
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and
Catherine Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and
James Clay Moltz
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written,
up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting point
for research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, activists,
and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.

SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Newton, David E.
Same-sex marriage : a reference handbook / David E. Newton.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–59884–707–9 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN 978–1–
59884–708–6 (ebook)
1. Same-sex marriage—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
HQ1033.N494
2010
306.8408—dc22
2010021774
ISBN: 978–1–59884–707–9
EISBN: 978–1–59884–708–6
14 13 12 11 10
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

This page intentionally left blank

For Raliegh, Julie, and Roxanne
For all that has been in the past and all that is yet to come.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction: The Early Days, 1
Same-Sex Relationships in History, 3
Early Civilizations, 4
China, 5
Islam, 5
American Indians, 6
Greece and Rome, 7
Some Cautions, 9
Attitudes Toward Same-Sex Relationships
in Western Culture, 11
Sodomy Laws in the United States, 14
The Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Movement, 16
Early Organizations, 17
The Storm Breaks, 18
Same-Sex Marriage in the United States, 22
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Introduction, 31
Same-Sex Marriage in Judeo-Christian History, 33
Rome and the Middle Ages, 36
“Traditional Marriage,” 42
Nontraditional Marriage in Western Culture, 45
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con, 49
Arguments in Opposition to Same-Sex Marriage, 49
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage, 61
The Status of Same-Sex Marriage in the United States, 67
Alternatives to Same-Sex Marriage, 70
The Future of Same-Sex Marriage in the United States, 71
ix

3
Worldwide Perspective, 81
Introduction, 81
Same-Sex Marriage in History, 82
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Opposition, 84
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support, 87
Western Europe, 87
Other Regions of the World, 93
Actions by Subnational Entities, 96
Argentina, 98
Mexico, 99
Court Decisions on Same-Sex Unions, 100
Public Opinion about Same-Sex Marriage, 100
The Future of Same-Sex Marriage, 102
4
Chronology, 111
5
Biographical Sketches, 133
Barry T. Albin, 133
Jack Baker, 134
Bob Barr, 135
David Boies, 136
Mary Bonauto, 137
John E. Boswell, 138
Chris Bryant, 139
Charles J. Cooper, 140
Irwin Cotler, 141
Dennis Damon, 142
James Dobson, 142
William N. Eskridge, Jr., 144
Maggie Gallagher, 144
Julie Goodridge, 145
Phyllis Lyon, 146
Richard Malone, 147
Del Martin, 148
Michael McConnell, 149
Thomas S. Monson, 150
Marilyn Musgrave, 151
Jerry Nadler, 152
Theodore Olson, 153
David Paterson, 154
Jason West, 155
x
Contents

6
Documents and Data, 157
Legislation, 157
Federal Defense of Marriage Act (1996), 157
Alabama Marriage Protection Act (1998/2006), 158
Federal Marriage Amendment (2003), 159
Oregon Family Fairness Act (2007), 160
House Bill 2007, 160
Summary, 160
A Bill for an Act, 160
Arkansas Same-Sex Adoption Law (2008), 162
Uniting American Families Act (2009), 164
An Act to End Discrimination in Civil Marriage and Afﬁrm
Religious Freedom (2009), 166
Reports, 168
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce (2003), 168
Adoption by Same-Sex Couples (2009), 169
European Parliament Resolution of 14 January 2009 on the
Situation of Fundamental Rights in the European
Union 2004–8 (2009), 172
Court Cases, 174
E. B. v. France, Application No. 43546/02 (2008), 174
Goodridge v. Department of Public Health, 440 Mass. 309
(2003), 176
Lewis v. Harris, 908 A.2d 196 (2006), 180
In re: Gill (2006), 185
Varnum v. Brien, 763 N.W.2D 862 (IOWA 2009), 188
Kutil and Hess v. Blake, WL 1579493 (2009), 190
Order on Intervenor’s Plea to the Jurisdiction (2009), 192
Data and Statistics, 194
Table 6.1: Same-Sex Marriages in Massachusetts (2009), 194
Table 6.2: Number of Same-Sex Couples in Legally
Recognized Relationships (2009), 195
Table 6.3: Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Marriage Data from
the Netherlands (2009), 195
Table 6.4: Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Marriage Data from
Belgium (2009), 196
Table 6.5: Divorce Rates by States, 2004–2007 (2009), 197
7
Organizations, 199
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage, 199
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage, 215
Contents
xi

Organizations with an Interest in Marriage, but Who Are
Neutral about Same-Sex Marriage, 224
8
Resources, 227
Print, 227
History, 227
Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Issues, 230
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage, 237
Arguments Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage, 241
General Reviews of Same-Sex Marriage and Adoption, 245
Nonprint, 254
History, 254
Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Issues, 256
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage, 259
Arguments Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage, 262
General Reviews of Same-Sex Marriage, 265
Glossary, 269
Index, 273
About the Author, 297
xii
Contents

Preface
S
ame-sex marriage? What an absurd idea! Marriage has always
been between one man and one woman. How can anyone
imagine any kind of legal union called “marriage” between
two women or two men?
Well, perhaps so. But also, perhaps not. Anyone who has stud-
ied American history knows that it is not quite true that “marriage
has always been between one man and one woman.” In fact, one of
the largest religious denominations in the United States, the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the Mormon church),
not only endorsed but also encouraged polygamous marriages of
its members for more than half a century. Church leaders made it
a requirement of their faith that men take multiple wives in order
for both men and women to ensure their entry into heaven after
their deaths. Reﬂecting the importance of such marriages, the
church referred to them as “celestial marriages.”
And a careful study of human civilization shows that many
other types of marriage are possible and, often, have been the norm
among various societies. In some cultures, a one-man, one-woman
marriage is often augmented by the addition of additional wives or
husbands who may or may not live with the primary family all or
part of the time. And same-sex marriages, while certainly not
common in most societies, have existed in many cultures.
So perhaps the idea of same-sex marriage in the twenty-ﬁrst
century is not such a revolutionary idea as it ﬁrst seems. Perhaps
the question really is whether the United States and other nations
of the world are now ready to acknowledge the right of two
women or two men to join together in a social institution that
bears the name of marriage. Or whether they should, at the very
least, be entitled to some type of legal union that bestows all or
most of the rights associated with opposite-sex marriage.
xiii

Various nations have taken different stands on this question.
In the Muslim world, for example, same-sex relationships of any
kind are regarded as sinful and, in some countries, are punishable
by death. The concept of same-sex marriage is, therefore, unthink-
able in such cultures. Christianity has long taken a similar stand on
same-sex relationships, and in countries that were part of colonial
empires established by Christian nations such as England,
Belgium, and the Netherlands, same-sex relationships and same-
sex marriage are simply not a possibility in today’s world.
But a number of other nations have taken a different view.
Same-sex marriage has actually become legal in eight nations:
Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Norway, South Africa, Spain,
Portugal and Sweden. Twenty other nations have adopted civil
unions, domestic partnerships, or other marriage-like arrange-
ments that extend to same-sex couples nearly all of the same rights
available to opposite-sex couples in a legal marriage. The most
striking fact about these data may be that all eight nations that have
legalized same-sex marriage (and many political subdivisions that
have taken the same action) have done so within the last decade.
Is the world witnessing a revolution in the way nations think about
the meaning of marriage as a social institution?
Certainly, the issue of same-sex marriage has become a topic
of vigorous debate in many parts of the world. In the United
States, for example, every state of the union, as well as the federal
legislature, has held often acrimonious discussions as to what
rights, if any, same-sex couples have in forming marriage-like
unions. In the vast majority of cases, states have taken legislative
and/or constitutional actions that speciﬁcally prohibit same-sex
marriage and, in many cases, any comparable type of union. But
a number of states have resisted this overall trend. Five states,
the District of Columbia, and one Indian nation (the Coquille
tribe) currently recognize same-sex marriage. Three other states
recognize same-sex marriages conducted in other states, and nine
states have adopted marriage-like arrangements called civil
unions or domestic partnerships that provide same-sex couples
with many rights available in an opposite-sex marriage.
The purpose of this book is to review the current status of
same-sex marriage and similar institutions in the United States
and other parts of the world. Chapter 1 provides a general
background on social attitudes about same-sex relationships in
general, in both the United States and other nations of the world,
going back as far as historical records are available. This review
xiv
Preface

explains how same-sex marriage has grown to be an issue of
signiﬁcance in many parts of the world. Chapter 2 focuses on
some of the most fundamental aspects of the same-sex marriage
debate. An important feature of the chapter is a review of the
arguments offered both in favor of and against such legal arrange-
ments. Chapter 3 expands this discussion to the worldwide stage,
explaining how the issue of same-sex marriage is similar to and
different from the debate in the United States and how other
nations have resolved the conﬂict.
The remaining chapters of the book provide background
information to assist readers in pursuing their research on this
topic in greater detail. Chapter 4 provides a chronology of impor-
tant events in the history of the debate over same-sex marriage.
Chapter 5 includes brief biographical sketches of some important
individuals in the history of this controversy. Chapter 6 contains a
number of important documents and some useful data about
same-sex unions in the United States and other parts of the world.
Chapter 7 provides a list of organizations who support or oppose
same-sex marriages and unions, while Chapter 8 contains a list of
print and electronic resources on the topic. A brief glossary of
important terms used in discussions of same-sex marriage is also
provided.
Preface
xv

This page intentionally left blank

1
Background and History
Introduction: The Early Days
On May 18, 1970, two men, Jack Baker and Michael McConnell,
applied for a marriage license at the ofﬁce of the county clerk for
Hennepin County, Minnesota. The county clerk, Gerald R. Nelson,
declined to issue a license, basing his decision on the fact that the
applicants were of the same sex. Baker and McConnell then ﬁled
suit against Nelson, claiming that there was no speciﬁc prohibition
of same-sex marriage in the Minnesota constitution or law. They
further claimed that withholding a marriage license was unconsti-
tutional under Articles 1, 8, 9, and 14 of the U.S. Constitution (free-
dom of speech; cruel and unusual punishment; right to privacy;
and due process and equal protection clauses). When the trial court
ruled against them, Baker and McConnell appealed to the state
supreme court, which afﬁrmed the lower court’s decision, and then
to the U.S. Supreme Court, which declined to hear the case “for
want of a substantial federal question” (Baker v. Nelson 1972). As
their case was working its way through the courts, Baker and
McConnell continued to pursue other avenues of formalizing their
relationship. In August 1971, McConnell legally adopted Baker,
and they began to enjoy a few of the rights afforded legally married
opposite-sex couples. At about the same time, they applied for a
marriage license in Blue Earth County, Minnesota, were granted
the license, and were married by a Methodist minister in Mankato,
county seat of Blue Earth County. In 1974, Baker and McConnell
applied to adopt a child, but their application was rejected by the
1

Children’s Home Society of Minnesota, largely because of strong
objections raised by “militant Christians” (Bronson 2004).
Baker and McConnell are generally regarded as pioneers of
the same-sex marriage movement in the United States. In the
decade that followed their ﬁrst attempts to receive a marriage
license, a number of other gay and lesbian couples made similar
efforts. Also in 1970, for example, two Kentucky women, Tracy
Knight and Marjorie Jones, applied for a marriage license from
the Jefferson County clerk. On the advice of the district attorney,
the clerk denied the license because the applicants were of the
same sex. When Knight and Jones sued to force the clerk to issue
a license, the district court rejected their claim, relying almost
exclusively on deﬁnitions of marriage found in standard diction-
aries of the time. The court noted that state statutes were essen-
tially silent on the issue of same-sex marriage, so it had no
statutory or case law precedent on which to base its decision
(Marjorie Jones et al., Appellants v. James Hallahan, Clerk of the Jefferson
County Court, Appellee 1973). Jones and Knight did not pursue their
case beyond the court of appeals.
A somewhat different situation arose in Colorado in 1975,
when two men, David McCord and David Zamora, approached
the county clerk in Colorado Springs seeking a marriage license.
The clerk responded that “[w]e do not do that here in El Paso
County, but if you want to, go to Boulder County, they might do
it there” (elephantjournal.com 2009). The Boulder County clerk,
Clela Rorex, consulted the assistant district attorney for Boulder
County, who said that there appeared to be no state law that pre-
vented the clerk from issuing a marriage license to two individ-
uals of the same sex, which she proceeded to do. In succeeding
months, she issued ﬁve more marriage licenses to same-sex
couples. The practice came to a halt, however, when state attorney
general J. D. McFarlane issued an opinion on May 7, 1975, that
Rorex’s actions were illegal under state law. Just to clarify the sit-
uation, the Colorado state legislature passed a law in 1977 deﬁn-
ing marriage as an act that can take place only between one man
and one woman.
The move by lesbian and gay couples for equality in marriage
did not go unnoticed by religious groups and legislators opposed
to the practice, who began to work for legislation limiting mar-
riage to one man and one woman. By 1980, half of the states had
passed laws or constitutional amendments speciﬁcally deﬁning
marriage as a legal entity involving a single opposite-sex couple.
2
Background and History

A decade later, that number had risen to 40 out of 50 states, and by
1994, 45 of the 50 states had adopted some form of opposite-sex
limitation for marriage through statute or constitutional amend-
ment. In 1996, the U.S. Congress passed and President Bill Clinton
signed the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), banning the federal
government from recognizing same-sex marriages performed in
any of the states (“Same Sex Marriage, Civil Unions and Domestic
Partnerships” 2009).
Same-Sex Relationships in History
As is the case with almost any current social issue, it is
impossible to understand the dispute over same-sex marriage
without appreciating the historical context of that debate. Indi-
viduals have engaged in same-sex behaviors from the dawn of
civilization. One authority on the topic has opined that “there
seems to be little doubt that homosexual behavior would have
been widespread among . . . Neolithic tribes, as well as among
their Paleolithic forebears . . . (Neill 2009, 82). A host of studies
have now shown that various cultures at various times in his-
tory have held varying views about the morality and validity
of same-sex relationships. One classic study that has cast light
on this variability of attitudes was conducted by anthropologist
Clellan S. Ford and psychologist Frank A. Beach in 1950. Ford
and Beach used data from the Yale Human Relations Files to
study attitudes about same-sex relationships in 76 societies for
which sufﬁcient data were available. They found that 49 (64%)
of those societies approved of some form of same-sex behavior
among men and/or women in the culture (Ford and Beach
1951, 130).
It is of no surprise to a modern reader that many cultures
have held strongly negative views about same-sex relationships.
Even today, a number of nations assign their most severe condem-
nation for such practices, as in Iran, Mauritania, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen, where a single
same-sex act is punishable by the death penalty (Kennedy 2007).
Studies show that about 80 nations worldwide still have laws
that prohibit sexual behavior between two men (although the
number is much smaller for such behavior between two women)
(“Homosexual Rights around the World” 2006). Such views are
not restricted to developing nations. A recent candidate for the
Same-Sex Relationships in History
3

U.S. Senate, for example, suggested that homosexual behavior
should be listed as a felony, punishable by death (U.S. Senate Can-
didate Wants Death Penalty for Homosexuals 2006). A nonscientiﬁc
poll conducted by the Web page about.com found that one out of
ﬁve Americans agreed with that position (Poll Results 2007).
Early Civilizations
What might be more surprising to the modern reader is that
many societies at many times in history have either exalted
same-sex relationships or, at the least, held them to be roughly
comparable to opposite-sex relationships. One ﬁnds examples of
such attitudes reﬂected in pictorial and written records from the
very earliest civilizations. Considerable research suggests, for
example, that homosexual practices were not uncommon in
Mesopotamia, dating from about 1700 BCE. Among the art objects
found by archaeologists, for example, are clay statuettes showing
two men engaged in anal intercourse. A society’s attitudes about
such behaviors may well be reﬂected in the lack of legal prohibi-
tions against such acts. The Code of Hammurabi, which deals with
a vast array of very detailed prohibited behaviors, nowhere men-
tions same-sex behavior as being prohibited. Some authorities also
point to the strongly homoerotic themes in the Gilgamesh, the
region’s creation myth similar to the creation story in the Christian
Bible. In that myth, Gilgamesh speaks of awaiting the arrival of his
companion, Enkidu, in terms that would be similar for an opposite-
sex relationship:
At the gate of my marital chamber there lay an axe,
. . .
I laid it down at your feet,
I loved it and embraced it as a wife,
and you made it compete with me.
When Gilgamesh asks his mother about the dream’s mean-
ing, she explains,
The axe that you saw [is] a man.
[that] you love him and embrace as a wife . . .
(“The Epic of Gilgamesh” 2009, Tablet 1;
for more on this topic, see Bullough 1976, 17–36).
4
Background and History

China
Another of the world’s oldest civilizations, that of China,
is also thought to have a long tradition of same-sex loving
relationships. This information is relatively new and contrary to
traditional Chinese beliefs that same-sex relationships were
essentially absent from Chinese cultures until the very recent past
(if even then). The work that signiﬁcantly altered scholarly view
on this subject was Bret Hinsch’s 1990 book, Passion of the Cut
Sleeve. The title of the book comes from a classic Chinese tale of
the Han emperor Ai and his male companion Dong Xian. When
called to an important meeting, the emperor cut the sleeve from
his elaborate gown, on which Dong was lying, rather than having
to awake and disturb him (Hay 2009). Hinsch has found that
long-term same-sex loving relationships were common during
certain periods of early Chinese history, with at least 10 emperors
between the period 206 BCE and 1 CE known to have been
involved in such relationships (Hinsch 1990, 35–36).
One of the most comprehensive studies of the place of same-
sex relationships in Chinese society is Their World: A Study of
Homosexuality in China, by Dr. Li Yinhe of the Institute of Sociol-
ogy at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. Li has concluded
that “historical traces of male homosexuality persist through
dynasty to dynasty from ancient times and never disappear.” In
fact, she writes that “a calm and dispassionate attitude to the
homosexual phenomenon was always prevalent in ancient China.
There was neither eulogy, nor criticism. It seemed to do no harm
in maintaining traditional family ethics” (“History of Chinese
Homosexuality” 2004).
Islam
Given the strong condemnations of same-sex behavior in
modern Islam, it may be something of a surprise that homosexual
relations were probably not uncommon in the religion’s earliest
history. Apparently Mohammed adopted the prohibition of
same-sex relationships that he learned from the Christian story
of Sodom and Gomorrah, but he assigned no speciﬁc penalty for
the practice (Greenberg 1988, 173). As in Christianity, the strong-
est criticisms of and penalties for same-sex behavior came not
from the religion’s founder, but from later disciples and commen-
tators. In any case, there is strong evidence that, whatever the
Same-Sex Relationships in History
5

caliphate’s ofﬁcial position on the topic, same-sex behavior was
common throughout early Islam. One early writer, the Dominican
priest William of Adam, wrote about his trip to Egypt, noting that
“[t]hese Saracens, forgetting human dignity, go so far that men live
with each other in the same way that men and women live together
in our own land” (Daniel 1994, as cited in Greenberg 1988, 176).
Later in history, as Westerners became better acquainted with
Islamic culture, such comments were much more frequent. Writer
after writer, from Lord Byron to Gustave Flaubert, noted that
young Muslim men in particular were readily available for sexual
contact, not only with visiting foreigners, but apparently with each
other (Neill 2009, 299–301).
The argument has long been that same-sex relationships are
so common in Islamic cultures because opposite-sex opportuni-
ties outside of marriage are essentially unavailable to men, as
is the case with women who have no access to men. In such a
case, the only sexual outlet for unmarried men is with other
men (see, for example, Dunne 2010). While that argument may
be true to some extent, it does not fully explain the apparent
widespread same-sex behavior discernible in Islamic cultures
throughout almost all of its history. Some commentators have
observed, for example, that same-sex behavior has apparently
always been essentially absent from Islamic bedouins, who often
live in a single-sex (male) society for months at time, without
their being same-sex contacts (Bianquis 1986, as quoted in
Greenberg 1988, 175).
American Indians
Same-sex relationships were common in American Indian
cultures and were often revered. In his classic study, Gay American
History, Jonathan Katz offers a number of documents from early
explorers about the same-sex practices they observed, always with
the greatest disgust. Among the earliest of these documents was a
note by the Spanish explorer Alvar Nun˜ez Cabeza de Vaca, who
reported a “devilish thing” that he observed, a marriage between
two men. Reports of similar events came from other explorers,
including Hernando de Alarco´n in 1540, Rene´ Goulaine de
Laudonnie´re in about 1562, Jacques le Moyne de Morgues in
1564, Francisco de Pareja in the period 1593–1613, Jacques
Marquette in the period 1673–1677, Pierre Liette in 1702, Joseph
Franc¸ois Laﬁtau in the period 1711–1717, and an increasing number
6
Background and History

of observers in the eighteenth century (Katz 1976, 281–334).
A report from 1819 reﬂects the general view of Westerners who ﬁrst
encountered many Indian cultures, acknowledging both how
common the practice was and how little concern it seemed to raise.
“Sodomy is a crime not uncommonly committed”; two explorers
write, “[M]any of the subjects of it are publicly known and do not
appear to be despised, or to excite disgust” (Katz 1976, 299). A
modern conﬁrmation of the practice of same-sex relationships
came from Jack D. Forbes, professor emeritus of Native American
Studies at the University of California at Davis. In 2004, he wrote
that “[c]ouples of the same sex also were recognized as legitimate
in many or perhaps most tribes. This style of marriage may not
have been overly common, but it is certainly noted for a number
of American Nations” (Forbes 2004).
Part of the confusion apparent among Western explorers
about the nature of same-sex couples in Native American tribes
was their lack of understanding as to Indian views on the nature
of human sexuality. In contrast to the opinions held by most peo-
ple today, Indians believed that there were more than two gen-
ders. A third gender, the berdache, consisted of individuals who
melded both male and female characteristics within one body,
so-called two-spirited people. Berdache were commonly (but not
always) morphological males who were raised to carry out many
of the responsibilities usually assigned to women. In many Indian
cultures, they were highly revered, chosen to settle disputes
between tribe members, and responsible for religious ceremonies.
In addition, they often married other males (as did female berd-
ache with other females), forming a family unit virtually identical
to those of opposite-sex couples (Williams 1986). Interestingly
enough, many young male Native Americans who might have
grown into the role of a berdache in another era now appear to
be most comfortable in the gay male culture of urban environ-
ments to which they have moved (Williams, 1986, 207–29).
Greece and Rome
The history of same-sex relationships in ancient Greece and
Rome is so well known as hardly to be worthy of extended discus-
sion here, which, in any case and given the length of this book, is
not possible. Sufﬁce it to say that such relationships were
common and generally accepted both in Greece and in pre-
Christian Rome. In Greece, the most common pattern was for an
Same-Sex Relationships in History
7

older man to adopt a younger man as his close partner, during
which he educated his younger companion into the traditions of
the society. The older/younger relationship closely mirrored that
of opposite-sex formal marriages, in which older men most com-
monly chose younger women as their brides.
Such age differences in same-sex relationships were, how-
ever, by no means the only type of such relationships. In fact,
one of the earliest and most famous same-sex relationships
between men was that of Achilles and Patroclus, described in
the Iliad. Although the sexual component of this relationship has
long been the subject of debate among scholars, it seems difﬁcult
to ignore that aspect of their relationship. When Patroclus dies,
Homer describes Achilles’ grief to some extent:
Once the funeral gathering broke up, the men dispersed,
each one going to his own ship, concerned to eat and
then enjoy sweet sleep. But Achilles kept on weeping,
remembering his dear companion. All-conquering Sleep
could not overcome him, as he tossed and turned, long-
ing for manly, courageous, strong Patroclus, thinking of
all he’d done with him, all the pain they’d suffered, as
they’d gone through wars with other men and with the
perilous sea. As he kept remembering, he cried heavy
tears, sometimes lying on his side, sometimes on his
back or on his face. Then he’d get up, to wander in
distress, back and forth along the shore. (Homer 2004,
Book 24)
Such expressions of grief may be no more than the sorrow of
two “good buddies,” as some scholars suggest, but it may also
represent somewhat deeper feelings between two men who are
perhaps more than just close friends (for one of the most complete
bibliographies of documents dealing with this topic, see “Homo-
sexuality in Greece and Rome: A Sourcebook of Basic Documents
in Translation” 2010).
Same-sex relationships in pre-Christian Rome were appa-
rently also common, and many have been carefully studied.
Among the most frequent examples mentioned is that of the
emperor Nero, who apparently participated in two same-sex
“marriages,” once as a bride with a wine steward named
Pythagoras, and once as a groom with the castrated actor Sporus
(see, for example, Frier 2004). Nero, however, was apparently
8
Background and History

anything but an exception. Edward Gibbon, perhaps the greatest
historian of ancient Rome, wrote that “of the ﬁrst ﬁfteen emper-
ors Claudius was the only one whose taste in love was entirely
correct” (Gibbon 1880, 118–19, note 40; this note appears in
Gibbon’s discussion of the same-sex relationship between the
emperor Hadrian and his partner Antinous, perhaps the most
famous long-term relationship of its kind in ancient Rome, thus
removing any doubt as to what Gibbon thought of as an
“entirely correct” relationship. For more details on the relation-
ships between Hadrian and Antinous, see Henderson 1923,
130–34).
Considerably less is known about same-sex relationships (or
almost any other topic) among ordinary citizens of Rome. There
is some evidence, however, that such relationships were not
uncommon nor were they particularly despised by society in gen-
eral. In his review of the role of same-sex relationships in early
Rome, John Boswell concludes that the broad appeal of the rela-
tionship between Hadrian and Antinous may have been due at
least in part to the popularity of same-sex themes in literature of
the time. He observes that “[e]verywhere in the ﬁction of the
Empire—from lyric poetry to popular novels—gay couples and
their love appear on a completely equal footing with their hetero-
sexual counterparts” (Boswell 1980, 85–86).
Some Cautions
Boswell’s interpretation of the place of same-sex relation-
ships in ancient Rome—as is true for much of what has been writ-
ten for other cultures discussed so far in this chapter—has been
the subject of considerable (often contentious) dispute among aca-
demic scholars. Indeed, almost any report of the nature of human
sexual activities (or any other kind of activity) in ancient civiliza-
tions is likely to be criticized by someone for being inaccurate.
There are at least three reasons that such vigorous debates occur
about the “facts” of history, especially those relating to sexual
activity. First, it is impossible and misleading to think about
same-sex relationships in Mesopotamia, China, Islam, Greece,
Rome, or other early civilizations in the same terms with which
one views same-sex relationships today. In fact, until recently it
was probably rare, if not unheard of, to deﬁne a person in terms
of his or her sexual orientation—as “gay” or “lesbian”—as many
people do today. Instead, people were statesmen, warriors, or
Same-Sex Relationships in History
9

workers who may have been physically, socially, intellectually, or
otherwise attracted to someone of the same sex all of the time,
some of the time, never, or “it depends.” A society’s response to
such a situation might have ranged anywhere from “how terrible!
He or she must die!” to “ho-hum” to “he/she must be a deity.”
Second, historians often have only the dimmest notions as to
what common attitudes toward same-sex behavior were in any
given culture. Unfortunately, history is usually the record of the
lives of king and queens, of other royalty, of military leaders, or
of other great ﬁgures. Historians often know next to nothing
directly about the lives of ordinary people. So the fact that Nero
legally and formally married two other men tells us nothing at
all about the nature of same-sex relationships among ordinary
Roman citizens.
Third, historians often disagree about the way people in any
given culture loved, thought, and believed. Trying to make sense
out of glyphs on an Egyptian temple, a poem on a 2,000-year-old
scroll, or an ancient Chinese law is often profoundly difﬁcult,
with different scholars arguing vehemently over the meaning of
some obscure word or phrase from a long-dead language.
Finally, no matter how hard they try, scholars tend to bring
their own training, history, feelings, and prejudices to the analy-
ses they make of historical works. One might understand, for
example, how a man in the tenth century who was erotically
attracted to other men might join a single-sex group of other
men (as in a monastery) rather than try to survive in a strongly
heterosexual culture for the rest of his life. But a Roman
Catholic historian might ﬁnd it difﬁcult to acknowledge that
the church has historically been a refuge for men attracted to
other men, when church teachings today so strongly condemn
every aspect of same-sex behavior and feelings. That person
might ﬁnd it difﬁcult to acknowledge that same-sex relation-
ships may once have been common and even sanctioned by
the early church.
Similarly, modern scholars who personally support same-sex
relationships may treat the historical record with their own gloss.
A lesbian or gay historian today might very much “want” to ﬁnd
meanings in ancient records that support her or his views, espe-
cially when the record is unclear. After all, many classical texts
have been routinely mistranslated (with change of pronouns, for
example) or left untranslated to avoid exposing same-sex rela-
tionships (see Boswell 1980, 19–21). Still, the temptation may be
10
Background and History

to go beyond uncovering the falsiﬁcation of history and ﬁnding
(conceivably unwarranted) support for one’s own position on this
contentious issue.
These cautions are not entirely an exercise in scholarly ethics.
People who argue today about the legitimacy of same-sex mar-
riage frequently refer to “tradition,” calling upon customs that
have apparently existed in civilization for thousands of years.
Yet some of the claims made for and against same-sex marriage
may not always be based on the best scholarship available. For
example, critics of same-sex marriage frequently point to biblical
references (the Sodom and Gomorrah story and passages from
Leviticus) that supposedly condemn same-sex relationships
between adults. Yet the earliest modern scholarly analysis of the
biblical meaning of these passages raised very serious questions
as to whether the passages actually have the condemnatory
meaning about same-sex relationships that virtually all Christians
today believe they have (Bailey 1955).
All these cautions suggest is that ancient records, while fasci-
nating clues about the lives and thoughts of long-dead people, are
only clues and not absolute guidelines as to the way modern peo-
ple should live their lives.
Attitudes Toward Same-Sex Relationships
in Western Culture
For the modern debate over same-sex marriage, probably the
most important historical story is that which begins in the lands
inhabited by and surrounding the early Israelites. A common
position is that the early Israelites may very well have held atti-
tudes about same-sex behavior similar to those of surrounding
cultures. One observer has characterized those attitudes by
observing that “homosexuality in many forms pervaded the
ancient Near East, and with more openness beyond Egypt. As
long as persons got married and had families, homoerotic activity
was generally accepted as part and parcel of life (Gerig 2010). It
seems likely that the early Israelites held generally similar views.
One historian of the period has written that “sodomy is not pro-
hibited in the pre-exilic section of Scripture” and, in fact, “there
is a distinct lack of preaching on sexual matters among the
Hebrews” during this period (Epstein 1948, 3–4).
Attitudes Toward Same-Sex Relationships in Western Culture
11

Perhaps the best-known examples of same-sex relationships
found in the Bible are those between David and Jonathan and
Ruth and Naomi. The former relationship is described and dis-
cussed at some length in the ﬁrst book of Samuel, chapter 20,
and the ﬁrst chapter of 2 Samuel. In those passages, the love
between the two men is described when Jonathan attempts to
save David from the wrath of his father, Saul:
And Jonathan had David reafﬁrm his oath out of love for
him, because he loved him as he loved himself. . . .
Then they kissed each other and wept together—but
David wept the most.
Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, for we have
sworn friendship with each other in the name of the
LORD, saying, ‘The LORD is witness between you and
me, and between your descendants and my descendants
forever.’ ” (1 Samuel 20: 16, 41–42)
Later, when David learns of Jonathan’s death (along with his
father, Saul), he responds by saying
I grieve for you, Jonathan my brother;
you were very dear to me.
Your love for me was wonderful,
more wonderful than that of women. (2 Samuel 1: 26)
The relationship between Ruth and her daughter-in-law,
Naomi, is described in the ﬁrst chapter of Ruth in the Bible. When
Ruth decides to return to Bethlehem after her two sons die, her
daughter-in-law, Naomi, vows to go with her. She says:
Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where
thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people,
and thy God my God:
Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be
buried: the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought
but death part thee and me. (Ruth 1: 1–2)
While these two passages would appear to afﬁrm same-sex
relationships, in at least two speciﬁc instances, critics of such rela-
tionships point to two other sections of the Bible as condemning
12
Background and History

such practices. The ﬁrst of these passages, dealing with the classic
story of Sodom and Gomorrah, is found in the 19th chapter of
Genesis. According to that story, two angels visit the city of
Sodom and are lodged in the home of one of its residents, Lot.
When the citizens of Sodom hear about the visitors, they go to
Lot’s home and call for him to send the angels out “so that we
may know them,” according to the passage in the King James
version of the Bible. Lot refuses to do so and, instead, offers his
two daughters, both of whom are virgins. The crowd refuses the
offer, and the angel’s “save the day” for Lot by telling him to leave
the city, because they are about to destroy it. In the end, the angels
do just that, raining ﬁre and brimstone down upon Sodom and its
sister city of Gomorrah.
The second selection from the Bible used to condemn
same-sex relationships consists of two verses from the book of
Leviticus—chapter 18, verse 22, and chapter 20, verse 13. They
read as follows:
Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it
is abomination. (Leviticus 18: 22)
If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman,
both of them have committed an abomination: they shall
surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
(Leviticus 20: 13)
Both of these verses, along with the story of Sodom and
Gomorrah, have traditionally formed the basis for opposition to
same-sex relationships in the Christian religion in particular, and
Judeo-Christian culture in general. As with most ancient texts,
these biblical references have been the subject of much scholarly
scrutiny, with dramatically different interpretations as to their
meaning. This feature of the scriptural references will be dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 2 of this book.
Sufﬁce it to say, the more conservative interpretation, that is,
that same-sex relationships are forbidden and that those who
engage in them must be put to death, has been the basis of most
of the legal prohibitions against such relationships in Western cul-
ture. Probably the ﬁrst expression of this legal theory can be
found in the Theodosian Code, issued by the emperor Valentinian
III in 430 CE. That code, whose name is derived from the emperor
Theodosius II, who initiated its compilation, summarizes all
Attitudes Toward Same-Sex Relationships in Western Culture
13

Roman laws issued under the Christian emperors beginning with
Constantine in 312. Among the laws included are prohibitions on
same-sex activity, such as the provision that
All persons who have the shameful custom of condemn-
ing a man’s body, acting the part of a woman’s to the suf-
ferance of alien sex (for they appear not to be different
from women), shall expiate a crime of this kind in aveng-
ing ﬂames in the sight of the people. (Theodosian Code
9.7:6 as cited in DeYoung 2000, 273)
Through most of the Middle Ages, prohibitions against same-
sex behavior were common in canonical law, although such restric-
tions did not become part of secular law until the early thirteenth
century (Johansson and Percy 2009 169). The extent to which the
most severe provisions of these laws were imposed is not clear,
since records of executions are relatively rare. Apparently the ﬁrst
person killed under a secular law against same-sex behavior was
one Lord Haspisperch, who was burned to death by order of King
Rudolph I in 1277 in Basel. Similar punishments for same-sex
activities have been reported throughout Western Europe in the
following century (see, for example, Crompton 2003, 201–2).
The ﬁrst law in England prohibiting same-sex behavior was
the Buggery Law of 1533, issued by King Henry VIII. The law pro-
vided that anyone convicted of “the detestable and abominable
Vice of Buggery committed with mankind or beast” be put to
death by hanging, without beneﬁt of clergy (“The Law in
England, 1290–1885” 2010). That act was revoked when Mary
became queen of England in 1553, but was reinstated when Mary
was succeeded by her half-sister Elizabeth in 1558 (Fone 2000,
215–18). The Buggery Law remained in effect in England until it
was repealed by the Sexual Offences Act of 1967. The capital pun-
ishment feature of the law had been repealed in 1861, however, by
the Offences Against the Person Act and replaced by a maximum
penalty of penal servitude for life (Barrett 1979, 1024–25).
Sodomy Laws in the United States
Early laws about same-sex behavior in the United States
were very similar to those of England. This pattern has long held
true for most, if not all, ex-British colonies (“This Alien Legacy:
14
Background and History

The Origins of ‘Sodomy’ Laws in British Colonialism” 2008).
The ﬁrst American law dealing with sodomy, the term most
commonly used for same-sex acts, was passed in Virginia on
May 24, 1610. It stated that “[n]o man shal [sic] commit the hor-
rible, and detestable sinnes of Sodomie upon pain of death”
(Painter 2004). The ﬁrst man sentenced under this law, one
Richard Cornish, was hanged for his acts in 1625 (“Sodomy Laws:
Virginia” 2004). Other colonies soon followed suit, sometimes
simply adopting existing English law on the topic, and sometimes
adopting legislation very similar in spirit, if not in text. In 1641,
for example, the Massachusetts Bay Colony adopted its now-
famous Body of Laws and Liberties, designed to highlight the
greater freedom available to colonists, compared to the situation
in the mother country. Those freedoms did not extend to those
who engaged in same-sex activities, which the Body prohibited,
quite remarkably, simply by restating the biblical prohibition
from Leviticus, namely: “If any man lyeth with mankinde as he
lyeth with a woman, both of them have committed abhomination,
they both shall surely be put to death” (Whitmore 1887, 15). Such
a practice, in which direct quotations from the Bible were used as
civil laws, was hardly unusual in the early colonies. Connecticut,
for example, had a similar law that remained in effect in precisely
the same words until 1687 (Crompton 1976, 279).
Over time, every state in the union adopted some type of legis-
lation prohibiting sodomy and/or other types of same-sex behav-
ior. It was not until the 1950s that public attitudes slowly began to
change on the topic. In 1955, the American Law Institute published
its Model Penal Code, a recommended guideline for state legisla-
tures in adopting laws dealing with criminal behavior. The model
code made no recommendations for “criminal penalties for consen-
sual sexual relations conducted in private,” essentially suggesting
that such relationships did not belong under the purview of civil
law in the United States (“Lawrence v. Texas” 2003).
Individual states gradually began to adopt that principle and
to repeal their sodomy laws. Illinois was the ﬁrst such state to do
so in a revision of its criminal code in 1961. Idaho was the second
state to take such an action, omitting sodomy laws from its
revised criminal code adopted in 1971. (When legislators realized
what they had done, they acted a year later to reinstate the
sodomy prohibition, becoming the ﬁrst and only state to reinstate
a sodomy statute; “History of Sodomy Laws” 2004). By 1986, 24
states and the District of Columbia still retained sodomy laws on
Sodomy Laws in the United States
15

their books, at a time when the U.S. Supreme Court ﬁrst decided a
case dealing with the issue (“Lawrence v. Texas” 2003). In the case
of Bowers v. Hardwick, the court ruled ﬁve-to-four that individuals
had no right to privacy when they were engaged in consensual
same-sex acts in the privacy of their own homes.
That decision stood until 2003, when the court reconsidered
its 1986 stand on sodomy. By that time, 13 more states had
repealed their sodomy laws or had them declared invalid by judi-
cial decisions. Only Alabama, Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
South Carolina, Texas, Utah, and Virginia still have sodomy laws
on their books. Those laws were also invalidated when the court
announced its decision in the case of Lawrence v. Texas, in which
it decided by a six-to-three vote that its 1986 decision was incor-
rect and that, in fact, private consensual sexual behavior is consti-
tutionally protected (“Lawrence v. Texas” 2003). As of early 2010,
only three states still had sodomy laws on the books—Kansas,
Oklahoma, and Texas—although those laws are unenforceable
under provisions of the Lawrence v. Texas decision.
The Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Movement
The move by states to begin repealing their sodomy laws in
the 1960s and 1970s coincided with another sea change in U.S.
social policy, the rise of the gay and lesbian rights movement
and the legal changes that movement initiated. Historically, les-
bians and gay men in the United States were not looked upon
favorably. As Jonathan Katz has summarized in his documentary
history of gays and lesbians in the United States, such individuals
were, for most of America’s history, “condemned to death by
choking, burning, and drowning; they were executed, jailed, pil-
loried, ﬁned, court-martialed, prostituted, ﬁred, framed, black-
mailed, disinherited, entrapped, stereotyped, mocked, insulted,
isolated, pitied, castigated, and despised.” In the more “enlight-
ened” decades of the ﬁrst seven decades of the twentieth century,
they were also “castrated, lobotomized, shock-treated, and
psychoanalyzed” (Katz 1976, 11; although many good histories
of same-sex behavior in the United States are available, Katz’s
documentary text provides some of the starkest and most dra-
matic illustrations of what life was like for lesbians and gay men
prior to the modern era beginning in the 1970s).
16
Background and History

Early Organizations
That situation changed only very slowly. The ﬁrst attempt of
which we know by gay men to work for a greater acceptance
of same-sex relationships in the United States dates to 1924. In that
year, a very small group of gay men formed the Society for Human
Rights, whose purpose it was to provide a social and educational
club for other gay men and to educate public ofﬁcials about the
nature of homosexuality (Gerber 1962). That organization lasted
only a few weeks, as one of the member’s wives reported the group
to the police. One of the founders, Henry Gerber, was ﬁred from his
job and lost his home when his employers learned of his actions.
It was to be more than three decades before other gay men
and lesbians would feel safe enough to repeat Gerber’s efforts.
In 1951, gay pioneer Harry Hays and a small group of his friends
formed the Mattachine Foundation (later called the Mattachine
Society), a group named after a medieval French society of
unmarried men who performed dances and plays during the
Feast of Fools. The goals of the Mattachine group were to provide
a safe and comfortable social setting in which gay men could
meet, to educate public ofﬁcials and the general public about the
nature of homosexuality, to develop a program of “political
action” against “discriminatory and oppressive legislation,” and
to assist “our people who are victimized daily as a result of our
oppression,” and who constitute “one of the largest minorities in
America today” (Cutler 1956, 13–14).
A year after the Mattachine Society was legally incorporated
(1954), a group of lesbians in the Los Angeles area met to form a
similar organization of women. They called the organization the
Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), after a ﬁctional lesbian character in
The Songs of Bilitis, an 1894 work by the French poet Pierre Louy¨s.
Interestingly enough, both the Mattachine and DOB groups
selected these abstruse names at least partly because they were
obscure enough to have little meaning to nongays and nonles-
bians, providing the security that lesbians and gay men so desper-
ately needed at the time.
Both Mattachine and DOB had somewhat checkered and rel-
atively short histories. Mattachine had splintered and dwindled
to a collection of local groups within a half dozen years, while
DOB hung on for 14 years, albeit in an increasingly diminished
form. Other groups with regional and national ambitions also
developed. In January 1963, a group of local lesbian and gay
The Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Movement
17

groups met in Philadelphia for a conference under the auspices of
the newly created East Coast Homophile Organizations (ECHO).
The theme of that conference was “Homosexuality—Time for
Reappraisal.” The group met twice more, in Washington in 1964
(“Homosexuality—Civil Liberties and Social Rights”) and in
New York City in 1965 (“The Homosexual Citizen in the Great
Society”). The success of the ECHO conferences encouraged
activists to aim even higher, resulting in a conference of yet
another new organization, the National Planning Conference of
Homophile Organizations (NPCHO), later to become the North
American Conference of Homophile Organizations (NACHO).
In addition to representatives from the ﬁve ECHO organizations,
there were attendees from the Midwest, South, and West, result-
ing in the ﬁrst truly national organization of gay men and lesbians
to form in the United States. As with other gay and lesbian
groups, NACHO had a relatively brief, but also quite successful,
existence. It held a total of four national conferences after the
Kansas City meeting, conducted and reported on research on the
legal status of gay men and lesbian and on discrimination in
housing and employment, organized demonstrations in a variety
of cities over injustices based on sexual orientation, and estab-
lished a legal defense fund to be used in court cases involving
gay men and lesbians.
The Storm Breaks
By the mid-1960s, American society was in turmoil, at least
partly because of the ongoing conﬂict in Vietnam, but more gener-
ally as a variety of minority groups began to press for equal rights
under the law. For society in general, the deﬁning moment of
that movement was passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, an
act that prohibited discrimination in the areas of housing,
employment, and public accommodations on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin (but not sexual orientation).
Thus, the events that occurred on the evening of June 27, 1969, at a
gay bar in New York City were to have a signiﬁcance that they
might not otherwise have had at a different time and under differ-
ent circumstances. The event unfolded as follows:
On the evening of June 27, 1969, a group of plainclothes New
York City police ofﬁcers raided the Stonewall Inn, a popular gay
bar in the city’s Greenwich Village neighborhood. Such raids were
not uncommon in New York, nor in almost any other large city in
18
Background and History

the United States at the time. During such a raid, law enforcement
ofﬁcers routinely removed some patrons of the bar to a local police
station, where they often spent the night. Names, addresses, and
occupations of the bar customers were routinely taken and often
released to the local newspapers. Occasionally the police physically
assaulted patrons. Most gay men and lesbians accepted this prac-
tice as just one of the hazards of having a somewhat open social life.
For reasons that will probably never be completely clear, the night
of June 27, 1969, was an aberration in this pattern. As police began
to remove patrons from the bar for transfer to a police paddy
wagon, other customers began to ﬁght back. They used whatever
weapons they could ﬁnd, including an uprooted parking meter, to
resist police activities, to the point that some police ofﬁcers were
eventually trapped inside the bar. Customers then set ﬁre to the
bar. (No lives were lost nor were there any serious injuries as a
result of this action.) (A number of excellent histories of the Stone-
wall riots and their consequences are available. See especially
Carter 2004, Duberman 1993, and Teal 1995.) For many lesbians
and gay men in America, the riots that took place at the Stonewall
on the night of June 27 and following evenings were historic; some
historians have even called them the beginning of the modern gay
and lesbian civil rights movement.
At the time of the Stonewall riot, only one state (Illinois) had
repealed its sodomy laws, making same-sex acts illegal in every
other state of the union, the District of Columbia, and all U.S.
possessions. No state, city, or other political entity had as yet
enacted legislation extending to lesbians and gay men the same
general civil rights enjoyed by heterosexuals, such as protection
against loss of one’s job, loss or refusal of housing opportunities,
or right of access to places of public accommodation, on the basis
of one’s sexual orientation. It was the attainment of these civil
rights that became an important focus of the so-called gay libera-
tion movement that developed after the Stonewall riots. (The
movement was actually more diverse than this, with the goal of
achieving sexual freedom an important element for many mem-
bers of the movement. For reviews of the complex character of
the movement, see Cruikshank 1992 and Rimmerman 2008).
Over the next decade, those engaged in the gay liberation move-
ment and its offshoots and successors developed and imple-
mented a relatively sophisticated program for achieving their
goal of gaining equality under U.S. laws with their heterosexual
counterparts, an equality similar to that guaranteed to blacks,
The Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Movement
19

Hispanics, Italians, Catholics, Lutherans, and virtually every other
special-interest group covered by the Civil Rights Act of 1964. That
program included lobbying local, state, and federal ofﬁcials, writ-
ing books and articles, appearing on radio and television, support-
ing and opposing candidates for public ofﬁce, ﬁnding gay and
nongay candidates to run for ofﬁce, writing and supporting legis-
lation for civil rights, and creating new organizations to meet the
special needs of lesbians and gay men.
The accomplishments of one of the most successful gay and
lesbians organizations illustrate these efforts. The National Gay
Task Force (now the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
[NGLTF]) was founded in 1973 by a small group of women and
men from an earlier organization, the Gay Activists Alliance
(GAA), who felt that that organization was not sufﬁciently com-
mitted to political action to achieve the goals in which they
believed. Over the ﬁrst 15 years of its existence, the Task Force
led or was involved in almost every social and political issue of
interest to lesbians and gay men in the United States. It convinced
the American Psychiatric Association to remove homosexuality
from its list of mental disorders in 1973; persuaded the U.S. Civil
Service Commission to remove its ban on employing lesbians
and gay men in federal positions; worked with members of the
U.S. Congress to introduce the ﬁrst federal antidiscrimination
legislation in 1975; led a 1981 campaign to defeat an anti-gay/
lesbian bill called the Family Protection Act; formed the Privacy
Project in 1986 to work for revocation of state sodomy laws; and
established the Military Freedom Project in 1988 to work against
bans on gay men and lesbians in the military. Today, along with
the Human Rights Campaign (founded in 1980), the Task Force
is still one of the largest, best funded, most highly respected,
and most effective national agencies working for the civil rights
of lesbians and gay men.
Slowly—sometimes very slowly—the efforts of the Task
Force and other gay and lesbian organizations began to bear fruit.
In 1972, two cities in Michigan became the ﬁrst governmental
entities to grant civil rights to lesbians and gay men. East Lansing
passed an ordinance banning discrimination against lesbians and
gay men in employment, while Ann Arbor followed a few
months later with a comprehensive ban against discrimination
in all areas, including employment, housing, and public accom-
modation. Two years later, Elaine Nobel became the ﬁrst (self-
acknowledged) lesbian to be elected to a major political ofﬁce,
20
Background and History

when she was chosen to be representative to the Massachusetts
state assembly from the state’s sixth district (Boston). Adoption
of antidiscrimination legislation in the states proceeded very
slowly. Wisconsin was the ﬁrst state to ban discrimination based
on sexual orientation in housing, employment, and public accom-
modation. It did so in 1981, but it took another eight years before
another state—Massachusetts—followed suit. Wisconsin and
Massachusetts were followed by Connecticut and Hawaii
in 1991 and by California, Vermont, and New Jersey in 1992,
although some states limited protection to only one of these areas,
usually employment. As of early 2010, 21 states and the District
of Columbia ban some form of discrimination based on sexual
orientation. Table 1.1 summarizes those laws for employment
The Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Movement
21
TABLE 1.1
State Antidiscrimination Laws
State
Law(s) Passeda
California
1992, 2003
Colorado
2007
Connecticut
1991
District of Columbia
1997, 2006
Delaware
2009
Hawaii
1991
Illinois
2006
Iowa
2007
Maine
2005
Maryland
2001
Massachusetts
1989
Minnesota
1993
Nevada
1999
New Hampshire
1998
New Jersey
1992, 2007
New Mexico
2003
New York
2003
Oregon
2008
Rhode Island
1995, 2001
Vermont
1991, 2007
Washington
2006
Wisconsin
1981
aInclusion of a second date refers to laws being extended to transgendered individuals.
Sources: Human Rights Campaign, “Statewide Employment Laws and Policies,” http://www.hrc.org/documents/
Employment_Laws_and_Policies.pdf; Institute of Real Estate Management, “Laws Prohibiting Discrimination Based
on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity,” http://www.irem.org/pdfs/publicpolicy/Antidiscrimination.pdf.

discrimination. In the remaining 29 states, a person can still be
ﬁred from a job, and, in most cases, also be removed from housing
or prevented from owning or renting a home or be expelled from
a place of public accommodation based on her or his sexual orien-
tation (Human Rights Campaign 2010).
National legislation to prohibit discrimination in employ-
ment on the basis of sexual orientation has been introduced in the
U.S. Congress in every session since 1994, with the exception of
the 109th (2005–2007). That legislation came closest to passing in
2009, but failed once again. As of early 2010, it was still under con-
sideration by the 110th Congress (The Task Force 2009).
Same-Sex Marriage in the United States
If one reads the history of the battle for lesbian and gay civil
rights up to about 1985, there is very little about same-sex
marriage or same-sex adoption as a priority among movement
leaders. Individual efforts to get a marriage license, like those of
Jack Baker and Michael McConnell, Tracy Knight and Marjorie
Jones, and David McCord and David Zamora, described at
the beginning of this chapter, were extraordinarily rare. By far,
the greatest emphasis by gay and lesbian organizations was on
achieving fundamental civil rights, such as nondiscrimination in
employment, housing, and public accommodation, as outlined
previously. By 1985, even that goal became secondary to other
concerns of lesbian and gay leaders in the United States. The
reason for this change was the rise of the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
For about a decade, from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, no sub-
ject came anywhere near the importance of that epidemic for the
nation’s gay and lesbian political community. Tens of thousands
of men and women were dying every year, many of them found-
ers and/or leaders of the gay and lesbian civil rights movement,
and ﬁnding a cure for the disease and providing aid and comfort
for the hundreds of thousands of individuals with the disease
drained the movement of the energy and opportunity to maintain
its drive for civil rights. (The classic history of the early years of
the HIV/AIDS epidemic is Shilts 2007; also see Holleran 2008.)
(Interestingly enough, the HIV/AIDS epidemic had little
effect on efforts by those opposed to granting civil rights to les-
bians and gay men. In fact, individuals and organizations who
had long opposed equal rights for gay men and lesbians simply
22
Background and History

added the epidemic to its list of reasons to oppose granting civil
rights to homosexuals. In fact, some observers continue to use
the epidemic as one of the reasons to oppose same-sex marriage,
arguing that same-sex behavior is “unhealthy,” and for that rea-
son those who engage in such practices should not have the right
to marry [see, for example, Camenker 2008]. This point is dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 2.)
As the HIV/AIDS epidemic began to moderate in the mid-
1990s, efforts by gay men and lesbians to achieve the rights of mar-
riage and adoption that opposite-sex couples traditionally enjoyed
reappeared, albeit once more in rare and isolated circumstances.
Undoubtedly, the most signiﬁcant of these efforts occurred
in the state of Hawaii in December 1990, when three same-sex
couples, Ninia Baehr and Genora Dancel, Tammy Rodrigues and
Antoinette Pregil, and Pat Lagon and Joseph Melillo, applied for
a marriage license in Honolulu. When their applications were
denied, the three couples ﬁled suit against Lawrence Miike,
Director of the Department of Health for the state of Hawaii. They
contended that they qualiﬁed for a marriage on every criterion
required by the state, except for being of the same sex. Further, they
pointed out that the Hawaii constitution prohibits discrimination
on the basis of a number of criteria, including gender. The clerk’s
decision to withhold a marriage license, they argued, was therefore
unconstitutional under the state constitution.
A trial court found in favor of the defendant on October 1,
1991, a decision the plaintiffs appealed to the Hawaii Supreme
Court. In 1993, the supreme court vacated the trial court’s deci-
sion and sent the case back to that court with the instructions
“that the burden will rest on [the defendant] to overcome the pre-
sumption that HRS 572-1 [the state’s marriage law] is unconstitu-
tional by demonstrating that it furthers compelling state interests
and is narrowly drawn to avoid unnecessary abridgments of
constitutional rights” (Baehr v. Miike 1996).
The case was then reheard before the First Circuit Court for
the state of Hawaii in late 1996. On December 3 of that year, Judge
Kevin S. C. Chang issued his decision in the case. He concluded
that
The evidentiary record presented in this case does not
justify the sex-based classiﬁcation of HRS 572-1.
Therefore, the court speciﬁcally ﬁnds and con-
cludes, as a matter of law, that Defendant has failed to
Same-Sex Marriage in the United States
23

sustain his burden to overcome the presumption that
HRS 572-1 is unconstitutional by demonstrating or prov-
ing that the statute furthers a compelling state interest.
On that basis, Judge Change ruled that
The sex-based classiﬁcation in HRS 572-1, on its face and
as applied, is unconstitutional and in violation of the
equal protection clause of Article I, Section 5 of the
Hawaii Constitution. (Baher v. Miike 1996)
A day after issuing his ruling, Judge Chang issued a stay on
the decision, allowing time for an appeal of the decision. Thus
for a period of 24 hours, marriages between same-sex couples
were legal in Hawaii.
Chang’s ruling motivated the state legislature to take action
in order to preserve the intent of the existing marriage law,
that is, to restrict the practice to one man and one woman. In
March 1997, the legislature adopted legislation calling for a state-
wide vote on a constitutional amendment restricting marriage in
the state to one man and one woman. Two months later, the state
also passed legislation creating an entity called reciprocal beneﬁ-
ciaries, which provided beneﬁts on about 60 matters for same-
sex couples equivalent to those for opposite-sex couples. In
November of 1998, voters ratiﬁed the proposed constitutional
amendment, permitting (but not requiring) the state legislature
to limit marriage to opposite-sex couples.
At the time of that vote, the status of the original Baehr
lawsuit was still in limbo because of Judge Chang’s ruling and the
vote on the constitutional amendment. In December 1999, the state
supreme court resolved that ambiguity by ruling that the legisla-
ture’s action in limiting the scope of marriage in the state made
the Baehr case moot (for a detailed chronology of the Baehr case,
see Partners Task Force for Gay and Lesbian Couples 2002; for
the supreme court’s ruling, see No. 20371 2006).
Baehr and the possibility it created that same-sex marriage
might be ruled a constitutional right in Hawaii caused a wave
of panic through most of the United States. During 1996, legisla-
tion banning same-sex marriages was introduced in 32 states
(Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska,
24
Background and History

New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Okla-
homa, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington), and the gover-
nors of Alabama and Mississippi issued (probably illegal) exec-
utive orders banning the practice (United Church of Christ
1998, 8). (Utah had already banned same-sex marriage in 1995,
the ﬁrst state in the union to do so.) At the same time, state
legislatures also became concerned about the possibility of
having to recognize same-sex marriages conducted in other
states. Under the so-called full faith and credit clause of the
U.S. Constitution (Article 4, Section 1), states are generally
expected to respect the “public acts, records, and judicial pro-
ceedings” of other states. Passing legislation renouncing that
practice is very unusual, but the Baehr case inspired legislators
in nearly every state to introduce bills taking just that action.
Eventually, all but about a half dozen states have passed laws
of this kind, now known as “defense of marriage” acts. And in
September 1996, the U.S. Congress passed (by a vote of 85 to
14 in the Senate and 342 to 67 in the House) and President Bill
Clinton signed a National Defense of Marriage Act, allowing the
U.S. government to ignore any acts of marriage between indi-
viduals of the same sex conducted in any individual state.
References
Baehr v. Miike. 1996. http://archives.starbulletin.com/96/12/03/news/
ssruling.txt. Accessed on January 17, 2010.
Bailey, Derrick Sherwin. 1955. Homosexuality and the Western Christian
Tradition. New York: Longmans, Green.
Baker v. Nelson. 1972. http://www.scribd.com/doc/21017674/Baker-v
-Nelson-409-U-S-810-1972. Accessed on January 6, 2010.
Barrett, Ellen M. 1979. “Legal Homophobia and the Christian Church.”
Hastings Law Journal 30 (4): 1019–27.
Bianquis, Thierry. 1986. “La Famille en Islam Arabe.” In Andre Burguie`re
et al., eds., Histoire de la Famille. Vol. 2. Paris: Armand Colin, , 389–449.
Boswell, John E. 1980. Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bronson, Ken. 2004. “Children’s Home Society Wafﬂes,” http://
www.may-18-1970.org/Quest-40.html. Accessed on January 5, 2010.
References
25

Bullough, Vern L. 1976. Sex, Society, and History. New York: Science
History Publications.
Camenker, Brian. 2008. “What Same-Sex ‘Marriage’ Has Done to
Massachusetts. It’s Far Worse than Most People Realize.” http://www
.massresistance.org/docs/marriage/effects_of_ssm.html. Accessed on
January 17, 2010.
Carter, David. 2004. Stonewall: The Riots That Sparked the Gay Revolution.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Crompton, Louis. 1976. “Homosexuals and the Death Penalty in Colonial
America.” Journal of Homosexuality. 1 (3): 277–93.
Crompton, Louis. 2003. Homosexuality and Civilization. Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Cruikshank, Margaret. 1992. The Gay and Lesbian Liberation Movement.
London: Routledge.
Cutler, Marvin, ed. 1956. Homosexuals Today: A Handbook of Organizations
and Publications. Los Angeles: ONE, Inc.
Daniel, Marc. 1994. “Arab Civilization and Male Love.” Translated by
Winston Leyland. In Jonathan Goldberg, ed., Reclaiming Sodom. New
York: Routledge., 59–65
DeYoung, James B. 2000. Homosexuality: Contemporary Claims Examined in
Light of the Bible and Other Ancient Literature and Law. Grand Rapids, MI:
Kregel Publications.
Duberman, Martin. 1993. Stonewall. New York: Penguin Books.
Dunne, Bruce. 2010. “Power and Sexuality in the Middle East.” http://
www.merip.org/mer/mer206/bruce.htm. Accessed on January 12,
2010.
elephantjournal.com. 2009. http://www.elephantjournal.com/2009/02/
gregory-hinton-for-daily-camera-march-26-1975-the-ﬁrst-same-sex
-marriage-licenses-in-the-united-states-were-heroically-issued-in
-boulder-by-county-clerk-clela-rorex/. Accessed on January 5, 2010.
“The Epic of Gilgamesh.” 2009. http://www.ancienttexts.org/library/
mesopotamian/gilgamesh/. Accessed on January 12, 2010.
Epstein, Louis M. 1948. Sex Laws and Customs in Judaism. New York:
D. D. Bloch Publishing Company.
Fone, Byrne. 2000. Homophobia: A History. New York: Metropolitan Press
Forbes, Jack D. 2004. “What Is Marriage? A Native American View.”
http://nas.ucdavis.edu/Forbes/what_is%20Marriage.pdf. Accessed on
January 13, 2010.
Ford, Clellan S., and Frank A. Beach. 1951. Patterns of Sexual Behavior.
New York: Harper & Brothers.
26
Background and History

Frier, Bruce W. 2004. “Roman Same-Sex Weddings from the Legal
Perspective.” Classic Studies Newsletter 10 (Winter 2004). ~http://www
.umich.edu/~classics/news/newsletter/winter2004/weddings.html.
Accessed on January 13, 2010.
Gerber, Henry. 1962. “The Society for Human Rights—1925.” One.
September. http://www.glapn.org/sodomylaws/usa/illinois/
ilnews02.htm. Accessed on January 15, 2010.
Gerig, Bruce L. 2010. “Homosexuality in the Ancient Near East, Beyond
Egypt.” http://epistle.us/hbarticles/neareast.html. Accessed on
January 13, 2010.
Gibbon, Edward. 1880. History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
6 vols. Edited by Dean Milman, Franc¸ois-Pierre-Guillaume Guizot, and
William Smith. New York: Harpers.
Greenberg, David F. 1988. The Construction of Homosexuality. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hay, Bob. “Comrades of the Cut Sleeve: Homosexuality in China.” 2009.
http://bobhay.org/_downloads/_homo/11%20Comrades%20of%20%
20the%20Cut%20Sleeve.pdf. Accessed on January 12, 2010.
Henderson, Bernard W. 1923. The Life and Principate of the Emperor
Hadrian, A.D. 76–138. London: Methuen & Company.
Hinsch, Bret. 1990. Passion of the Cut Sleep. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
“History of Chinese Homosexuality.” 2004. http://www.chinadaily
.com.cn/english/doc/2004-04/01/content_319807.htm. Accessed on
January 12, 2010.
“History of Sodomy Laws.” 2004. http://www.glapn.org/sodomylaws/
history/history.htm. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Holleran, Andrew. 2008. Chronicle of a Plague, Revisited: AIDS and Its
Aftermath . Philadelphia: Da Capo Press.
Homer. 2004. The Iliad. Translated by Ian Johnston. http://www.mlahanas
.de/Greeks/Texts/Iliad/iliad24.htm. Accessed on January 12, 2010.
“Homosexual Rights Around the World.” 2006. http://www.asylumlaw
.org/docs/sexualminorities/rights%20around%20the%20world-06.pdf.
Accessed on January 12, 2010.
“Homosexuality in Greece and Rome: A Sourcebook of Basic
Documents in Translation.” 2010. http://www.laits.utexas.edu/
ancienthomosexuality/bibliography.php. Accessed on January 12, 2010.
Human Rights Campaign. 2010. “Statewide Employment Laws and
Policies.” http://www.hrc.org/documents/Employment_Laws_and
_Policies.pdf. Accessed on January 15, 2010.
References
27

Johansson, Warren, and William A. Percy. (2009). “Homosexuality in the
Middle Ages.” http://www.williamapercy.com/wiki/index.php/
Homosexuality_in_the_Middle_Ages. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Katz, Jonathan. 1976. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the
U.S.A. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company.
Kennedy, Dominic. 2007. “Gays Deserve Torture, Death Penalty, Iranian
Minister Says.” http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,311025,00.html.
Accessed on January 12, 2010.
“The Law in England, 1290–1885.” 2010. http://www.fordham.edu/
halsall/pwh/englaw.html. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Lawrence v. Texas. 2003. http://caselaw.lp.ﬁndlaw.com/scripts/getcase
.pl?court=US&vol=000&invol=02-102. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Marjorie Jones et al., Appellants v. James Hallahan, Clerk of the Jefferson
County Court, Appellee. 1973. http://marriagelawfoundation.org/cases
%5CJones%20v.%20Hallahan.pdf. Accessed on January 5, 2010.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. 2009. “Employment Non-
Discrimination Act.” http://www.thetaskforce.org/issues/
nondiscrimination/ENDA_main_page. Accessed on January 17, 2010.
Neill, James. 2009. The Origins and Role of Same-Sex Relations in Human
Societies. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company.
No. 20371. 1996. http://hawaii.gov/jud/20371.pdf. Accessed on
January 17, 2010.
Painter, George. 2004. “The Sensibilities of Our Forefathers: The History
of Sodomy Laws in the United States.” http://www.glapn.org/
sodomylaws/sensibilities/virginia.htm. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Partners Task Force for Gay and Lesbian Couples. 2002. http://www
.buddybuddy.com/t-line-3.html. Accessed on January 17, 2010.
“Poll Results.” 2007. http://atheism.about.com/gi/pages/poll.htm
?linkback=http://atheism.about.com/b/a/250223.htm&poll_id
=1770807142&poll=2&submit1=Submit+Vote. Accessed on January 12,
2009.
Rimmerman, Craig A. 2008. The Lesbian and Gay Movements: Assimilation
or Liberation? Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
“Same Sex Marriage, Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships.”
2009. http://www.ncsl.org/IssuesResearch/HumanServices/
SameSexMarriage/tabid/16430/Default.aspx. Accessed on January 6,
2010.
Shilts, Randy. 2007. And the Band Played On, rev. ed. New York: St.
Martin’s Grifﬁn.
28
Background and History

“Sodomy Laws: Virginia.” 2004. http://www.glapn.org/sodomylaws/
usa/virginia/virginia.htm. Accessed on January 14, 2010.
Teal, Donn. 1995. The Gay Militants: How Gay Liberation Began in America,
1969–1971. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
“This Alien Legacy: The Origins of ‘Sodomy’ Laws in British
Colonialism.” 2008. New York: Human Rights Watch. Also available
online at http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/ﬁles/reports/lgbt1208
_web.pdf.
United Church of Christ. 1998. “Same-Sex Marriage Rights: A Timeline.”
http://www.ucc.org/assets/pdfs/emr9.pdf. Accessed on January 17,
2010.
“US Senate Candidate Wants Death Penalty for Homosexuals.” 2006.
http://www.wtol.com/Global/story.asp?S=4590031. Accessed on
January 12, 2009.
Whitmore, William H. 1889. The Colonial Laws of Massachusetts. Boston:
Rockwell and Churchill. Available online at http://books.google.com/
books?id=Vzno-EGGVcoC&printsec=frontcover&dq=The+Colonial
+Laws+of+Massachusetts&cd=1#v=onepage&q&f=false.
Williams, Walter L. 1986. The Spirit and the Flesh. Boston: Beacon Press.
References
29

This page intentionally left blank

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Introduction
On January 11, 2010, trial began in the U.S. District Court for the
Northern District of California on a suit to overturn voter-
approved Proposition 8, passed in November 2008. That proposi-
tion offered an amendment to the state constitution deﬁning
marriage as a contract between one man and one woman. In his
opening statement for the defense, attorney Charles Cooper
referred to “traditional marriage” 14 times. He said, among other
comments, that
[Traditional marriage is the union of a man and a
woman, a] deﬁnition that has prevailed in virtually
every society in recorded history, since long before the
advent of modern religions.
[T]he traditional age-old limitation of marriage to
one man and one woman is worth preserving.
[T]raditional marriage . . . has ancient and powerful
religious connotations. (Beck 2010)
The debate over same-sex marriage involves arguments over a
number of different issues. Proponents of the practice say that
same-sex marriage is a civil right to which all American citizens
are entitled, that same-sex marriage helps stabilize relationships
between loving individuals of the same gender, and that same-sex
31

marriage poses no threat to opposite-sex marriage that has been
common for so many centuries. Opponents of same-sex marriage
say that the practice legitimizes sinful behavior, that it sends the
wrong message to children about an immoral type of sexuality,
and that it gives special privileges to a certain class of American
citizens.
No issue is more contentious, however, than the argument that
marriage in Judeo-Christian culture has always been an institution
between one man and one woman. Whether authorized by reli-
gious dogma or civil law, critics point out, marriage has always
and without exception been permitted only between opposite-sex
couples. Given the fundamental character of this argument, the
place to begin in a review of the dispute over same-sex marriage is
almost certainly a review of the nature of marriage in Judeo-
Christian culture. Is it, in fact, true that opposite-sex marriage is
the one and only legitimate type of relationship permitted in Jewish
and Christian cultures, as far back as one can determine?
The issue as to how a society views same-sex marriage is a
very different—and arguably much more fundamental—question
than how it views same-sex relationships in general. One can
imagine that a society tolerates, accepts, or even honors same-
sex relationships (as discussed at length in Chapter 1) without
its also acknowledging the right of same-sex couples to enter into
a formal and legal relationship, such as marriage. The state of
affairs in the United States today illustrates that point. Recent
polls indicate that roughly 6 out of 10 Americans are willing
to accept the proposition that same-sex relationships are morally
acceptable. Even larger majorities (usually 80% and more) agree
that gay men and lesbians should not be deprived of housing,
employment, public accommodation, or other civil rights on the
basis of their sexual orientation (see, for example, PollingReport
.com 2010). However, a signiﬁcant majority of Americans still
believe that same-sex couples should not have the right to marry,
with generally about 65 percent of respondents opposed to
same-sex marriage and about 35 percent in favor of the practice
(PollingReport.com 2010).
It may be that this disconnect in public opinion about
same-sex relationships and marriage is an example of the view
sometimes expressed that “I don’t care what they [gay men and
lesbians] do in the privacy of their own home, as long as they
don’t parade their sexual acts in public [that is, seek legal recogni-
tion of their ‘lifestyle’).” In view of this attitude, what is actually
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

known about the legal status of same-sex marriage in the history
of Western culture?
Same-Sex Marriage
in Judeo-Christian History
Most opponents of same-sex marriage base their objections to
a large extent on biblical injunctions on the topic. They usually
cite one or more of the following passages to justify their stance
on same-sex marriage:
•
Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination. (Leviticus 18:22)
•
If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman,
both of them have committed an abomination: they shall
surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
(Leviticus 20: 13)
•
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind. (I Corinthians 6: 9)
•
For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for
even their women did change the natural use into that
which is against nature:
And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of
the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men
with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving
in themselves that recompence of their error which was
meet. (Romans 1: 26–27)
•
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous
man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly
and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of
fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
For whoremongers, for them that deﬁle themselves
with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured
persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to
sound doctrine. (1 Timothy 1: 9–10)
(It should be pointed out that the wording of these passages has
been changed during a number of translations over hundreds of
Same-Sex Marriage in Judeo-Christian History
33

years, and a number of authorities differ as to the actual meanings
of some terms, especially terms for which there is no precise com-
parable word in modern English.)
Some historians point out that these prohibitions arise rela-
tively late in the history of Israelite culture, after the Israelites
returned from Babylonian exile in the late sixth century BCE. Prior
to this period, there appear to be no prohibitions on homosexual
activity within the society. Indeed, one authority has written that
“there is a distinct lack of preaching on sexual matters [of any type]
among the Hebrews of the pre-exilic [pre-Babylonian exile] period”
(Epstein 1948, 3–4).
The prohibitions found in modern versions of the Bible are
generally construed as an effort by God (and/or his spokesperson
on Earth) to warn the Israelites of any number of unapproved
practices engaged in by their neighbors. They were a set of guide-
lines designed to make the Israelites a race of people that was dif-
ferent and special. Thus, in addition to prohibitions against same-
sex relationships and same-sex marriage (which, by inference,
were practiced by neighboring cultures), a very long list of other
banned practices is to be found in the Bible, most of them in the
book of Leviticus. Among these prohibitions are adultery (18: 20
and 20: 10), bestiality (18: 23 and 20: 15 and 16), theft (19: 11), lying
(19: 11), profanity (19: 12 and 20: 9), hating another person (19: 17),
taking vengeance on another person (19: 18), planting more than
one type of seed in a ﬁeld (19: 19), wearing a garment made of
both linen and wool (19: 19), eating any food that contains
blood (19: 26), cutting one’s hair or beard (19: 27), having a tattoo
(19: 28), and using false weights and balances (19: 36). A very
large variety of foods are also prohibited in chapter 11 of Leviti-
cus, including pigs, horses, camels, rats, cats, dogs, snakes,
raccoons, squirrels, most insects, many birds (such as eagles,
sparrows, owls, and crows), and many forms of seafood (such
as catﬁsh, sharks, scampi, octopus, squid, shellﬁsh, and whales)
(Divine Law 1999). Modern-day followers of a literal interpreta-
tion of the Bible presumably respect and observe all items on this
list of prohibitions.
Many modern interpreters of scriptural proscriptions of
same-sex relationships and same-sex marriage take a relati-
vely simplistic view that biblical passages mean just what they
say: same-sex relationships of all kind are prohibited. In fact,
biblical scholars have historically held somewhat different views
on the issue. In many instances, they have questioned whether
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the story of Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 19), the laws of Leviti-
cus, and the proscriptions against homosexual acts in I Corinthi-
ans, Romans, and I Timothy mean precisely what many church
leaders and the general public have come to believe that they
say, or whether these messages are more complex, requiring that
the modern world take a more careful look at the cultural context
in which those passages were written. As just one example, a
number of scholars have asked whether the proscription in Leviti-
cus that “[t]hou shall not lie with mankind, as with womankind”
actually refers to same-sex acts as they are viewed in the modern
world. Instead, a long-held alternative is that, given the original
language used, the prohibition is actually against the practice of
using males as prostitutes in temple ceremonies, a practice
common among tribal neighbors of the Israelites (see, for exam-
ple, Gay Christian Network 2010; Liberated Christians 1998; Reli-
gious Tolerance 2008; Walker 1999).
The appeal by some modern writers to the Bible as the source
of Western culture’s one-man, one-woman model of “traditional
marriage” is also problematic on other grounds. Some scholars
have noted that the Bible mentions other types of marriages—
perhaps as many as eight in all—described and sanctioned by
the scriptures. For example, Jacob had two wives, Leah and
Rachel (Genesis 29: 1–30); Esau had three wives, Adah, Aholiba-
mah, and Bashemath (Genesis 36: 2–3); Abijah had 14 wives (II
Samuel 24: 9); and Solomon had 700 wives and 300 royal concu-
bines (I Kings 11: 1–3). Some scholars also recognize another type
of marriage, that which includes a man, his legal wife, and a
slave. Such a marriage is described in Genesis 16: 2–3, when
Sarah, who has been unable to bear a child with Abraham, offers
her slave, Hagar, as a “substitute wife,” who may be able to have
offspring with him. Other types of nontraditional marriages
described in the Bible and apparently sanctioned by God include
contracts between a rapist and his victim, a male soldier and a
female prisoner of war, and two slaves (Religious Tolerance 2006).
In spite of any current controversy over the scriptural basis of
one-man, one-woman marriage, it is clear that over time, after the
death of Jesus, a Christian model of marriage similar to that pro-
moted by most modern Christians evolved. That model is based
essentially on the union of one man and one woman for the pur-
pose of producing children. The procreative element of Christian
marriage remains an essential component of the one-man, one-
woman standard for marriage. Both opponents of same-sex
Same-Sex Marriage in Judeo-Christian History
35

marriage and jurists who have to rule on that issue tend to
embrace this philosophy. For example, in the landmark case of
Baker v. Nelson (191 N.W. 2d. 185), Justice C. Donald Peterson
noted that “[t]he institution of marriage as a union man and
woman, uniquely involving the procreation and rearing of chil-
dren within a family, is as old as the book of Genesis” (Baker v.
Nelson 1971, 185).
Given that Jesus himself said very little or nothing about
marriage, and nothing at all about same-sex relationships, the
Christian model of marriage is most commonly attributed to the
philosophy and writings of Saint Paul. It was better, he said, to
avoid all sexual contact in one’s life whatsoever, as he himself
had apparently been able to do. But, recognizing the powerful
force of the sexual drive, Paul realized that most men (and probably
women) could not follow his example. Therefore, he acknowledged
that marriage was necessary to avoid having men and women
involved in sexual activity outside the bonds of matrimony. Among
his many admonitions on the subject, Paul wrote:
It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own
wife, and let every woman have her own husband.
For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man
hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and
another after that.
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for
them if they abide even as I. (I Corinthians 7: 1–2, 8–9)
Even then, marriage was not ofﬁcially afﬁrmed a sacrament
of the Roman Catholic Church until 1208, when the Council of
Florence and Pope Innocent IV declared it so, intimating in the
process that matrimony had always been a sacred rite of the
church (Lehmkuhl 1910).
Rome and the Middle Ages
For the ﬁrst three and a half centuries of its history, Chris-
tianity probably had relatively little impact on the world around
it. In the world’s most powerful nation at the time, Rome, same-
sex relationships and same-sex marriage were not uncommon
nor prohibited (see Chapter 1). With the ascension of the ﬁrst
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Christian emperor, Constantine, that situation changed. Christian
doctrine on many issues, including same-sex relationships,
became incorporated into Roman law. In 342 CE, for example,
the emperor Constantius II issued a regulation making same-sex
marriage illegal. The regulation survives in the Theodosian Code
of 429, a compilation of laws adopted since the time of Constan-
tine. It said in part anyone who “ ‘marries’ in the manner of a
woman . . . when Venus is changed into another form” shall be
subjected to “exquisite punishment” (Greenberg 1990, 229). The
precise meaning of that law has been the subject of scholarly dispute,
with some writers arguing that it was passed “facetiously,” per-
haps at least partly because an author of the law, the emperor
Constans (Constantine’s son), was himself accused of having a num-
ber of male lovers (Frakes 2006).
In any case, Roman law gradually became more clear over
time about same-sex relationships in general, and same-sex mar-
riage in particular. For example, in the year 390 CE, a law was
passed specifying the death penalty (by public burning) for any
man who “played the role of a woman” in a sexual encounter
(Frakes 2006). For a period of time, Christianity battled with other
religions and philosophies, such as Stoicism, Manicheism, and
Neo-Platonism for dominance in setting moral and ethical stan-
dards in the Roman empire. But it eventually won out, with
increasingly severe punishments for same-sex relationships and
same-sex marriage. By 529, for example, Roman law no longer
distinguished between active and passive participants in same-
sex activities. The Corupus Iurus Civilis (“Body of Civil Law”)
promulgated by Emperor Justinian in that year called for the
death penalty for all such individuals. According to one authority,
that code, which summarized more than 200 years of Roman laws
on a host of topics, “represent[s] the heritage which late Roman
law was to leave to posterity [on the subject of same-sex relation-
ships] (di Beradino 1997, 10). Christianity had triumphed. Same-
sex relationships were damned, and same-sex marriage was
beyond consideration.
And yet, such might not have been the case. While canon law
(usually the dominant legal force in most countries of Western
Europe) strictly prohibited same-sex relationships and same-sex
marriages in civil society, the situation may have been quite dif-
ferent within the Roman Catholic Church (and, later, the Eastern
Orthodox Church) itself. Such a dichotomy is hardly surprising.
In the ﬁrst place, members of the clergy were, in most cases,
Rome and the Middle Ages
37

normal, healthy men themselves. They must often have had the
same sexual appetites as ordinary men and indulged those
appetites as did their lay brothers. (The issue with women was
very different, of course, because women never held leadership
positions in early Christianity.) Countless numbers of clergy,
from local priests to popes, had spouses of the opposite sex
and families, not so very different from those of the laity. For
example, evidence suggests that at least 10 popes were married
before receiving holy orders, and 5 were sexually active during
their pontiﬁcate during the Middle Ages. The ﬁrst in this list,
Pope Sergius III, apparently had a son with his mistress, Maro-
zia, a married woman. That son later became Pope John XI
(Mann 1912). Somewhat later, one of Sergius’s successor’s sex-
ual life was so blatant that his ofﬁcial entry in The Catholic Ency-
clopedia declares that he was “a coarse, immoral man, whose life
was such that the Lateran was spoken of as a brothel, and the
moral corruption in Rome became the subject of general odium”
(Kirsch 1910).
In addition, members of the clergy who were attracted to
other men were in, for them, an almost ideal—and perhaps
seductive—situation, a community where one’s only social con-
tacts were with others of the same sex. In a very simplistic sense,
one might ask what a man who was sexually attracted to other
men would do with his life in the Middle Ages? If one remained
in the secular world, he would almost certainly be expected to
marry and raise a family. The clergy at least offered an escape
from that option and, perhaps, an opportunity to develop one or
more relationships with other individuals.
As might be expected, written records concerning same-sex
relationships among the Roman Catholic clergy in the Middle
Ages are sparse. But a few documents remain that suggest that
the hypothesis in the preceding paragraph might have some val-
idity. In his book Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality,
for example, Yale historian John Boswell reprints some letters
between members of the clergy that have strong erotic overtones.
For example, a leading theologian at the court of Charlemagne,
Alcuin, wrote a number of erotic poems to other clergymen. In
one, written to Arno, bishop of Salzburg, he says that
I think of your love and friendship with such sweet
memories, reverend bishop, that I long for that lovely
time when I may be able to clutch the neck of your
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

sweetness with the ﬁngers of my desires. Alas, if only it
were granted to me, as it was to Habakkuk, to be trans-
ported to you, how would I sink into your embraces, . . .
how would I cover, with tightly pressed lips, not only
your eyes, ears, and mouth but also your every ﬁnger
and your toes, not once but many a time. (Boswell 1980,
190; see remaining sections of this chapter for more
examples of the same)
Given these two factors, it would hardly be surprising if
same-sex relationships were not uncommon in the early church,
as they have perhaps remained to the present day. (Based on a
number of surveys, the best estimate appears to be that about
one-third of all priests in the Roman Catholic Church today are
attracted to members of the same sex; for a summary of those
studies, see Religious Tolerance 2009.) A number of scholars
have explored the world of same-sex relationships in the early
Roman Catholic Church, with some discoveries having been
made that are, perhaps, somewhat surprising. The evidence now
suggests that not only were same-sex relationships relatively
common among the clergy, but they were, in at least some instan-
ces, recognized, honored, and legitimized in formal ceremonies.
The person perhaps most closely associated with the study of
same-sex unions in the Roman Catholic Church during the
Middle Ages is probably John E. Boswell (1947–94), formerly A.
Whitney Griswold Professor of History and chair of the Depart-
ment of History at Yale University. In 1994, a few weeks before
his death, Boswell’s book Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe
was published. The book summarized 12 years of Boswell’s
research at dozens of major libraries on original manuscripts in
half a dozen languages. He came to the conclusion that “homo-
sexual marriage ceremonies” were widely known in the Catholic
world from the ﬁfth century on. “Such ceremonies,” he went on,
“were performed in Catholic churches by priests and either estab-
lished what the community regarded as marriages, or commemo-
rated special friendships, in both cases in devoutly Christian
terms.”
In his book, Boswell lists 62 manuscripts that purportedly
refer to same-sex unions. He also provides verbatim translations
of 18 of those documents (Boswell 1994, 283–390). An example
of the kind of ceremony that Boswell cites is the following, taken
from a document entitled “Ofﬁce for Same-Gender Union,”
Rome and the Middle Ages
39

currently held at the Mount Athos Panteleimon Monastery in
Halkadiki, Greece:
O Lord our God and Ruler, who madest humankind
after thine image and likeness, and gavest them power
of life everlasting, who approved it when thy holy apos-
tles Philip and Bartholomew were united, bound
together not be nature but in the communion of holy spi-
rit, and who didst approve that thy holy martyrs Serge
and Bacchus should be united, bless also these they serv-
ants, N. and N., joined not by nature but in the way of
faith. Grant unto them, Lord, to love each other without
hatred and to abide without scandal all the days of their
lives, with the help of the Blessed Mother of God and all
thy saints, because Thine is the power and the kingdom
and the power and the glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
(Boswell 1994, 329)
Boswell is by no means the only scholar to have uncovered the
institution of formal, at least quasi-legal unions among Roman
Catholic clergy. For example, the Russian Orthodox theologian
Pavel Florenskij (also Florensky, 1882–1937) wrote about the
validation of similar same-sex unions in Orthodox churches. As
described by William Eskridge in his review of the history of
same-sex marriage, Florenskij described a series of steps in a
process known as “brother-making,” “enfraternization,” or “spiri-
tual brotherhood.” Those steps included
•
The couple stands in front of the altar, with the older
brother on the right.
•
The ceremony begins with prayers and litanies that cel-
ebrate similar ceremonies with other couples from the
church.
•
The couple is joined by a girdle that surrounds them both,
signifying their union in Christ.
•
The priest reads from the scripture a passage such as I
Corinthians 12: 27 (“For as the body is one, and hath
many members, and all the members of that one body,
being many, are one body: so also is Christ.”) and offers
more prayers.
•
The congregation joins in the Lord’s Prayer, after which
all assembled take part in communion.
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
The priest leads the couple around the lectern while all
sing a hymn.
•
The couple exchange a kiss, and the service ends with all
singing Psalm 133: 1 (“Behold, how good and how pleas-
ant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!”). (as cited
in Eskridge 1993, 1450–51)
The publication of Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe in
1994 caused a sensation in the academic world. On the one hand
Boswell’s text provided a new and dramatically different view
of the role of same-sex relationships and same-sex unions (includ-
ing marriage) in the Middle Ages. One reviewer described the
book as a “brilliant, learned, engaging, talkative, and insistent
argument that the ancient and medieval church celebrated the
same-sex equivalent of its heterosexual marriage ceremony”
(Bennison 1995, 256). Other views were less complimentary. In
one of the most hostile reviews, medieval historian Marian
Therese Horvat called Boswell’s book “advocacy scholarship”
that had little redeeming value. She said the book revealed a
“complete misunderstanding of the underlying spirit of the Age
of Faith.” The worst aspect of the book, she said, was that it was
“bad history” that was “even more dangerous than the practice
of bad medicine, because its poison seeps into the very soul of
Christian Civilization” (Horvat 2002).
One of the most common criticisms of Boswell’s book was
that the ceremony he most commonly described, known as adel-
phopoiesis, really means just what the direct Greek translation
suggest: “brother” (α′δελϕο′ς; adelphos) “I make” (ποιε′ω; poieo).
That is, critics suggested that the ceremonies Boswell described
are really nothing more than afﬁrmations of close friendship in
Christ, rather than erotic love relationships.
Such may, of course, very well be true. This controversy
illustrates once more the problems faced by modern scholars in
translating ancient texts and trying to understand the subtle
meanings contained in terms and phrases that may have no
modern counterpart. Almost certainly, the questions raised by
Boswell in his book can never be deﬁnitively answered, and
scholars are likely to continue the debate over the true meaning
of adelphopoiesis for years to come. The interesting point is that
a scholarly and esoteric debate over religious ceremonies from
the Middle Ages ﬁrst published in 1994 has now become an
important component of the modern-day debate over same-sex
Rome and the Middle Ages
41

marriage, as proponents and opponents do battle over the con-
cept of a Roman Catholic church that may (or may not) once have
blessed same-sex unions with the same authenticity granted to
opposite-sex marriages.
“Traditional Marriage”
The argument over same-sex unions in the Roman Catholic
and Orthodox churches notwithstanding, there can be little doubt
that an institution now labeled as “traditional marriage” did
develop among the laity in Christian societies during the Middle
Ages. That institution consisted of one man and one woman
whose primary purpose it was to bear and raise children. But that
“traditional marriage,” which survived well into the twentieth
century, was very different from what most people think of as a
“conventional marriage” today.
In the ﬁrst place, love was generally not considered to be a
factor of any signiﬁcance in the contracting of a “traditional mar-
riage.” Perhaps more than anything else, a “traditional marriage”
was an economic transaction in which a man acquired a woman
to be his companion and the mother of his children. Such transac-
tions often involved the transfer of ﬁnancial assets such as money
and property in a contract arranged between a bridegroom and
the prospective bride’s father, a so-called bride sale. The symbol
of the transaction was generally a ring, thought of as a “down
payment” on the bride’s dowry. The ring has, of course, remained
a part of the modern marriage ceremony, although it no longer
necessarily represents the purchase of a woman by a man. With-
out question, many husbands and wives grew to love each other
over time, although love itself was almost never considered an
issue in contracting a marriage (“Love, Marriage, Romance and
Women . . . in Medieval and Celtic Culture” 1998).
Procreation was a critical issue for families in the Middle
Ages and Renaissance for a number of reasons. The birth of a
boy child, for example, ensured that the father’s family line and
name would be perpetuated. In addition, children were expected
to begin work at an early age, certainly before puberty, helping
in the ﬁelds and in cottage industries operated by the family.
Children were, thus, an essential economic asset. Parents also
depended on children for support and comfort during their own
old age.
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In many instance, marriages were arranged by some person,
related or not related to a prospective bride and groom. These
arranged marriages were designed to achieve some stable family
unit, as interpreted by the arranger of the marriage. For example,
in 1344 the ruler of an estate in Weitenau in the Black Force held
the authority to arrange marriages for all girls over the age of 14
and all boys over the age of 18 living on his property (Youngs
2006, 137).
Among the nobility, marriage served other functions, such as
extending the land over which a man had control, increasing his
material wealth, and ensuring the maintenance of peace among
neighboring states. Marriages were arranged by parents with
political considerations such as these, often when the prospective
bride and groom were very young (“Noble Life” 2010).
An important feature of “traditional marriages” was the
unequal status of men and women in such arrangements. Gener-
ally speaking, when a woman married she lost all of her ﬁnancial
assets as well as much of her personal freedom. The English
essayist, Daniel Defoe, regarded this type of marriage (a marriage
without love) as “legalized prostitution” (Novak 2001, 68). The
great English jurist, William Blackstone, provided the legal basis
for this view of marriage in his monumental work on English
law, Commentaries on the Laws of England. He wrote that “[b]y mar-
riage, the very being or legal existence of a woman is suspended,
or at least incorporated or consolidated into that of the husband,
under whose wing, protection, or cover she performs everything”
(Blackstone 1765, 430). In one famous example of this legal princi-
ple, a leader of the English suffragist movement, Millicent Garrett
Fawcett, expressed her outrage when she reported to a local con-
stabulary the theft of her purse. Her outrage was based on the
court’s charge that the theft had taken “£1, 18s. 6d., the property
of Henry Fawcett,” an action that, she later wrote, made her feel
“as if I had been charged with theft myself” (Offen 2010).
One interesting manifestation of the role of women in “tradi-
tional marriage” involves the practice by which a bride gives up
her maiden name to take her husband’s surname at the wedding
ceremony. Many people believe that this custom reﬂects the trans-
fer of a piece of property (the bride) from one owner (her father,
whose name she bears before marriage) to a new owner (her
new husband, whose name she assumes). Thus the problem faced
by many “liberated” women is whether to keep their maiden
(paternal) surname or to assume the name of her new “owner,”
“Traditional Marriage”
43

her husband (see, for example, “A New Perspective on Taking
Your Husband’s Name” 2010).
Over time, more and more women began to rebel against the
position in which they found themselves in “traditional mar-
riages,” which limited their own freedom and independence. In
colonial New England, for example, women who wished to remain
ﬁnancially and legally independent sometimes entered into a
relationship with another woman that became known as a Boston
marriage (Lewis 2010). A Boston marriage might consist of two
unmarried women living together (almost certainly in a nonsex-
ual relationships), which allowed them some of the beneﬁts of a
family unit without the constraints of the “master-slave” relation-
ship they perceived in “traditional marriage.”
The most severe aspects of “traditional marriage,” such as
the unreasonable constraints on wives in such relationships,
gradually began to disappear in some places over a long period
of time. An important factor in this evolution in the United States
was the changes in sex roles that occurred during World War II.
Largely because of the liberating opportunities made available
during the war, women became less willing to give up the free-
dom they had found in war jobs, in the military, and in other posi-
tions of independence and responsibility. Many women began to
seek a different kind of marriage in which they could become
breadwinners, share housekeeping responsibilities and decision
making, choose to have or not to have children, and even retain
their own maiden names (see, for example, Bryant 2009; Baxan-
dall and Gordon 2000; Rosen 2007).
By no means was this liberated view of marriage acceptable
to all—or even most—women and men. The reaction among
evangelical women, as an example, is reﬂected in the formation
of the organization Concerned Women for America (CWA) in
1978. Founder Beverly La Haye has written that she was moti-
vated to form the new group after watching a television appear-
ance of Betty Friedan, one of the pioneers of the women’s
liberation movement in the United States. La Haye says that she
jumped up and declared that “Betty Friedan doesn’t speak for
me and I bet she doesn’t speak for the majority of women in this
country.” She decided that a new organization was needed to
save traditional marriage in the United States against a movement
that was “destroying the family and threatening the survival of
the nation” (Faludi 1991, 247–48). CWA currently claims to have
more than a half million members in all 50 states. The ﬁrst among
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

its six core issues is the family, on which its position is that
“marriage consists of one man and one woman.” The organiza-
tion’s goal is to “seek to protect and support the Biblical [sic]
design of marriage and the gift of children,” a position that is very
consistent with that of the philosophy of “traditional marriage”
outlined above (Concerned Women for America 2010a).
The example of CWA illustrates the fact that many individ-
uals and groups that oppose same-sex marriage really do believe
that the practice represents a threat to “traditional marriage” in
the most classic sense. They often emphasize a number of other
modern trends that threaten “traditional marriage,” including
divorce, cohabitation, adultery, premarital sex, and absentee
fathers (Concerned Women for American 2010b). Such individ-
uals and groups are, then, well within an important historical tra-
dition of theological beliefs about the appropriate nature of
marriage in Western culture (for a contemporary view of the role
of women in “traditional marriages,” see Rainey 1989).
Nontraditional Marriage in Western Culture
In spite of the dominant model of one-man, one-woman mar-
riage in Western culture, a number of exceptions to this model
have been attempted. For example, members of the so-called
Shaker denomination believed that marriage was no longer a
necessity since the second coming of the religion’s founder,
Mother Ann Lee, in 1747. Church dogma taught that celibacy
was a more perfect state than marriage, and adherents to the reli-
gion were taught to remain abstinent if they possibly could. The
church never speciﬁcally banned marriage among its members,
but the strong emphasis on celibacy eventually led to the decline
and near extinction of the religion. The only way to gain new
members, children being virtually out of the question, was recruit-
ment from nonmembers, a practice that resulted in declining
numbers over time. Today, a relatively small number of Shaker
communities remain in the United States and a few other nations
(“Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village” 2010; Foster 1984, chapter 2).
Avery different approach to marriage was an essential part of
another religious community, a utopian commune founded in
1848 by John Humphrey Noyes in Oneida, New York. Noyes
believed that Christ’s second coming had already occurred,
shortly after his death in 70 CE. He believed that the goal of
Nontraditional Marriage in Western Culture
45

modern Christians was to rid themselves of sin and become as
perfect as possible in the present world, without waiting for death
and an ascent to heaven. Noyes’s philosophy is generally known
as perfectionism.
From a practical standpoint, perfectionism implied for Noyes
and his followers that Christians should share everything in
common, their possessions, work responsibilities, and families.
Noyes was convinced that the pattern of “traditional marriage”
espoused by most Christians was responsible for most of the
world’s problems. That institution provided, in the ﬁrst place,
“only a scanty and monotonous allowance” for the natural sexual
appetite, especially at an age (adolescence) when it is at its height
(all quotations in this paragraph from Holloway 1966, 180–87).
The bonding of one man to one woman also is responsible, he
thought for “the natural vices of poverty, contraction of taste,
and stinginess or jealousy.” Noyes believed that the practice of
“random procreation” guaranteed by “traditional marriage”
would eventually be replaced by “scientiﬁc combination,” such
as that practiced so successfully with domestic animals. “The
obvious remedy for these abuses,” Noyes believed was “male
continence combined with complete freedom of intercourse.’”
By male continence, Noyes meant the practice of coitus reservatus,
or self-control by a man that prevents fertilization of a woman.
The concept of complete freedom of intercourse eventually became
better known as complex marriage. In this system, every man had
the right to have intercourse with every other woman in the com-
munity, and vice versa. Rules were established as to how such
activities were to occur, but in principle, complete sexual freedom
existed in the community.
The Oneida community survived as a thriving community
for only a few decades. To a large extent, it died out when Noyes
was unsuccessful in convincing his son, an atheist, to continue
his mission. The practice of complex marriage was abandoned in
1879, and the community itself eventually conﬁned its activities
to the manufacture of cutlery, an industry in which it was famous
until the ﬁrst decade of the twenty ﬁrst century (Hillebrand 2008;
Klaw 1993).
Without much question, the best known and most successful
system of nontraditional marriage is that previously endorsed by
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, more commonly
known as the Mormon church. The denomination was founded
in 1830 in Fayette Township, New York, by Joseph Smith. Smith
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

had received his ﬁrst vision of God 10 years earlier and been vis-
ited by the angel Moroni in 1823. The angel told Smith of a trove
of golden plates containing a new scripture on which a new reli-
gion was to be based, the religion that was to become Mormonism
(for an early history of Mormonism, see “Introduction to Church
History” 2009).
One of the revelations received by Smith came in response
to his question as to why prophets in the Old Testament were
allowed more than one wife. The response to this question was
that God permitted such forms of marriage under certain
circumstances (“Origins of Polygamy among the Mormons”
2008). Provided with this information, Smith himself began to
take multiple wives, a practice also adopted by other men of
the denomination and one that the church did not formally
acknowledge until 1852. Then, at a conference of the elders of
the church held in Salt Lake City, president Brigham Young
and elder Orson Pratt revealed that polygamy had been a
common and approved practice in the church for many years
(“Deseret News, —Extra, Containing a Revelation on Celestial
Marriage” 1852, 1).
The 1852 announcement came only a few years after the Utah
Territory was established by the Compromise of 1850. As the
years went by, residents of the territory became more interested
in being annexed to the United States as a full-ﬂedged state. How-
ever, word of the religion’s polygamous practices spread through-
out the nation, and the federal government refused to consider
statehood for the territory as long as the Mormon church recog-
nized polygamy. After a number of battles between federal troops
and state militia, a peaceful settlement was reached in 1890 when
Wilford Woodruff, president of the church, issued a document
now known simply as The Manifesto (and known within the
church as Ofﬁcial Declaration—1). In this document, Woodruff
said that the church was “not teaching polygamy or plural mar-
riage, nor permitting any person to enter into its practice.” He fur-
ther stated that “[i]nasmuch as laws have been enacted by
Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pro-
nounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby dec-
lare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my inﬂuence
with the members of the Church over which I preside to have
them do likewise (Ofﬁcial Declaration—1 2006).
Although the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints now
ofﬁcially disavows polygamy, the tradition lives on in an offshoot of
Nontraditional Marriage in Western Culture
47

the church known as Mormon fundamentalism (or fundamentalist
Mormonism). This line of the denomination originated in the 1920s
when a man by the name of Lorin C. Woolley declared that the
mother church had been incorrect on a number of doctrinal issues,
the most important of which was polygamy. He founded a new
denomination in which the right of polygamy was restored to male
members of the church (Hales 2008). That offshoot survives today
with a nonscientiﬁc census placing its adherents at about 37,000
(Winslow 2007). A number of sects within the Mormon fundamental-
ist movement also exist. These include the Apostolic United Breth-
ren, Church of Jesus Christ in Zion, Church of the Firstborn in the
Fullness of Time, Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints, Latter Day Church of Christ (Kingston clan), Righteous
Branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, School of
the Prophets, True and Living Church of Jesus Christ of Saints of
the Last Days, Centennial Park group, Nielsen/Naylor Group, and
Independent Mormon fundamentalists (“The Latter-day Saint
Movement” 2010). One of these branches, the Fundamentalist
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, received some notoriety
in 2007, when its leader, Warren Jeffs, was convicted of accessory to
rape and sentenced to two consecutive terms of ﬁve years to life in
prison (“Polygamist ‘Prophet’ to Serve at Least 10 Years in Prison”
2007).
An issue of special interest is the place of same-sex marriage in
Native American cultures. Jack D. Forbes, professor emeritus of
Native American Studies at the University of California at Davis,
has noted that observers who talk about “traditional marriage”
refer almost exclusively to that concept within Judeo-Christian cul-
ture, which traces back two to three thousand years. But, he points
out, an important part of the American heritage is the Native
American culture, which has been in existence at least 10 times
that long (Forbes 2004). Unlike Judeo-Christian societies, Native
American tribes have generally been much more open to a variety
of marriage arrangements, include polygamy, cross-generational
marriages, and same-sex marriages. “Native communities,” Forbes
has written, “usually were generally accepting of individual
choices so long as they did not serve to damage others or the
well-being of the whole” (Forbes 2004). The tradition of the berd-
ache, described in Chapter 1, is one of the oldest and most honored
sexual roles in Native American cultures, and same-sex unions
between a berdache and another man were widely accepted and,
in many cases, regarded as of special importance.
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Interestingly enough, regardless of this tradition, modern-
day Indian tribes are struggling with the issue of same-sex mar-
riage in much the same way as are most American states. Some
tribes have banned same-sex marriage by tribal degree, but one,
the Coquille tribe of western Oregon, has approved same-sex
marriage and granted full tribal spousal beneﬁts to members of
such relationships (Bushyhead 2009). In another instance, the
legislative body of the Cherokee Nation has passed legislation
banning same-sex marriage, but the nation’s highest judicial court
has overturned that legislation and ruled that an application for a
marriage license by two women must be issued. (That case has
been in dispute for a number of years, and the court agreed to
rehear testimony again in 2010; see Rifkin 2008).
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments
Pro and Con
A number of arguments have been made, both for and
against the legalization of same-sex marriage. Space prevents a
complete discussion of all arguments pro and con on this topic.
Instead, the following sections summarize some of the most
common of those arguments against same-sex marriage, followed
by rebuttals to those arguments and arguments in favor of same-
sex marriage, again followed by rebuttals.
Arguments in Opposition
to Same-Sex Marriage
Marriage Has Traditionally Been an Institution between One Man
and One Woman in Western Culture and Most Other Human Societies
This argument has been presented in some detail in the pre-
ceding section. In summary, people who take this position are
saying that one-man, one-woman marriage simply is the one
and only correct legal relationship in human culture. For exam-
ple, Jay Alan Sekulow, chief counsel for the American Center for
Law and Justice, a group opposed to same-sex marriage, testiﬁed
before the U.S. House of Representatives Judiciary Subcommittee
on the Constitution in 2004 that the tradition of one-man, one-
woman marriage goes back to the very origins of English and
American law. He quoted Justice Blackstone, one of the great
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
49

early commentators on English law, who said that “it is declared,
that all persons may lawfully marry, but such as are prohibited by
God’s law; and that all marriages contracted by lawful persons in
the face of the church, and consummate with bodily knowledge,
and fruit of children, shall be indissoluble” (“Testimony of Jay
Alan Sekulow” 2004, 14). To emphasize his point, Sekulow then
quoted a possibly apocryphal story about Abraham Lincoln ask-
ing a friend how many legs a dog has, if you agree to the proposi-
tion that its tail counts as a leg. When his friend said, “Five legs, of
course,” Lincoln only laughed. “No matter what you called a
tail,” Lincoln said, “it was never going to be a leg” (“Testimony
of Jay Alan Sekulow” 2004, 15–16). For Sekulow, the point is that
no matter what you choose to call the union of two people other
than one man and one woman, it will simply never be a marriage.
Rebuttal
The discussion of “traditional marriage” in the preceding
section has shown that alternatives to one-man, one-woman mar-
riages have existed in Western culture. Perhaps the best known
and longest-lasting of these alternatives has been the practice of
polygamy, a part of the Mormon tradition for about 70 years in
the church as a whole, and for more than a century in at least
some parts of the denomination.
Critics of this argument also point out that fact that many
practices once regarded as inviolable and/or sacred because they
had been around “forever” and were just simply the right way to
do things have eventually been viewed in new a light. Slavery is
perhaps the most obvious example. The practice of slavery dates
to the earliest history of human society. Written records of the
use of warriors and civilians captured in battle as slaves dates to
at least the second millennium BCE in Egypt. Rules as to who
may and may not be kept as a slave are also discussed at some
length in the 25th chapter of the book of Leviticus. The practice
of slavery in the United States and other Western nations is too
well known to be repeated here. As late as the middle of the nine-
teenth century, before Lincoln’s issuance of the Emancipation
Proclamation, the practice of slavery was widespread and com-
pletely legal in the United States. Indeed, the practice was
enshrined in the U.S. Constitution.
The fact that slavery had always been around and generally
recognized as a legitimate right did not prevent a change in view-
point. Eventually, slavery was outlawed in the United States and
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

internationally, by act of the United Nations, in 1948 (which did
not prevent a number of nations, such as Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Peru, and Mauritania, from retaining the practice for another 20
to 40 years) (Bales 2004).
Perhaps more to the point is the practice of miscegenation,
marriage between two individuals of different races. That prac-
tice was illegal in the United States until 1967, when the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled in Loving v. Virginia that the state of Virgin-
ia’s 1924 miscegenation law was unconstitutional. The reasoning
of the trial judge whose decision was overruled by the Supreme
Court bears a familiar ring in the context of today’s debate over
same-sex marriage. Marriage between two people of different
races is just simply wrong, Judge Leon Bazile wrote:
Almighty God created the races white, black, yellow,
malay and red, and he placed them on separate conti-
nents. And, but for the interference with his arrange-
ment, there would be no cause for such marriage. The
fact that he separated the races shows that he did not
intend for the races to mix. (as cited in Cohen 2009)
Forty years after the Supreme Court’s ruling, Jeter Loving
spoke about same-sex marriage in the context of her own experi-
ence in defeating miscegenation laws in the United States. “Not a
day goes by,” she said, when she did not remember what it meant
to have been given the right to marry the man with whom she
was in love. As a result, she went on, “I believe all Americans, no
matter their race, no matter their sex, no matter their sexual orienta-
tion, should have that same freedom to marry” (Nussbaum 2009).
For proponents of same-sex marriage, the history of miscege-
nation laws provide a lesson in thinking about laws that “have
always been true” and are a “fundamental part of our society that
can not be changed.”
Same-Sex Marriage Poses a Threat to the Traditional Family
Some critics of same-sex marriage believe and argue that the
goal of gay and lesbian activists is not simply to obtain the right to
marry for same-sex couples; it is to destroy the very institution of
marriage and the family itself. In many cases, the basis for this
argument is that gay and lesbian activists have an “agenda” for
the overthrow of American society as we know it. Although dif-
ferent writers vary in their approach to this subject, many base
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
51

their views on a book written by two gay men, Marshall Kirk and
Hunter Madsen, in 1989. In that book, After the Ball: How America
Will Conquer Its Fear and Hatred of Gays in the ’90s, Kirk and
Madsen described a media campaign by which Americans could
be convinced that same-sex relationships are normal and accept-
able and that lesbians and gay men are fundamentally no different
from people with other sexual orientations (Kirk and Madsen
1990). Some opponents of same-sex marriage view the proposals
made by Kirk and Madsen (which generally do not speak of mar-
riage issues directly) as the crystallization of a social agenda laid
out by the leaders of the gay and lesbian civil rights movement.
For example, Peter Winn, associate editor of CitizenLink, on-
line news magazine of the conservative evangelical group Focus
on the Family, has written that “[t]hey don’t just want marriage.
They want to destroy marriage—and the family—as we know it”
(Winn 2003). It is not clear from Winn’s article to whom the “they”
in this quotation refers. It could conceivably be all gay men and les-
bians, all gay and lesbian activists, only some gay and lesbian activ-
ists, or only the speciﬁc individuals who are cited in Winn’s article.
His point seems clear, however, in that he feels that allowing
same-sex marriage is likely to lead to the destruction of “traditional
marriage” and the traditional family.
Critics who hold this view sometimes suggest that evidence
already exists for the effects that same-sex marriage will have on
“traditional marriage” and the family. For some reason, the exam-
ple most commonly mentioned is that of France, which in 1999
adopted legislation granting to same-sex couples many of the
rights and privileges enjoyed by opposite-sex couples. The result
of that action, according to some observers, has been “the destruc-
tion of marriage” (Lutzer 2004, 27). As one speaker at the 2007
World Congress of Families IV noted, one consequence of the
new legal rights granted same-sex couples in France has been a
40 percent increase in the number of children born outside mar-
riage (Bull 2010). The speaker concluded from his observations
that the issue of same-sex marriage is not really about gay men
and lesbians at all; it is about the institutions of marriage and
the family and their future chances of survival if same-sex
marriage is permitted. Same-sex “marriage” and its variations,
he argues, “will turn out in practice to mean the creation of an
alternative form of legal coupling, which will over time result in
the practical elimination of marriage and put a new, ﬂimsier insti-
tution in its place” (Bull 2010).
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rebuttal
One of the problems that proponents of same-sex marriage
have with this argument is its lack of speciﬁcity. The question
they often ask is, “Please explain how granting the right of two
men or two women to marry will affect the strength, viability, or
sanctity or an opposite-sex marriage” (see, for example, “Mike
in Maryland” at “Gay Marriage Is Fading as ‘Values’ Focal Point”
2009). A critic of Benjamin Bull’s argument above might be
whether he actually believes that a 40 percent increase in
the number of children born out of legal marriage in France is
the result of the adoption of civil solidarity pacts that are now
available to French same-sex couples. If so, and it may well be
true, the argument may then be subject to a variety of demo-
graphic tests.
In fact, such tests are already available and have been con-
ducted on a limited basis. The reason such tests are limited, of
course, is that same-sex relationships (marriages, civil unions,
domestic partnerships, etc.) have been available for only a rela-
tively short period of time. Data on long-term associations
between same-sex unions and trends in the stability of marriage
and families are still difﬁcult to obtain. Still, some modest trends
can be noted. In the ﬁrst place, the one state in the United States
where same-sex marriage has been legal for the longest period
of time, Massachusetts, also has the lowest divorce rate of any
state in the union. As of 2007, the divorce rate in Massachusetts
was 2.3 per thousand. By contrast, the divorce rate in states that
have taken some of the strongest stands against legal unions of
any kind between same-sex couples are among the highest in
the nation: 5.9 in Arkansas, 5.2 in Oklahoma, 4.7 in Kentucky, 4.9
in Idaho, 4.6 in Alabama, and 4.6 in Florida (Divorce Rates by
State: 1990, 1995, and 1999–2007 2009).
Similar data are available from Europe. Yale law professor
William N. Eskridge Jr. and Manhattan investment banker Darren
R. Spedale have been studying data on marriage and divorce
trends in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, where various types
of same-sex unions have been legal dating back nearly 20 years.
In 2006, they published a book, Gay Marriage: For Better or for
Worse?: What We’ve Learned from the Evidence, summarizing the
results of their research. They found no evidence whatsoever that
the availability of legal unions between same-sex couples had any
effects at all on opposite-sex marriage and divorce rates. Indeed,
if one were to hypothesize that any relationship at all exists
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
53

between the two variables, Eskridge and Spedale concluded, it
was that same-sex unions promote the stability of opposite-sex
marriages (Eskridge and Spedale 2006). In a related paper, these
authors summarized their conclusions by noting that “[l]ong-
range trends in marriage rates, divorce rates, and nonmarital
births either have been unaffected by the advent of same-sex part-
nerships or have moved in a direction that suggests that the insti-
tution of marriage is strengthening” (Eskridge, Spedale, and
Ytterberg 2004, 2).
Very similar results have been obtained by other researchers.
For example, Dr. Scot O’Grair has studied marriage, divorce, and
birth rates in a number of countries and U.S. states and concluded
that it seems that one would have to have “a signiﬁcant streak of
dishonesty” to come to the conclusion that “traditional marriage”
is harmed by promoting same-sex marriage. “A more likely con-
clusion, if one were force to make conclusions on such data,”
he concludes, “would be that same-sex marriage beneﬁts the
institution of marriage on whole” (O’Grair 2008).
Recognizing Same-Sex Marriage Will Lead to the Legalization
of a Host of Other Disreputable Practices
This argument is a classic approach used in debates over
many topics. It is based on the assumption that adopting one pol-
icy logically requires one to adopt a second policy related to it,
which in turn may lead to adopting yet a third, fourth, and other
policies. The term used to describe this line of reasoning is the
slippery-slope argument, suggesting that once one starts down a
certain road, it is difﬁcult to turn off that road until a number of
related decisions have been made, some (or many) that one did
not foresee or approve of at the beginning of the process.
With respect to same-sex marriage, the argument is that once
marriage between two people of the same sex is legalized, what is
to prevent legalization of a marriage between 2 men and a
woman, or 2 woman and a man, or 1 man and 10 women (polyg-
amy), or a brother and a sister (endogamy), or a man and his cat,
or a woman and her dog? If one believes that marriage is a civil
right, as do supporters of same-sex marriage, then how can that
same right be denied to people who have other views of the
nature of marriage? Supporters of this view generally do not
emphasize the possibility of man-dog or woman-cat relation-
ships, but do point out the logical necessity of extending marriage
privileges to those who believe in polygamy (or polyandry). In a
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

public statement on this issue with regard to the then-proposed
(and since-passed) Defense of Marriage Act in 1996, Hadley
Arkes, professor of jurisprudence and American institutions at
Amherst College, pointed out that “[e]very argument for gay
marriage is an argument that would support polygamy. . . . we
can count on the fact that there will be someone, somewhere,
ready to press this issue by raising a challenge in the court and
testing the limits even further” (Fact Sheet on “Hate Crime”
Legislation 2000, 7). Those who press this argument frequently
point out that individuals and groups that support same-sex mar-
riage often acknowledge and even endorse this possibility. The
policy on polygamy of the American Civil Liberties Union, for
example, speciﬁcally states that the organization “believes that
criminal and civil laws prohibiting or penalizing the practice of
plural marriage violate constitutional protections of freedom of
expression and association, freedom of religion, and privacy for
personal relationships among consenting adults” (National
ACLU Policy on Plural Marriage 2008).
Rebuttal
The fact is that many people who support same-sex marriage
hold the more general view that whom a person marries is her or
his own business and that polygamy and polyandry are perfectly
all right. But it is also possible to make an argument that the
slippery-slope thesis does not apply in this case. Eugene Volokh,
professor at the UCLA School of Law, suggests that what makes
a difference is how people view marriage itself. If they think of
marriage in terms of “it’s none of my business whom people
marry,” they may have a very different view about the slippery-
slope argument and polygamy than someone who believes that
marriage between two people has social utility. In the latter case,
Volokh argues, people can and probably will look at two different
propositions—same-sex marriage and polygamy or polyandry—
in very different lights. There is no reason, he says, why individ-
uals cannot make intelligent and informed decisions about the
two institutions that are different from each other (Volokh 2005).
The Primary Goal of Marriage Is Procreation, and Gay Men
and Lesbians Cannot Procreate
This argument clearly has two parts. The ﬁrst is very common
among opponents of same-sex marriage. It states very simply that
same-sex couples should not be allowed to marry because the
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
55

primary purpose of marriage is to produce children. The second
part of the argument is that same-sex couples are biologically not
capable of having children. For opponents of same-sex marriage,
these two parts go together almost inevitably. Typical of the kinds
of comments in debates about same-sex marriage is the following:
“A normative marriage of a man and a woman involves the con-
summation of the marriage and procreative act. A same sex couple
will never be able to consummate a marriage and cannot procreate”
(“Economic Reasons for Gay Marriage” 2010).
This argument about same-sex relationships has a very long
history. In the late 1970s, popular singer Anita Bryant led a cam-
paign in Dade County, Florida, against the adoption of an ordi-
nance banning discrimination against lesbians and gay men in
housing and public employment. Bryant mounted a campaign
against the organization called Save Our Children, based on her
thesis that “[a]s a mother, I know that homosexuals cannot bio-
logically reproduce children; therefore, they must recruit our chil-
dren” (Andreeva and Kit 2010). The argument continues to be
persuasive today among antigay groups. In June 2009, the British
far-right political party, National Front, used Bryant’s statement
as the lead-in to its weekly electronic newsletter outlining the
upcoming campaign against “the enslavement of the White peo-
ple of Britain” (“Now People Rise Up and Storm Break Loose!”
2009, 1).
The fundamental role of procreation in “traditional mar-
riage” is by no means an argument limited to the fringes of the
anti-same-sex-marriage movement. Indeed, it is a core argument
for almost everyone who opposes any type of marriage other than
that between one man and one woman. In a closely reasoned
argument against same-sex marriage, Margaret A. Somerville, at
the McGill Centre for Medicine, Ethics and Law in Montreal,
claims that “traditional marriage” has evolved over millennia as
the institution that “establishes the values that govern the trans-
mission of human life to the next generation and the nurturing
of that life in the basic societal unit, the family” (Somerville
2003, 3). Marriage never has been, is not, and cannot be, she says,
a relationship designed simply to validate a relationship between
two individuals, satisfying only their own needs. Conﬁrming the
primary goal of marriage as a procreative institution is especially
important now, Somerville argues, because of the growth in
reproductive technologies that allow procreation to occur outside
of the traditional male-female sexual act.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rebuttal
Rebuttals to this argument typically deal with each of its two
separate aspects. In the ﬁrst place, it is obviously incorrect to say
that gay men and lesbians cannot reproduce. That statement sug-
gests that infertility is somehow a biological correlate of homo-
sexuality. Such a conclusion is clearly wrong. The 2000 U.S.
census found that 29.6 percent of all lesbians had previously been
married to a man, and 18.0 percent of gay men had previously
been married to a woman. That these individuals were not infer-
tile is indicated by the fact that 60 percent of all lesbians had had
one child, 26 percent had had two children, and 15 percent had
had three or more children. Among gay men, the comparable ﬁg-
ures were 52 percent for one child, 28 percent for two children,
and 20 percent for three or more children (“2000 Census and
Same-Sex Households: A User’s Guide 2002” 26–28).
Considerably more controversial is the claim by opponents of
same-sex marriage that procreation is the primary purpose of
marriage. It is certainly true that many individuals, organizations,
legislative bodies, and courts hold to this position. For example,
the Washington State Supreme Court ruled by a ﬁve-to-four vote
in 2006 that the state’s defense of marriage act (DOMA) was not
unconstitutional. A fundamental part of the court’s decision
was that
DOMA is constitutional because the legislature was enti-
tled to believe that limiting marriage to opposite-sex cou-
ples furthers procreation, essential to survival of the
human race, and furthers the well-being of children by
encouraging families where children are reared in homes
headed by the children’s biological parents. Allowing
same-sex couples to marry does not, in the legislature’s
view, further these purposes. (“In the Supreme Court of
the State of Washington” 2006)
(Interestingly enough one response to this decision was the ﬁling
of a petition by same-sex-marriage advocates for a state law mak-
ing procreation a legal requirement for all marriages in the state
(Washington Secretary of State 2007).
Although a number of courts have agreed with the Washington
supreme court majority, a number have also taken a different view.
In its now-classic decision overturning the state’s restriction of
marriage to opposite-sex couples in 2008, the California Supreme
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
57

Court noted that procreation may, indeed, be an important func-
tion of marriage. It ought not to be, however, the deﬁning criterion
that determines whether or not two individuals should have the
right to marry. In its four-to-three May 2008 decision on the issue,
the court ruled that “[t]hus, although the state undeniably has a
legitimate interest in promoting ‘responsible procreation,’ that
interest cannot be viewed as a valid basis for deﬁning or limiting
the class of persons who may claim the protection of the funda-
mental constitutional right to marry” (“In the Supreme Court of
California” 2008, 75).
The U.S. Supreme Court has not yet ruled on the issue of
same-sex marriage and, therefore, on the associated issue of the
role of procreation in marriage. The highest judicial body in
Canada, the Superior Court of Justice, has, however, made its
views known on the subject. In the case of Halpern v. Canada, the
court ruled unanimously that restrictions on same-sex marriage
violated that country’s Charter of Rights and Freedoms. With
regard to the issue of procreation, the court said that
The objective of procreation cannot support the restric-
tion against same-sex marriage. The evidence demon-
strates that it was only recently, when same-sex couples
began to advance claims for equal recognition of their
conjugal relationships, that some courts began to infer
that procreation was an essential component to mar-
riage. It is well-established in annulment cases that a
marriage is valid and not voidable despite the fact that
one spouse refuses to have sexual intercourse, or is infer-
tile, or insists on using contraceptives. Moreover, in
cases where a husband is unable to consummate the
marriage due to impotence resulting from advanced
age, Canadian courts have consistently ruled that the
marriage is understood to be for the purpose of compan-
ionship and is therefore valid and not voidable. . . . Pro-
creation is not a pressing and substantial objective of
the rule of marriage. (Halpern v. Canada [Attorney Gen-
eral], 2002 CanLII 49633 [ON S.C.] 2002, 3)
A Family with One Man and One Woman Is the Best Environment
in Which to Raise Children
This argument has two aspects. In many cases in which it is
presented, the opponent of same-sex marriage simply makes the
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

value judgment that, in her or his opinion, allowing same-sex
couples to raise children is just plain wrong. This view has been
expressed well by Erwin W. Lutzer, senior pastor of the Moody
Church. In his book, The Truth about Same-Sex Marriage, Lutzer
writes that many people who think about the possibility of
allowing gay and lesbian couples to raise children “feel a pro-
found sense of unease,” even though, he goes on, “we cannot
exactly say why” (Lutzer 2004, 57). (Critics of this position have
an answer to that question, given below.) Lutzer’s fellow oppo-
nents of same-sex marriage usually continue that children need
an environment in which one man and one woman are present
to provide the optimal environment for proper upbringing. A
writer for the Catholic Education Resource Center says, for exam-
ple, that “[e]xposure to both sexes is vitally important to the
developmental needs of children because it helps them to form
their sexual identity, but there are many more areas where chil-
dren are affected by the parenting of a mother and father” (Brink-
mann 2004). The author bases part of her argument on an ofﬁcial
pronouncement of the Roman Catholic Church, which said that
“as experience has shown, the absence of sexual complementarity
in these unions creates obstacles in the normal development of
children” (Congregation for the Doctrine of Faith 2003).
Proponents of this view often realize that these value judg-
ments are not entirely adequate to make their case. The question
as to how children fare in same-sex households is, after all, one
that can be answered to a signiﬁcant degree by means of careful
research in the social sciences. One article purporting to review
the evidence on same-sex parenting cited seven ways in which
children are harmed by same-sex marriage: higher incidence of
violence, higher incidence of mental health problems, reduced life
expectancy, higher incidence of same-sex orientation, greater risk
of sexual involvement with parents, greater risk of social or
psychological problems, and higher incidence of child molesta-
tion (“Same-Sex Parenting Is Harmful to Children” 2004). The
article concludes with the suggestion that the members of the
Canadian Psychological Association, who hold a very different
view on this subject, may be “just plain mad.”
Rebuttal
In many instances, this dispute very quickly turns into a
question of “he says, she says,” with each side citing extensive sci-
entiﬁc research to support its position, and providing rebuttals to
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
59

the other side’s claims of validity. What is a layperson to do in
such a case? One possibility is to turn to professional organiza-
tions who might be expected to take an informed and impartial
position on the topic. For example, the American Pediatric Asso-
ciation appointed a committee in 2005 to review the research on
the effects on the legal, ﬁnancial, and psychosocial health and
well-being of children being raised in gay and lesbian house-
holds. The committee concluded that research conducted over a
period of more than 25 years shows that “there is no relationship
between parents’ sexual orientation and any measure of a child’s
emotional, psychosocial, and behavioral adjustment.” These stud-
ies found “no risk to children as a result of growing up in a family
with 1 or more gay parents” (Pawelski et al. 2006).
Similar conclusions have been reached by a number of other
professional organizations concerned with the welfare of chil-
dren, including the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, American Academy of Family Physicians, American
Family Therapy Academy, American Medical Association,
American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Asso-
ciation, American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,
American Psychoanalytic Association, Child Welfare League of
America, National Adoption Center, National Association of
Social Workers, and North American Council on Adoptable Chil-
dren (“Resource Links—Parenting/Family Issues: Policy State-
ments of Professional Organizations” 2010).
Other Arguments
A number of other arguments offered in opposition to same-
sex marriage are as follows. These arguments cover the range
from carefully thought out, logical objections to the practice to
more personal and emotional complaints.
1. Same-sex relationships are immoral. Therefore, relation-
ships between gay men or lesbians should not be vali-
dated by making them legal.
2. Same-sex marriage is still just a social experiment. Society
and children should not be asked to suffer the burdens of
such an experiment.
3. Granting lesbians and gay men the right to marry provide
them with a special privilege, since they are already
allowed to get married, except not to someone of the same
gender.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

4. If same-sex marriage is legalized, churches, synagogues,
mosques, and other places of worship may be required
to conduct marriage ceremonies of which they do not
approve.
5. The legalization of same-sex marriage will lead to the
promotion of same-sex lifestyles in public schools.
6. Same-sex marriage is just another way of recruiting young
children to the homosexual lifestyle.
7. Same-sex marriage violates my own personal religious
beliefs.
8. Personally, I just do not like the idea of same-sex relation-
ship and do not think they should receive legal sanction.
(For an extended discussion of any one or all of these arguments,
see the section Arguments Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage and
Adoption in Chapter 8.)
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
Many of the arguments in favor of same-sex marriage are either
stated explicitly or appear implicitly in the rebuttal sections above.
In addition, however, other arguments have been suggested in
support of same-sex marriage. These include the following:
The Right to Marry Is Guaranteed to Same-Sex Couples by Provisions
of the U.S. Constitution and State Constitutions That Contain “Equality
under the Law” Provisions (As They All Do)
This argument is perhaps the keystone of the case in favor of
same-sex marriage in the United States. The position could per-
haps be phrased in the following terms:
Suppose that an opposite-sex couple that considers itself to be
legally married is challenged (for some reason) to prove that they
are married. What document or documents would that couple
normally provide to supply such proof? The answer, of course, is
a marriage license, a document issued by each of the 50 states cer-
tifying that the couple’s marriage has satisﬁed state requirements
for the marriage. Every state sets its own requirements for mar-
riage, which vary from state to state. The age at which males and
females, for example, differs from state to state and within some
states, with a minimum age for a male differing from that of a
female. People applying for a marriage license may be required
to be a resident of the state or not, and special provisions are
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
61

established for people who have been previously married. Until
quite recently, states had no provisions for or against marriage
between two individuals of the same sex.
A great many couples choose to have religious ceremonies in
connection with their legal marriage. A religious ceremony in and
of itself, however, does not constitute a legal marriage. That is, a
man and woman might go through a formal wedding in a church,
synagogue, or mosque, but without a legal document from the
state, that couple is not legally married.
The question raised by advocates of same-sex marriage is
whether a state can constitutionally refuse to issue a marriage
license to two individuals of the same sex. The argument is that
state constitutions generally have some type of provision requir-
ing that individuals not be discriminated against on the basis of
a number of characteristics, such as age, sex, national origin, or
religion. Does that constitutional provision mean, then, that the
state can refuse to grant a marriage license to two individuals,
solely on the basis of their genders?
This question is a complex legal issue about which some of
the ﬁnest legal minds in the nation have argued. Courts at all lev-
els (except the U.S. Supreme Court) have now weighed in on one
side or another of the issue. In September 2007, for example, the
Maryland Supreme Court ruled that the state’s 34-year-old law
banning same-sex marriage did not violate the state constitu-
tion’s equal protection provision because the state had a legiti-
mate interest in promoting heterosexual marriage as a way of
having children and raising families (Rein and Otto 2007). By
contrast, the California Supreme Court took the opposite view.
In their 2008 decision on same-sex marriage, the court ruled that
“the California Constitution properly must be interpreted to
guarantee this basic civil right to all Californians, whether gay
or heterosexual, and to same-sex couples as well as to opposite-
sex couples” (In re Marriage Cases 2008, 7). In contrast to the
Maryland court, the California court decided that the state’s
“interest in retaining the traditional and well-established deﬁni-
tion of marriage” was not a sufﬁcient reason to deny marriage
licenses to couples of the same gender (In re Marriage Cases
2008, 11). The difference between these two decisions, reﬂected
in differing opinions among other state courts, is the standard
used in considering the cases. The Maryland court used a more
lenient standard, called the “rational basis” standard, while the
California court used a more severe standard, called the “strict
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

scrutiny” standard. Those states in which courts have used
the “strict scrutiny” standard in considering same-sex marriage
have tended to ﬁnd that laws prohibiting the granting of marriage
licenses to same-sex couples are unconstitutional, while those that
apply the looser “rational basis” standard tend to support existing
state marriage laws.
Rebuttal
As noted above, some legal experts say that limiting mar-
riage to opposite-sex couples serves a very important function of
the state: protecting traditional marriage and families consisting
of one man and one woman, and their children. States have a
right to limit a person’s rights, they say, when public interest is
of greater interest.
Same-Sex Couples Deserve the Same Economic Beneﬁts as Those
Granted to Opposite-Sex Couples
People who are legally married are entitled to a number of
economic beneﬁts not available to unmarried individuals. Some
examples include the right to adopt children, the right to inherit
property, the right to visit one’s spouse in the hospital, the right
to ﬁle joint income tax returns, the right to receive Social Security
beneﬁts on the death of a spouse, and the right to have joint life,
health, and vehicle insurance policies. In 1997, the U.S. General
Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) conducted a study of the federal bene-
ﬁts available to legally married couples in the United States not
available to individuals or nonmarried cohabiting couples. The
agency found 1,049 federal statutory provisions that fell into this
category, a number that had increased to 1,138 when the study
was updated in 2004 (United States General Accounting Ofﬁce
2004, 1 and Appendix). Proponents of same-sex marriage say that
same-sex couples should have the same civil and economic rights
as those available to opposite-sex couples.
Rebuttal
As noted above, opponents of same-sex marriage argue that
the state has a right to pass legislation that promotes, encourages,
and supports institutions in which children are born and raised
and “traditional” families are maintained. In that regard, restrict-
ing these rights to opposite-sex couples is both sensible and
reasonable.
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
63

Allowing Same-Sex Couples to Marry Causes No Harm to Opposite-Sex
Marriage or to “Traditional” Families
This argument is a simple one: Suppose that a legally mar-
ried, same-sex couple moves into a neighborhood. How does the
presence of that couple and any children they may have affect
the stability of opposite-sex couples in the same neighborhood?
Or, more broadly, how does it affect the stability of “traditional
marriages” in the community as a whole, in the state, or in the
nation?
Rebuttal
Opponents of same-sex marriage believe that allowing two
men or two women to marry reduces the status and quality of “tra-
ditional marriage.” Rather than pose no harm to the “traditional
family,” same-sex marriage will actually result in the destruction
of “traditional marriage,” according to this view. James Dobson,
founder of Focus on the Family, has said on more than one occasion
that “[i]f marriage is everything, it is absolutely nothing” (see, for
example, Hodel 2003).
Other Arguments
As is the case against same-sex marriage, a number of addi-
tional arguments in favor of same-sex marriage have been
advanced. These include the following:
1. Allowing same-sex couples to marry is likely to reduce
the rate of promiscuity among gay males. Some hetero-
sexual critics have long criticized gay males for their
promiscuity, so marriage would almost certainly provide
a way of dealing with this issue, allowing two men to
remain together in a committed relationship similar to
that enjoyed by nongay men. (This argument is less rel-
evant to lesbians who, as a rule, tend to be less promiscu-
ous than gay males.)
2. As a concomitant of the previous point, the availability of
same-sex marriage would probably contribute to a
decrease in the number of HIV/AIDS cases, since the
disease is often spread by promiscuous, anonymous sex.
3. For some people, the main criterion for permitting two
individuals to marry is whether or not they love each
other, a standard that can be met by both same-sex and
opposite-sex couples.
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

4. Allowing same-sex couples to marry would actually
increase the strength of the modern institution of mar-
riage, since a much larger number of men, women, and
children would become part of the institution.
5. If same-sex marriage is permitted, a greater number of
orphans and abandoned children will have an opportu-
nity to have a real family.
In conclusion, supporters of same-sex marriage sometimes
raise questions as to the sincerity of their opponents’ arguments.
As an example, a number of state and federal legislators and other
government ofﬁcials have had an opportunity to take a public
stand on same-sex marriage. When they do so, these individuals
often offer a common theme, outlined above, that marriage and
family are the foundation of American society, and allowing
same-sex marriage will bring about the destruction of both
institutions. Yet, the record of some of these individuals raises
questions as to how deeply they really hold these pro-marriage,
pro-family beliefs. For example:
•
President Bill Clinton, who signed the Defense of Mar-
riage Act (DOMA) in 1996, was impeached by the U.S.
House of Representatives in 1998 for lying about having
sexual relations with a young woman in the White House.
•
Henry Hyde (R-IL) voted for DOMA. In 1998, Hyde
admitted to fathering a child out of wedlock with a mar-
ried mother of three children when he was in his 40s, an
affair he called “a youthful indiscretion” (D. Talbot 1998).
•
Larry Craig (R-ID) voted for DOMA. In 2007, he was
convicted of “lewd conduct” for soliciting a police ofﬁcer
in a bathroom at the Minneapolis airport (Orr 2009).
•
Strom Thurmond (R-SC) voted for DOMA. After his death
in 2003, Thurmond’s family acknowledged that he had
fathered a child out of wedlock with a 16-year-old maid in
his home in 1925 (“Thurmond’s Family ‘Acknowledges’
Black Woman’s Claim as Daughter” 2003).
•
Mark Sanford (R-SC) voted for DOMA. In 2009, he
admitted to having had a long-term affair with a women
in Argentina while he was governor of South Carolina
and still married (“Mark Sanford” 2010).
•
David Vitter (R-LA) was cosponsor of a bill to amend the
U.S. Constitution to deﬁne marriage as between one man
Same-Sex Marriage: Arguments Pro and Con
65

and one woman. In 2005, Vitter admitted that he had been
a client of an escort service known as D.C. Madam
(“Hustler Says It Revealed Senator’s Link to Escort
Service” 2007).
•
Miss California 2009, Carrie Prejean, was a spokesperson
for the anti-same-sex marriage campaign in the state. She
was removed from her position in late 2009 at least partly
because of a sexually explicit video she made.
•
Hiram Monserrate, Democratic senator in the state of New
York, has been a leader in opposition to same-sex marriage
in the state senate. In 2010, he was expelled from the senate
by his colleagues because of a misdemeanor conviction for
assaulting his girlfriend (Blain and Lovett 2010).
•
Mark Foley (R-FL) voted for DOMA. He resigned from
the U.S. House of Representatives in 2006 for having
made sexual approaches to a number of House pages
(“Three More Former Pages Accuse Foley of Online
Sexual Approaches” 2006).
•
Iris Robinson, wife of Ireland’s First Minister Peter
Robinson, has long campaigned against gay men and
lesbians, claiming that homosexuality is “an abomina-
tion.” In 2010, the BBC program Spotlight revealed that the
59-year-old Mrs. Robinson had had a long-term relation-
ship with a then-19-year-old man, Kirk McCambley.
Robinson reportedly gave McCambley $80,000 to set up a
restaurant, but then asked for $8,000 back to donate to her
church (Coll 2010).
•
Mark Souder (R-IN) resigned his ofﬁce on May 18, 2010,
admitting an extramarital affair with a staff member.
Souder had been a strong opponent of same-sex marriage,
voted for DOMA, and signed an amicus curiae brief
against the District of Columbia’s proposal to approve
same-sex marriage, all actions he defended as being nec-
essary to protect traditional marriage in the United States
(Sudbay 2010).
•
Rev. George Allen Rekers is co-founder of the Family
Research Council, which campaigns against same-sex
marriage, and expert witness (for which he was paid well
over $100,000) in opposition to same-sex adoption in
Florida and Arkansas. In May 2010, he was found to have
hired a male escort from a web site called rentboy.com to
accompany him on a ten-day trip to Europe.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
The hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church has been at
the forefront of virtually every anti-same-sex marriage
campaign in the United States and other parts of the
world. For more than a decade, the church has also been
involved in a seemingly ongoing series of sexual scandals
involving priests and underage boys and girls. Those
scandals, by early 2010, had become widespread in the
United States, the Netherlands, Austria, and Germany, in
at least one case involving questionable judgments made
by Pope Benedict XVI himself about clergy under his
control (Kulish and Donadio 2010).
(For further information on this issue, see the ﬁlm Outrage, released
in May 2009.)
The Status of Same-Sex Marriage
in the United States
Same-sex marriage is now legal in ﬁve states and the District
of Columbia. It is also recognized by the Coquille Indian tribe of
Oregon. The ﬁve states in which same-sex marriage has been rec-
ognized are Connecticut, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
and Vermont. In addition two states, New York and Rhode Island,
recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states, although
same-sex marriage is not legal in those states. In February 2010,
the attorney general of Maryland issued an advisory opinion that
the state could recognize same-sex marriages performed in other
states, although Maryland itself has not yet changed its own mar-
riage license law in this regard.
A state can legalize marriage between individuals of the same-
sex in one of three ways. First, the citizens of the state can vote to
approve such an arrangement. Every state has some type of provi-
sion, usually a referendum or initiative petition, by which an issue
can be placed on the ballot on which all citizens of the state can
vote. In theory, it would be possible for some individual(s) or
group(s) to propose an initiative or referendum question asking
for the voters’ approval of a law legalizing same-sex marriage. Such
an action has never occurred in the United States. On the other
hand, initiative or referendum petitions can also be offered in
opposition to same-sex marriage, usually deﬁning by law that a
The Status of Same-Sex Marriage in the United States
67

marriage is legal only between one man and one woman or by
adopting a constitutional amendment to that effect. As of mid-
2010, 41 states had adopted laws deﬁning marriage as an institu-
tion existing between one man and one woman; 30 states had
passed constitutional amendments to the same effect (National
Conference of State Legislatures 2010). (States often pass both a
law and a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage.
The reason is that opponents of same-sex marriage often feel that
courts can more easily overturn a state law than a constitutional
amendment. Currently, 28 states have both state laws and constitu-
tional amendments banning same-sex marriage.)
A second route to the approval of same-sex marriage is through
action by a state legislature. Two states have taken this route thus
far, Vermont and New Hampshire. In 2007, a bill was introduced into
the Vermont House of Representatives amending the state’s mar-
riage laws to permit same-sex marriage. That bill was eventually
passed by both houses of the legislature and vetoed by Republican
Governor Jim Douglas in 2009. Douglas’s veto was then overridden
by both houses of the legislature (Goodnough 2009a).
A similar sequence of events was taking place in Vermont’s
neighbor, New Hampshire, at about the same time. In a much
closer contest, New Hampshire legislators passed a law permitting
same-sex marriage in the state and then worked out a compromise
that allowed Democratic Governor Jim Lynch to sign the bill. The
law went into effect on January 1, 2010 (Goodnough 2009b).
A third state, Maine, nearly joined its two New England
neighbors, Vermont and New Hampshire, also in 2009. On May 6
of that year, Democratic Governor John Baldacci signed into law
a bill just passed by both houses of the state legislature permitting
same-sex marriage in the state. Opponents of same-sex marriage
then ﬁled a referendum petition to have this action repealed, an
effort that succeeded in the November 3, 2009, election. Largely
through a massive effort by the Roman Catholic Church in the
state, voters rejected the new law by a margin of 52 percent to
48 percent (Goodnough 2009c).
In addition to Vermont and New Hampshire, one other
legal entity, the District of Columbia, has legalized same-sex
marriage through legislative action. On December 18, 2009,
Democratic mayor Adrian Fenty signed a bill passed by the
Council of the District of Columbia legalizing same-sex mar-
riage in the district. The district is a unique entity in the United
States, one whose actions require approval (or at least avoid
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

disapproval) by the U.S. Congress. The citizens of the district
were required to wait for 30 days to see if the Congress over-
turned their council’s action. When it did not, the law went into
effect, and marriage licenses to same-sex couples were ﬁrst
issued on March 3, 2010 (“D.C. Mayor Signs Same-Sex Marriage
Bill” 2009).
The third mechanism by which same-sex marriage may
become legal in a state is through judicial action. A judge or a
court may determine that a law prohibiting same-sex marriage is
constitutional and that, therefore, the state is required to permit
such marriages. Same-sex marriage has become legal in three
states by this route: Connecticut, Iowa, and Massachusetts. The
pattern for this method of approving same-sex marriage was
established in the early 2000s when a group of lesbians and gay
men sued the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, claim-
ing that the department’s refusal to issue them marriage licenses
was a violation of the state constitution’s right to equal treatment
of all its citizens. The trial judge rejected this argument in
May 2002, and the plaintiffs appealed that decision to the State
Supreme Judicial Court. On November 18, 2003, that court over-
turned the trial court’s decision and announced that the state
legislature had 180 days to change state marriage laws to permit
same-sex couples to receive marriage licenses. When the legisla-
ture failed to act within that period of time, Republican Governor
Mitt Romney ordered county clerks in the Commonwealth to
begin issuing licenses to same-sex couples as of May 17, 2004.
Opponents of same-sex marriage vowed to promote a constitu-
tional amendment that would invalidate the State Supreme Judi-
cial Court’s action, but steps for that action are complex and
time-consuming. As of mid-2010, the court’s decision was still in
effect, and same-sex marriage was still legal in Massachusetts.
Given the complexity of Massachusetts law involving constitu-
tional changes, existing law authorizing same-sex marriage can-
not be considered again until 2012 at the earliest (Pew Forum on
Religion & Public Life 2008).
Since the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court decision of
2004, two other state supreme courts have reached similar deci-
sions. On October 28, 2008, the Connecticut Supreme Court struck
down a state law allowing civil unions as violating the state con-
stitution’s guarantee of equal protection under the law, and on
April 3, 2009, the Iowa State Supreme Court reached a similar
decision (McFadden 2008; Davey 2009).
The Status of Same-Sex Marriage in the United States
69

Alternatives to Same-Sex Marriage
An important element in the debate over same-sex marriage is
the possibility of legal arrangements that are similar to, but not
identical with, marriage. Such arrangements are generally known
as civil unions or domestic partnerships. They provide same-sex
couples with many, but usually not all, of the same rights and
responsibilities. As of mid-2010, one state, New Jersey, had a civil
union law for same-sex couples, while similar laws in three other
states (Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Vermont) had become
moot because of the availability of marriage in those states. Seven
other states have laws permitting domestic partnerships: Califor-
nia, Hawaii, Maine, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin.
The District of Columbia’s domestic partnership law became moot
when it made same-sex marriage legal in 2009. Domestic partner-
ship laws vary widely in terms of the rights they provide, including
typically such things as state tax beneﬁts, hospital visitation rights,
adoption and parenting rights, and inheritance rights. Thus far, the
most comprehensive law passed is that in the state of Washington,
the so-called “Everything but Marriage” act, in which same-sex
couples in a domestic partnership are granted essentially all the
same rights under state law available to married couples. An effort
to overturn this law by state referendum in November 2009 failed
by a popular vote of 951,822 to 838,842 (Ammons 2009).
As with same-sex marriage, many individuals oppose the insti-
tutions of civil union and domestic partnership. States that have
passed laws or constitutional amendments banning same-sex mar-
riage sometimes include all other legal entities that might be consid-
ered comparable to marriage, such as civil unions and domestic
partnerships. Currently, 15 of the constitutional amendments
passed by states to ban same-sex marriage have included explicit
bans against civil unions, and four other amendments include bans
on both civil unions and domestic partnerships. An example of the
provisions included in such amendments is the Louisiana law:
Marriage in the state of Louisiana shall consist only of
the union of one man and one woman. No ofﬁcial or
court of the state of Louisiana shall construe this
constitution or any state law to require that marriage or
the legal incidents thereof be conferred upon any
member of a union other than the union of one man
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and one woman. A legal status identical or substantially
similar to that of marriage for unmarried individuals
shall not be valid or recognized. No ofﬁcial or court of
the state of Louisiana shall recognize any marriage con-
tracted in any other jurisdiction which is not the union
of one man and one woman. (Lambda Legal 2008)
The Future of Same-Sex Marriage
in the United States
The future for marriage and similar unions for same-sex cou-
ples in the United States is difﬁcult to predict. On the one hand,
there was a rush to approve marriage, civil unions, and domestic
partnerships in the last half of the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst
century. On the other hand, opponents of such arrangements
had achieved signal success in banning, both by law and by con-
stitutional amendment, same-sex marriage and its substitutes in
nearly all 50 states.
Public opinion polls also offer little guidance as to the future
direction of same-sex marriage, civil unions, and domestic part-
nerships. Although public opinion polls differ to some extent on
this question, long-term trends appear to point to a slow increase
in the number of Americans who are willing to legalize marriage
and similar institutions for same-sex couples. When the Gallup
poll ﬁrst asked questions about this topic in 1996, it found that
27 percent of respondents had no objection to same-sex marriage,
while 68 percent opposed the practice. It its most recent poll,
Gallup found those numbers to have narrowed to 40 percent in
favor of same-sex marriage and 57 opposed (Gallup 2009). On
the other hand, there was a signiﬁcantly greater willingness to
permit same-sex couples to enter into “marriage-like” arrange-
ments, with 56 percent supporting such arrangements and 40 per-
cent opposing them (Gallup 2009).
Most observers now agree that the key to the future of same-
sex arrangements in the United States lies in a case working its
way through the courts in the matter of the state of California’s
actions on same-sex marriage. Those actions had their begin-
nings in June 2004 when a superior court judge in San Francisco
consolidated a group of separate lawsuits on the legality of
same-sex marriage under the California constitution. The judge
The Future of Same-Sex Marriage in the United States
71

eventually ruled that the state’s ban on same-sex marriage viola-
tes the state’s constitutional guarantees of equal rights for all citi-
zens of the state. In the fall of 2006, a state appeals court reversed
the trial judge’s decision, and said that restricting marriage to
opposite-sex couples is not unconstitutional under the state
constitution. The city of San Francisco then appealed that decision
to the state supreme court, which, on May 15, 2008, reversed the
appeals court decision, and declared that bans on same-sex mar-
riage violated the equal protection provisions of the state
constitution.
Acting under the supreme court’s decision, county clerks in
California began issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples on
June 16, 2008. At the same time, opponents of same-sex marriage
had begun a campaign to place on the November 2008 ballot a
proposition, Proposition 8, that would amend California’s
constitution to speciﬁcally prohibit same-sex marriage, thereby over-
riding the supreme court’s decision of May 2008. The vote on Propo-
sition 8 was held on November 4, 2008, and passed by a margin of
52 percent to 48 percent. Although that action appeared to end the
battle over same-sex marriage in California, it did not. Instead, oppo-
nents of the proposition ﬁled suit in federal district court in San
Francisco, asking that the result of the election be overturned. The
petitioners’ argument was essentially that certain rights are guaran-
teed to citizens of the United States under the U.S. Constitution,
and that those rights are not subject to voter approval; they are a fun-
damental prerogative of American citizens.
As of mid-2010, that case is being heard by Judge Vaughn
Walker, chief judge of the district court. It is unclear when a deci-
sion will be reached in that case, but there is no question that
whichever side loses will appeal the decision. Eventually, no mat-
ter how long it takes, the case will reach the U.S. Supreme Court,
which will ultimately decide as to the legality of same-sex mar-
riage in the United States (M. Talbot 2010).
References
Ammons, David. 2009. “Gregoire, Reed Certify R-71 and November
Returns.” http://blogs.sos.wa.gov/FromOurCorner/index.php/2009/12/
gregoire-reed-certify-r-71-November-returns/. Accessed on March 23,
2010.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Andreeva, Nellie, and Borys Kit. 2010. “HBO Eyes Biopic about Anti-Gay
Activist.” http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/
news/e3i8decb5ca03594f57ac71c73740127394. Accessed on February 25,
2010.
Baker v. Nelson 1971. http://marriagelawfoundation.org/cases%5CBaker
%20v.%20Nelson.pdf. Accessed on February 14, 2010.
Bales, Kevin. 2004. Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy,
2nd ed. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Baxandall, Rosalyn, and Linda Gordon. 2000. Dear Sisters: Dispatches from
the Women’s Liberation Movement. New York: Basic Books.
Beck, Amanada. 2010. “For the Record: Defendants’ Opening Statement.”
Prop 8 on Trial. http://prop8.berkeleylawblogs.org/2010/01/16/
for-the-record-defendants-opening-statement/. Accessed on
February 13, 2010.
Bennison, Charles. 1995. “Book Reviews.” Anglican Theological Review 77
(April 1, 1995): 256.
Blackstone, William. 1765. Commentaries on the Laws of England. Book 1,
Chapter 15. Yale Law School. Avalon Project. http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
18th_century/blackstone_bk1ch15.asp. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
Blain, Glenn, and Kenneth Lovett. 2010. “State Senate Votes to Boot Sen.
Hiram Monserrate, Citing His Misdemeanor Assault Conviction.” New
York Daily News. http://www.nydailynews.com/news/2010/02/09/
2010-02-09_state_senate_to_vote_to_expel_sen_hiram_monserrate_over
_misdemeanor_assault_conv.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Boswell, John. 1980. Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
. 1994. Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe. New York: Villard
Books.
Brinkmann, Susan. 2004. “Gay Marriage: Who’s Minding the Children?”
Catholic Standard & Times. http://www.catholiceducation.org/articles/
homosexuality/ho0090.html. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Bryant, Joyce. 2009. “How War Changed the Role of Women in the United
States.” http://www.yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/2002/3/
02.03.09.x.html. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
Bull, Benjamin W. 2010. “Attack on Traditional Marriage.” http://www
.worldcongress.org/wcf4.spkrs/wcf4.bull.htm. Accessed on February 23,
2010.
Bushyhead, Julie. 2009. “The Coquille Indian Tribe, Same-Sex Marriage,
and Spousal Beneﬁts: A Practical Guide.” Arizona Journal of International
& Comparative Law 26 (2): 509–46.
References
73

Cohen, Andrew. 2009. “Interracial Marriage and the Long Arc of Justice.”
Vanity Fair. http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2009/10/
interracial-marriage-and-the-long-arc-of-justice.html. Accessed on
February 22, 2010.
Coll, Bryan. 2010. “Mrs. Robinson: Northern Ireland’s Own Sex Scandal.”
Time. http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1952511,00
.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Concerned Women for America. 2010a. “Our Core Issues.” http://
www.cwfa.org/coreissues-short.asp. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
. 2010b. “Top 10 Reasons to Support the Marriage Afﬁrmation and
Protection Amendment.” http://www.cwfa.org/articles/5351/CFI/
family/index.htm. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
Congregation for the Doctrine of Faith. 2003. “Considerations Regarding
Proposals to Give Legal Recognition to Unions between Homosexual
Persons.” http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/
documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_20030731_homosexual-unions_en.html.
Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Davey, Monica. 2009. “Iowa Court Voids Gay Marriage Ban.” http://
www.nytimes.com/2009/04/04/us/04iowa.html. Accessed on March 23,
2010.
“D.C. Mayor Signs Same-Sex Marriage Bill.” 2009. CNN Politics. http://
www.cnn.com/2009/POLITICS/12/18/same.sex.marriage/index.html.
Accessed on March 23, 2010.
“Deseret News, —Extra, Containing a Revelation on Celestial Marriage.”
1852. http://relarchive.byu.edu/MPNC/descriptions/extra.html.
Accessed on February 18, 2010.
di Beradino, Angelo. 1997. “Homosexuality in Classical Antiquity.”
L’Osservatore Romano, March 19, 1997, 10.
Divine Law. 1999. “Dietary Laws in Scripture.” http://atschool.eduweb
.co.uk/sbs777/laws/diet.html. Accessed on February 14, 2010.
Divorce Rates by State: 1990, 1995, and 1999–2007. 2009. National Center
for Health Statistics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvss/Divorce%
20Rates%2090%2095%20and%2099-07.pdf. Accessed on February 23,
2010.
“Economic Reasons for Gay Marriage.” 2010. mndaily.com. http://www
.mndaily.com/2010/02/21/economic-reasons-gay-marriage. Accessed
on February 23, 2010.
Epstein, Louis M. 1948. Sex Laws and Customs in Judaism. New York: Bloch
Publishing Company.
Eskridge, William N., Jr. 1993. “A History of Same-Sex Marriage.”
Virginia Law Review 79 (7): 1419–513.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Eskridge, William N., Jr., and Darren R. Spedale. 2006. Gay Marriage: For
Better or for Worse?: What We’ve Learned from the Evidence. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Eskridge, William N., Darren R. Spedale, and Hans Ytterberg. 2004.
“Nordic Bliss? Scandinavian Registered Partnerships and the Same-Sex
Marriage Debate.” Issues in Legal Scholarship. http://asemus.asef.org/
go/subsite/ccd/documents/nordicbliss-ytterberg.pdf. Accessed on
February 23, 2010.
Fact Sheet on “Hate Crime” Legislation. 2000. http://www.us2000.org/
cfmc/Homosexual%20Fact%20sheet.pdf. Accessed on February 23, 2010.
Faludi, Susan. 1991. Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American
Women. New York: Crown Books.
Forbes, Jack D. 2004. “What Is Marriage? A Native American View.” New
from Indian Country, May 3, 2004. http://www.westgatehouse.com/art161
.html. Accessed on February 20, 2010.
Foster, Lawrence. 1984. Religion and Sexuality: The Shakers, the Mormons, and
the Oneida Community. Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Frakes, Robert. 2006. “Why the Romans Are Important in the Debate
about Gay Marriage.” http://hnn.us/articles/21319.html. Accessed on
February 14, 2010.
Gallup. 2009. “Majority of Americans Continue to Oppose Gay
Marriage.” http://www.gallup.com/poll/118378/majority-americans
-continue-oppose-gay-marriage.aspx. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
The Gay Christian Network. 2010. “What I Believe.” http://
gaychristian.net/justins_view.php. Accessed on February 14, 2010.
“Gay Marriage Is Fading as ‘Values’ Focal Point.” 2009. http://www
.ﬁvethirtyeight.com/2009/09/gay-marriage-is-fading-as-values-focal
.html. Accessed on February 23, 2010.
Goodnough, Abby. 2009a. “Gay Rights Groups Celebrate Victories in
Marriage Push.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/
08/us/08vermont.html. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
. 2009b. “New Hampshire Legalizes Same-Sex Marriage.” New
York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/04/us/04marriage.html.
Accessed on March 23, 2010.
. 2009c. “A Setback in Maine for Gay Marriage, but Medical
Marijuana Law Expands.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/
2009/11/05/us/politics/05maine.html. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
Greenberg, David F. 1990. The Construction of Homosexuality. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hales, Brian C. 2008. Mormon Fundamentalism—Setting the Record Straight.
Orem, UT: Millennial Press.
References
75

Halpern v. Canada (Attorney General), 2002 CanLII 49633 (ON S.C.). 2002.
http://www.canlii.org/en/on/onsc/doc/2002/2002canlii49633/
2002canlii49633.html. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Hillebrand, Randall. 2008. “The Shakers/Oneida Community. Part Two:
The Oneida Community.” http://www.nyhistory.com/central/
oneida.htm. Accessed on February 18, 2010.
Hodel, Donald Paul. 2003. “Judicial Tyranny.” http://www2.
focusonthefamily.com/docstudy/newsletters/A000000770.cfm.
Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Holloway, Mark. 1966. Heaven on Earth. New York: Dover Books.
Horvat, Marian Therese. 2002. The Daily Catholic. 13 (95; May 23). http://
www.dailycatholic.org/issue/2002May/may23.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2010.
“Hustler Says It Revealed Senator’s Link to Escort Service.” 2007. http://
www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/07/10/vitter.madam/index.html.
Accessed on March 15, 2010.
In re Marriage Cases. 2008. http://www.courtinfo.ca.gov/opinions/
archive/S147999.PDF. Accessed on March 12, 2010.
“In the Supreme Court of California.” 2008. http://www.courtinfo.ca.gov/
opinions/archive/S147999.PDF. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
“In the Supreme Court of the State of Washington.” 2006. Andersen v. King
County. 138 P.3d 963. Available online at http://www.courts.wa.gov/
newsinfo/content/pdf/759341opn.pdf. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
“Introduction to Church History.” 2009. http://www.lds.org/
churchhistory/content/0,15757,4071-1-2132,00.html. Accessed on
February 18, 2010.
Kirk, Marshall, and Hunter Madsen. 1990. After the Ball: How America Will
Conquer Its Fear and Hatred of Gays in the 90’s. New York: Plume Books.
Kirsch, Johann Peter. 1910. “Pope John XII.” The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol.
8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, http://www.newadvent.org/
cathen/08426b.htm. Accessed on February 15, 2010.
Klaw, Spencer. 1993. Without Sin: The Life and Death of the Oneida
Community. New York: Allen Lane.
Kulish, Nicholas, and Rachel Donadio. 2010. “Abuse Scandal in Germany
Edges Closer to Pope.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/
03/13/world/europe/13pope.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Lambda Legal. 2008. “Text of State Constitutional Amendments and
Revisions Targeting Same-Sex Relationships.” http://data.lambdalegal
.org/pdf/legal/state-constitutional-amendments/text-state-by-state
-constitutional-amendments-same-sex-relationships.pdf. Accessed on
March 23, 2010.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

“The Latter-day Saint Movement.” 2010. http://www.ils.unc.edu/
~unsworth/inls181/exercise1/fundamentalist.html. Accessed on
February 18, 2010.
Lehmkuhl, Augustinus. 1910. “Sacrament of Marriage.” The Catholic
Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, http://
www.newadvent.org/cathen/09707a.htm. Accessed on February 14,
2010.
Lewis, Jone Johnson. 2010. “Boston Marriage: Women Living Together in
the 19th Century.” http://womenshistory.about.com/od/bostonmarriage/
a/boston_marriage.htm. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
Liberated Christians. 1998. “Serious Study Of Leviticus: Has Nothing to
Do with Today’s Homosexuality.” http://www.libchrist.com/other/
homosexual/leviticus.html. Accessed on February 14, 2010.
“Love, Marriage, Romance & Women . . . in Medieval & Celtic Culture.”
1998. http://www.dfwx.com/medieval_cult.html. Accessed on
February 17, 2010.
Lutzer, Erwin W. 2004. The Truth about Same-Sex Marriage. Chicago:
Moody Publishers.
Mann, Horace. 1912. “Pope Sergius III.” The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 13.
New York: Robert Appleton Company, http://www.newadvent.org/
cathen/13729a.htm. Accessed on February 15, 2010.
“Mark Sanford.” 2010. “Times Topics.” The New York Times. http://
topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/s/mark
_sanford/index.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
McFadden, Robert D. 2008. “Gay Marriage Is Ruled Legal in
Connecticut.” http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/11/nyregion/
11marriage.html. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
National ACLU Policy on Plural Marriage. 2008. ACLU Policy #91.
http://www.acluutah.org/pluralmarriage.htm. Accessed on
February 23, 2010.
National Conference of State Legislatures. 2010. “Same Sex Marriage,
Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships.” http://www.ncsl.org/
IssuesResearch/HumanServices/SameSexMarriage/tabid/16430/
Default.aspx. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
“A New Perspective on Taking Your Husband’s Name.” 2010. http://
community.feministing.com/2009/03/a-new-perspective-on-taking-yo
.html. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
“Noble Life.” 2010. http://www.mnsu.edu/emuseum/history/
middleages/nlife.html. Accessed on February 17, 2010.
Novak, Maximilian E. 2001. Daniel Defoe: Master of Fictions: His Life and
Ideas. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
References
77

“Now People Rise up and Storm Break Loose!” 2009. Weekly ENews of the
National Front. 9 (June 27). http://74.125.95.132/search?q=cache:QFf6
AnfzbGYJ:www.nationalfrontnorth.com/multimedia/ezine/pdf/
nfnews9.pdf+%22I+know+that+homosexuals+cannot+biologically
+reproduce+children%22&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us. Accessed on
February 25, 2010.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2009. “A Right to Marry? Same-sex Marriage and
Constitutional Law.” Dissent. http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/
?article=1935. Accessed on February 22, 2010.
Offen, Karen. 2010. “A Brief History of Marriage.” http://www.imow.org/
economica/stories/viewStory?storyId=3650. Accessed on February 17,
2010.
“Ofﬁcial Declaration—1.” 2006. http://scriptures.lds.org/en/od/1#.
Accessed on February 18, 2010.
O’Grair, Scot. 2008. “Effects of Same-Sex Unions.” http://isocrat.org/
science/demog/mar_stats.php#ymde. Accessed on February 23, 2010.
“Origins of Polygamy among the Mormons.” 2008. http://
www.mormon-polygamy.org/origins_mormon_polygamy. Accessed on
February 18, 2010.
Orr, Jimmy. 2009. “Ex-Senator Larry Craig Gives Up Appeal of Bathroom
Sting.” Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/
Politics/The-Vote/2009/0108/ex-senator-larry-craig-gives-up-appeal
-of-bathroom-sting. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Pawelski, James G., et al. 2006. “The Effects of Marriage, Civil Union, and
Domestic Partnership Laws on the Health and Well-Being of Children.”
Pediatrics 118 (1, July): 349–364.
The Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 2008. “Gay Marriage
Timeline.” http://pewforum.org/Gay-Marriage-and-Homosexuality/
Gay-Marriage-Timeline.aspx. Accessed on March 23, 2010.
PollingReport.com. 2010. “Law and Civil Rights.” http://www
.pollingreport.com/civil.htm. Accessed on February 13, 2010.
“Polygamist ‘Prophet’ to Serve at Least 10 Years in Prison.” 2007. http://
www.cnn.com/2007/US/law/11/20/jeffs.sentence/. Accessed on
February 18, 2010.
Rainey, Barbara. 1989. “What Should Be the Wife’s “Role” in Marriage?”
Family Life. http://www.familylife.com/site/apps/nlnet/
content3.aspx?c=dnJHKLNnFoG&b=3781167&ct=4639651. Accessed on
February 16, 2010.
Rein, Lisa, and Mary Otto. 2007. “Md. Ban On Gay Marriage Is Upheld:
Law Does Not Deny Basic Rights, Is Not Biased, Court Rules.” The
Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

article/2007/09/18/AR2007091802177.html. Accessed on March 12,
2010.
Religious Tolerance. 2006. “Bible Passages Describing Eight Family/
Marriage Types.” http://www.religioustolerance.org/mar_bibl0.htm.
Accessed on February 14, 2010.
. 2008. “Context and Analysis of Leviticus 18:22.” http://
www.religioustolerance.org/hom_bibh4.htm. Accessed on February 14,
2010.
. 2009. “Homosexual Orientation among Roman Catholic Priests.”
http://www.religioustolerance.org/hom_rcc.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2010.
“Resource Links—Parenting/Family Issues: Policy Statements of
Professional Organizations.” 2010. Rockway Institute, Alliant
International University. http://www.alliant.edu/wps/wcm/connect/
website/Home/Research+and+Public+Services/Research+Institutes/
Rockway+Institute/For+the+Media/Resource+Links+on+Parenting
-Family+Issues. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Rifkin, Mark. 2008. “Native Nationality and the Contemporary Queer:
Tradition, Sexuality, and History in Drowning in Fire.” The American
Indian Quarterly 32 (4; Fall 2008): 443–70.
Rosen, Ruth. 2007. The World Split Open: How the Modern Women’s
Movement Changed America, Rev. ed. New York: Penguin Books.
“Sabbathday Lake Shaker Village.” 2010. http://www.shaker.lib.me.us/.
Accessed on February 18, 2010.
“Same-Sex Parenting Is Harmful to Children.” 2004. REALity. 23 (2; March/
April). http://www.realwomenca.com/archives/newsletter/2004_mar
_apr/article_1.html. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Somerville, Margaret A. 2003. “The Case against ‘Same-Sex Marriage.’ ”
A Brief Submitted to the Standing Committee on Justice and Human
Rights [of the Canadian Parliament]. http://www.catholiceducation.org/
articles/homosexuality/ho0063.html. Accessed on April 15, 2010.
Sudbay, Joe. 2010. “ ‘Family Values’ GOP Rep. Mark Souder to Resign
over Affair with Staffer.” http://www.americablog.com/2010/05/
family-values-gop-rep-mark-souder-to.html. Accessed on May 18, 2010.
Talbot, David. 1998. “This Hypocrite Broke Up My Family.” http://
www.salon.com/news/1998/09/cov_16newsb.html. Accessed on
March 15, 2010.
Talbot, Margaret. 2010. “A Risky Proposal.” The New Yorker. January 18:
40–51.
“Testimony of Jay Alan Sekulow, Chief Counsel, the American Center for
Law and Justice Before the Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution
References
79

May 13, 2004.” 2004. http://www.aclj.org/media/pdf/040513_FMA
HearingTestimony.pdf. Accessed on February 22, 2010.
“Three More Former Pages Accuse Foley of Online Sexual Approaches.”
2006. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/three_more_form
.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
“Thurmond’s Family ‘Acknowledges’ Black Woman’s Claim as
Daughter.” 2003. http://www.foxnews.com/story/
0,2933,105820,00.html. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
“2000 Census and Same-Sex Households: A User’s Guide.” 2002. http://
www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/reports/reports/2000Census.pdf.
Accessed on February 25, 2010.
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce. 2004. “Defense of Marriage Act:
Update to Prior Report.” http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04353r.pdf.
Accessed on March 15, 2010.
Volokh, Eugene. 2005. “Same-sex Marriage and Slippery Slopes.” Hofstra
Law Review 33 (October): 1155–1201.
Walker, Jonathan P. 1999. “Reconsidering Homosexuality and the Bible.”
http://www.gsafe.org/jonathan_walker.htm. Accessed on February 14,
2010.
Washington Secretary of State. 2007. “Proposed Initiatives to the People
—2007.” http://www.sos.wa.gov/elections/initiatives/people.aspx?y
=2007. Accessed on February 25, 2010.
Winn, Pete. 2003. “Q&A: The Homosexual Agenda.” http://www
.citizenlink.org/CLFeatures/A000000562.cfm. Accessed on February 23,
2010.
Winslow, Ben. 2007. “37,000 ‘Fundamentalists’ Counted in and Near
Utah.” Deseret Morning News. August 1, 2007. http://www.rickross.com/
reference/polygamy/polygamy684.html. Accessed on February 18, 2010.
Youngs, Deborah. 2006. The Life-Cycle in Western Europe, c.1300–c.1500.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
Introduction
One of the risks facing any scholar of social customs is the tempta-
tion to view other cultures through the prism of one’s own history
and one’s own social framework. If marriage has “always” been
an institution reserved for one male and one female in Judeo-
Christian societies, one might reason, then is it not logical to
assume that such has universally been the case in human history?
The only certain way to answer that question, of course, is to sur-
vey as many human societies as possible and discover what other
cultures have accepted as a “marriage.” When one does so, one
ﬁnds that opposite-sex unions between one woman and one
man are certainly a very common model of marriage in human
history. On the other hand, alternative models of the institution
are also known.
In fact, the most common form of marriage known to anthro-
pologists is probably some form of polygyny, the practice of an
individual having two or more spouses. In the case of a man
who takes two or more wives, the practice is known as polygyny,
and that of a woman who takes two or more husbands, the prac-
tice is called polyandry. In perhaps the most deﬁnitive study of
its kind, the Ethnographic Atlas Codebook provides demographic
data on 1167 societies, published in 29 successive installments in
the journal Ethnology between 1962 and 1980. The resource reports
on 98 societies in which marriage was the monogamous associa-
tion between one man and one woman, 263 societies in which that
form of marriage was at times augmented by polygyny, 280
81

societies in which the standard form of association was polygy-
nous, three that were polyandrous, and 595 that involved
extended families consisting of a variety of male and female rela-
tionships simultaneously (Gray 1998).
Same-Sex Marriage in History
Of greater interest to readers of this book is to what extent, if
at all, same sex marriages have existed in cultures outside Judeo-
Christian cultures (discussed in Chapter 1), in general, and North
America, in particular. It is worth noting at the outset of this dis-
cussion that information about same-sex marriages in cultures
other than those of the Judeo-Christian tradition is often incom-
plete or inaccurate. Even trained anthropologists are not immune
from the tendency mentioned in the ﬁrst paragraph of this chap-
ter to impose their own moral and ethical precepts on their
research. This point has been made by scholars over and over
again in the professional literature. For example, the authors of
the highly respected work Family in Transition, Arlene S. and
Jerome H. Skolnick, have written that
The assumption of universality has usually deﬁned what
is normal and natural both for research and therapy and
has subtly inﬂuenced our thinking to regard deviations
from the nuclear family as sick or perverse or immoral.
(Skolnick and Skolnick 1989, 7)
A modern writer on same-sex marriages in Africa reinforces
this view. She writes that “the topic [of same-sex marriage] is
pushed to the extreme margins [of anthropological research] by
an historical ﬁxation on western nuclear families as a universal
ideal” (Njambi and O’Brien 2000, 4). The author also illustrates in
her article how strongly the forces of Western culture are still
operating to suppress and eliminate forms of marriage (and other
cultural customs) in Africa. In 1991, for example, the Roman
Catholic bishops association of Kenya issued a set of guidelines
about same-sex marriage, suggesting that this practice be “given
up completely,” that women involved in such relationships be
denied the sacraments, and that every effort be made to separate
the members of a same-sex marriage, after which each woman
would be provided with assistance individually and their children
82
Worldwide Perspective

baptized (Kenya Catholic Bishops 1991; as cited in Njambi and
O’Brien 2000, 18). Given the antipathy and bias with which even
trained researchers approach the issue of same-sex marriage, then
what is it that can be said about the this practice in various cul-
tures throughout history?
First of all, there is evidence that same-sex marriages have
existed at least in some cultures at some times in history for many
centuries. One example frequently mentioned by writers on the
subject is that of the southern Chinese province of Fujian during
the Yuan and Ming dynasties (1264–1644). For some reason, the
men of this province appear to have been inordinately interested
in developing long-term relationships with other men, relation-
ships that often were formalized through ceremonies virtually
identical with those used for opposite-sex couples. The male-
male marriages into which Fujian men entered were apparently
remarkable similar to those of their heterosexual counterparts.
(The best source for detailed information about these relation-
ships is the 1990 book Passions of the Cut Sleeve, by Bret Hinsch.)
The record of same-sex marriage among Fujian men includes
an important component present in virtually all accounts of such
arrangements throughout history. Although it seems clear that
such marriages were similar to and, generally, a replacement
for opposite-sex marriage, participants always left those arrange-
ments at some time for the purpose of entering into an opposite-
sex marriage with the goal of producing children. In no same-sex
marriage, of course, can the members of a couple reproduce by
conventional biological means to produce children. So in any soci-
ety in which children are important (and that probably includes
every human culture that has ever existed), some arrangement is
necessary for the continuation of the species, even if same-sex mar-
riages are permitted or encouraged. Still, the record indicates that
even after Fujian men had become involved in heterosexual cou-
plings with a women, they retained very close relationships with
their previous partners and continued to take part in a variety of
same-sex traditions, such as all-male retirement parties, liaisons
with other men, and even worship of a same-sex marriage god
(Neil 2009, 261).
Perhaps the greatest volume of research on same-sex mar-
riage outside Western culture is that dealing with that institution
in various parts of Africa. In the vast majority of these cases, these
marriages involve two women who join together in an arrange-
ment that appears to be identical (except for biological roles) to
Same-Sex Marriage in History
83

opposite-sex marriage. Until the 1930s, these same-sex marriages
were noted by a number of anthropological researchers, but not
given serious attention. Then, two researchers, Eileen Jensen Krige
and Melville J. Herskovits, began to take a more systematic and
objective view of the same-sex marriage tradition in a variety of
African tribes. In their individual research, Krige and Herskovits
reported that these woman-woman relationships were apparently
a form of legal marriage exactly like that of contemporaneous
male-female marriages. Essentially the only role for men in such
relationships was in the reproduction of children (see, for example,
Herskovits 1937 and Krige 1937).
One of the interesting features of these relationships is that
they have often been described by researchers as consisting of a
woman and her “female husband” (see, for example, Haviland
et al. 2007, 215). Some contemporary researchers note that this
very phrase superimposes on native relationships a Western tra-
ditional view of what marriage should be like: an arrangement
between a woman and a man (the “female husband”). Yet, partic-
ipants in such marriages do not view their participation in these
terms at all. In their important study of same-sex marriages
among Gikuyu women, for example, Njambi and O’Brien point
out that their interviewees never use the Gikuyu term for
husband (muthuri), but always use the phrases mutumia wakwa
or muka wakwa (“cowife”) or muiru wakwa (“partner in marriage”)
(Njambi and O’Brien 2000, 16). Overall, Njambi and O’Brien
provide a well-documented and clear-cut view of same-sex rela-
tionships between two women that appear to be a completely sat-
isfactory (for the participants, at least) alternative to traditional
opposite-sex or other forms of marriage (see also Roscoe and
Murray 2001; Igwe 2009; O’Brien 1977).
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent
Developments: Opposition
The status of same-sex marriage varies widely throughout the
world. In some regions, there is no possibility of there begin a legal
relationship between two individuals of the same gender for the
foreseeable future. The Islamic religion, as an example, has very
strong prohibitions against same-sex relationships (although such
relationships are common among men, at least, in most Islamic
84
Worldwide Perspective

nations; see, for example, FOXNews.com 2010). In nine nations
with predominantly Muslim populations (Afghanistan, Iran,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, United Arab
Emirates, and Yemen), same-sex relationships are penalized by
death (Gay & Lesbian Archives of the Paciﬁc Northwest 2007).
Under such circumstances, any discussion of same-sex marriage
is, obviously, impossible.
In other parts of the world, attitudes toward same-sex relation-
ships have a mixed history. In many cultures, same-sex relation-
ships were honored, largely ignored, treated as a normal variant
of sexual behavior, or punished with relatively mild penalties.
Historical and literary evidence suggests, for example, that same-
sex relationships were common across the Indian subcontinent
through most of history. Such penalties as were applied for such
behaviors were generally mild and commonly less severe than pen-
alties for certain opposite-sex behaviors (Vanita and Kidwai 2000,
25). The situation changed in India when that country was colon-
ized by the British Empire, which brought with it the strong
condemnations of homosexual behavior taught by Christianity. In
1860, the British colonial government in Delhi speciﬁcally prohib-
ited homosexual activity in section 377 of the Indian Penal Code,
a ban that remained in effect until it was overturned by the Indian
Supreme Court in 2009 (Vanita 2002; Thottam 2009).
Similar patterns are apparent in Africa, where most modern
nations retain attitudes and laws about homosexual behavior
imported by colonizing nations from Western Europe that largely
displaced traditional attitudes about same-sex behavior, in par-
ticular, and sexuality, in general (Epprecht 2008). The inﬂuence
of religious beliefs from Islam and Christianity that so trans-
formed native attitudes about same-sex behavior in Africa and
other parts of the world in the nineteenth century have not yet
disappeared. In April 2009, for example, Ugandan Member of
Parliament David Bahati introduced legislation instituting new
penalties for same-sex behavior. The legislation would have
amended the current 14-year term in prison for homosexual activ-
ity to include the death penalty for anyone who was HIV/AIDS
positive, who had been convicted of previous homosexual activ-
ity, or who had been found guilty of homosexual relations with
a person under the age of 18. Bahati’s actions came two days after
a visit to Uganda by three American evangelical Christians who
claimed to be experts on homosexuality. The message of the evan-
gelicals was that the gay movement is an “evil institution” whose
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Opposition
85

goal it is to “defeat the marriage-based society and replace it with
a culture of sexual promiscuity” (Gettleman 2010, A9). The gov-
ernment’s ofﬁcial response to complaints about its aggressive
stand on same-sex behavior was reﬂected in a statement by the
Ugandan Minister of Ethics and Integrity, James Nsaba Buturo,
who said: “Homosexuals can forget about human rights” (“Hate
Begets Hate” 2010, A12).
As in the United States, a number of nations have taken
actions to restrict marriage to opposite-sex couples, usually by
amending their national constitutions. It is not always clear
whether constitutional amendments of this kind are written spe-
ciﬁcally to deter same-sex unions or whether the language of
“one man and one woman” is simply simpler and, therefore,
somewhat innocuous. As an example, a new constitution for the
nation of Cuba was adopted at a national referendum with
97.7 percent of eligible voters approving the document. Article
36 of that constitution deﬁnes marriage as a “voluntarily estab-
lished union between a man and a woman” (“The Text of the
Constitution of the Republic of Cuba” 2003). A number of other
nations have provisions in their national constitutions identical
or similar to that of Cuba’s, including Bulgaria (Bulgaria—
Constitution 1991), Paraguay (Paraguay—Constitution 1992),
and Cambodia (Cambodia Constitution 1993).
Since 2000, a number of countries have taken a somewhat dif-
ferent approach, adopting speciﬁc amendments to their constitu-
tions to ban same-sex marriage and, often, same-sex adoption.
These efforts are similar to those in the United States to promote
an amendment to the U.S. Constitution deﬁning marriage as an
arrangement between one man and one woman. The ﬁrst nation
in the world to follow this avenue was Honduras. In 2005, the
Honduran National Assembly voted unanimously to adopt a con-
stitutional amendment banning marriage between and adoption
by same-sex couples. The action was prompted by strong com-
plaints from the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the country and
from a number of Protestant evangelical groups concerned about
the government’s previous support for a variety of gay and
lesbian organizations (GlobalGayz.com 2005; Constitution of
Honduras—English Translation, Article 112). Since the action in
Honduras, a number of other nations have taken similar actions,
passing new constitutions or stand-alone amendments that spe-
ciﬁcally prohibit marriage between two individuals of the same
gender. Such amendments are sometimes limited to same-sex
86
Worldwide Perspective

marriage, while others include both marriage and any other kind
of similar union, such as civil unions and domestic partnerships.
These nations include Uganda (2005), Latvia (2005), Democratic
Republic of Congo (2005), Serbia (2006), El Salvador (2007),
Nigeria (2007), Ecuador (2008), Bolivia (2009), Dominican Repub-
lic (2009), Cayman Islands (2010), Jamaica (2010), and Zambia
(2010).
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent
Developments: Support
Thus far, the greatest support for same-sex marriage has
occurred in Western Europe, with some important steps forward
having occurred in other parts of the world.
Western Europe
The ﬁrst nation in Europe—and the world—to take legal
action to provide same-sex couples with marriage-like privileges
was the Netherlands. In 1979, the Dutch parliament passed a
law allowing same-sex couples to enter into common-law-type
arrangements called unregistered cohabitation (ongeregistreerd
samenwonen), in which they were accorded legal rights in a variety
of areas, including rent law, social security, income tax, immigra-
tion rules, state pension, and death taxes (Waaldijk 2005, 104;
Gay and Lesbian.net 2010). In 1997, the Dutch parliament revis-
ited this issue and created a new category of association known
as a registered partnership (geregistreerd partnerschap), which was
available to both same- and opposite-sex couples. The new cat-
egory was similar to unregistered cohabitation, except that it
expanded the rights to which couples were admitted. Finally, in
December 2000, the Dutch parliament became the ﬁrst country
in the world to open marriage to same-sex couples. The vote on
this act was 49 to 26 in the upper house and 109 to 33 in the lower
house of parliament (“Dutch Legislators Approve Full Marriage
Rights for Gays” 2000). For trends in the number of same-sex cou-
ples taking advantage of the Dutch law, see Chapter 6.
Other European countries have followed similar pathways in
recognizing the marital rights of same-sex couples. Denmark, for
example, also recognized same-sex relationships as unregistered
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
87

common-law arrangements in 1986, before creating the category
of registered partnerships (registreret partnerskab) three years later.
That law was extended to Greenland in 1996 and amended and
expanded in 1999. Couples in a registered partnership have many
of the same rights as those in an opposite-sex marriage, with a
few exceptions:
•
They may adopt children, but may not have joint custody
of a child.
•
They are not covered by Danish laws that refer speciﬁcally
to opposite-sex couples.
•
They are not provided with rights of international treaties
unless all signatories to those treaties speciﬁcally agree
(The Danish Registered Partnership Act 1996).
As of mid-2010, only minimal efforts have been made to take the
next step in Denmark, extending full and equal rights of marriage
to same-sex couples.
Two other Scandinavian countries, Sweden and Norway, have
followed pathways toward approval of same-sex marriage similar
to that of the Netherlands. Sweden extended the rights of a
common-law marriage to same-sex couples in January 1988, and
then expanded that right to a registered partnership (registrerat
partnerskap) in June 1994. In April 2009, the Swedish parliament
ﬁnally extended full marriage rights to same-sex couples by a vote
of 261 to 22 (Nyberg 2009). Similarly, Norway approved common-
law marriage status to same-sex couples in January 1989, registered
partnership (registrert partnerskap) status in April 1993, and full
and equal marriage rights in June 2008 (“Norway Passes Law
Approving Gay Marriage” 2008).
Two other European nations have also approved same-sex
marriage. Belgium approved common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples in November 1998, registered partnerships (le
partenariat enregistre´) in January 1999, and full marriage rights in
February 2003 (Religious Tolerance 2003). For trends in same-sex
marriages in Belgium, see Chapter 6.
The road to full marriage rights for same-sex couples in Spain
was somewhat different from that of other European nations.
Prior to 2004, a number of municipalities, including Aragon,
Asturias, the Canary Islands, Catalonia, Madrid, Navarre, and
Valencia, had established provisions for civil unions for same-
sex couples. No federal action on the issue was taken, however,
88
Worldwide Perspective

until the election of the Socialist government of President
Jose´ Luis Rodrı´guez Zapatero in 2004. The following year,
the president fulﬁlled a campaign promise by submitting to
the national legislature a bill granting full marriage rights to
same-sex couples. Although defeated by the Senate by a vote of
131 to 119, the bill was approved by the Congress of Deputies by
a vote of 187 to 147. Since the latter body has veto power over
the Senate, the bill was declared to have passed, and King Juan
Carlos gave his royal assent to the bill on July 1, 2005. The bill’s
adoption prompted widespread demonstrations against the bill,
organized by the Roman Catholic Church. Public opinion polls
conducted at the time indicated, however, that 66 percent of the
population supported their government’s actions (Giles 2005).
Data on the number of couples taking advantage of the Spanish
same-sex marriage law are provided in Table 3.1.
As in the United States, a number of European nations have
created alternative institutions designed to provide same-sex cou-
ples with some or many (but never all) of the rights enjoyed by
opposite-sex couples in the institution of marriage. The most
common term used to describe these arrangements is registered
partnerships. Such arrangements have now been approved in
Austria, Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Slovenia, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Other designa-
tions that have been used for such arrangements (although they
usually do not differ in substance) are life partnership (Lebenspart-
nerschaft; Germany), civil union (unia˜o de facto; Portugal), civil pact
of solidarity (pacte civil de solidarite´; France and Luxembourg), civil
partnership (Ireland), and stable union of a couple (unio´ estable de
parella; Andorra).
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
89
TABLE 3.1
Same-Sex Marriages in Spain, July 2005–8
Year
Marriages
between Men
Marriages
between Women
Same-Sex
Marriages
Total
Marriages
Percent
Same-Sex
Marriages
2005 (after July)
923
352
1,275
120,728
1.06
2006
3,190
1,384
4,574
211,818
2.16
2007
2,180
1,070
3,250
203,697
1.60
2008
2,299
1,250
3,549
196,613
1.81
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadı´stica (National Statistics Institute). Data for 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008.

As of mid-2010, the status of same-sex marriage and similar
institutions is very ﬂuid in Europe. The situation in Portugal is a
good example. Same-sex behavior was illegal in the country until
1982, and same-sex marriage is speciﬁcally prohibited by law. As
recently as October 2008, the Portuguese parliament voted against
extending marriage to same-sex couples by a vote of 196 to 28
(“Portugal Parliament Approves Gay Marriage” 2010). Still,
same-sex couples were provided with the opportunity to partici-
pate in civil unions (unia˜o de facto) in 2001, and a number of non-
governmental organizations have long lobbied for equal
marriage rights for lesbians and gay men. In September 2009,
the newly elected government of Prime Minister Jose Socrates
announced that it would make same-sex marriage a priority in
its legislative agenda. Four months later, the government carried
through on that promise and passed a same-sex marriage bill by
a vote of 125 to 99. Rather than signing or vetoing the bill,
Conservative president Anibal Cavaco Silva asked the nation’s
Constitutional Court to determine whether the new law would
be constitutional. On April 8, 2010, the Constitutional Court ruled
by a vote of 11-to-2 that the legislation was constitutional, and a
month later, on May 18, 2010, Cavaco Silva ﬁnally signed the
pending legislation, making Portugal the sixth country in Europe
to legalize same-sex marriage (“Portugal’s President to Ratify
Same-sex Marriage Law 2010).
The United States and the United Kingdom have, of course,
had a long and close social and political history. In the area of
legal precedent, for example, U.S. attorneys and judges frequently
cite the historic work of William Blackstone (1723–80), perhaps
the most famous of all English jurists. Such has been the case in
disputes over same-sex issues in the United States, much as it
has been in debates over other major points of law in this country
since the nation’s founding (see, for example, REL: 02/15/2002
EX PARTE H.H. 2010, in which the chief justice of the Alabama
Supreme Court refers to Blackstone eight times in a decision
about a lesbian seeking custody of her biological child). The ﬁrst
law to deal speciﬁcally with same-sex marriage in the United
Kingdom was apparently the Nullity of Marriage Act 1971, deﬁn-
ing marriage as being between one man and one woman. Any
marriage between two individuals of the same gender, according
to this law, was to be declared null and void. The act had been
passed as part of a legislative agenda based on recommendations
90
Worldwide Perspective

of a special law commission established by the government to
consider the status of family law in the United Kingdom. One
commentator noted that it was “surely rather extraordinary” that
no law had ever been passed in Great Britain stating when a mar-
riage would or would not be void, a deﬁciency resolved by this
act (Hall 1971).
The Nullity of Marriage Act 1971 was replaced two years
later by the 1973 version of the Matrimonial Causes Act. The
Matrimonial Causes Acts are a series of about two dozen laws
dating to 1857 that codify marriage law in Great Britain. Section
11(c) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 states that a marriage
is void if “the parties are not respectively male and female”
(Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information 2010c, §11c). Similar laws pro-
hibiting same-sex marriage are also in place in Scotland (Ofﬁce of
Public Sector Information 2010b, §5[4][3]) and Northern Island
(Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information. 2010a, §6[6]]3]). All of these
laws remain in force in all parts of the United Kingdom, making
same-sex marriage illegal throughout the nation.
Efforts to provide same-sex couples with some type of
marriage-like legal arrangement in the United Kingdom have a
relatively short history. Probably the ﬁrst step in that direction
occurred in 2001, when Ken Livingstone, mayor of London,
announced that the city would initiate a London Partnerships
Register, which would be available to both opposite- and same-
sex couples. The register provided no legal rights to couples, but
is generally regarded as the ﬁrst time that any British governmen-
tal authority had granted legal recognition to same-sex couples
(“Capital Move for Gay Couples” 2001).
The ﬁrst comparable step on a national level occurred a year
later when Lord Lester of Herne Hill introduced into the House
of Lords a bill, the Civil Partnerships Bill, to provide same-sex
couples with a number of rights comparable to those enjoyed by
opposite-sex couples in a traditional marriage in England and
Wales. The bill covered a number of topics, including sharing of
communal property, property agreements, taxation, provision
for health and welfare of partner without capacity to act for them-
selves, income-based beneﬁts, working families’ tax credit and
disabled person’s tax credit, and power of court for various pur-
poses (Civil Partnerships Bill [HL] 2002). The bill passed a second
reading in the House of Lords on January 25, 2002, but action was
then suspended to allow the government to study the concept of
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
91

civil partnerships and its implementation in the country. In
June 2003, the Woman and Equality Unit of the Department of
Trade and Industry published a paper, “Civil Partnership: A
Framework for the Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Couples,” that
outlined the result of that study and gave the government’s posi-
tion on the issue (“Civil Partnership: A Framework for the Legal
Recognition of Same-Sex Couples” 2003). The paper noted that
Brieﬂy, the Government proposes to create a new legal
status of civil registered partner for same-sex partners
who register under the new scheme. As well as their
commitment to each other being respected, registered
partners would also gain rights and responsibilities,
reﬂecting the integral roles they play in each other’s
lives. (Civil Partnership: A Framework for the Legal
Recognition of Same-Sex Couples 2003, 9)
When translated into a legislative bill, this report met general
approval in both the House of Lords and the House of Commons.
The primary objection it met came from members of the
Conservative Party, who submitted a so-called “wrecking amend-
ment” in the House of Lords that would have gutted the bill of its
primary components. That amendment was approved by the
House of Lords on a vote of 148 to 130. When the bill reached
the House of Commons, it passed on a vote of 426 to 49 with
instructions to the House of Lords to remove the wrecking
amendment. The House of Lords did so by a vote of 251 to 126
on November 17, 2004, and the bill became law with the granting
of Royal Assent on the following day (Gay and Lesbian.net 2009;
text of the Civil Partnership Act 2004 is at http://www.opsi.gov
.uk/acts/acts2004/ukpga_20040033_en_1).
In April 2009, the Ofﬁce for National Statistics released the
latest data on the number of civil partnerships formed in the king-
dom from 2005 (based on the 11 days in England and Wales and
12 days in Scotland during which the option was available)
through 2008. Those data are summarized in Table 3.2.
Generally speaking, the legal status of same-sex relationships
has long been an issue of interest to governing bodies of the Euro-
pean Union. In January 2006, for example, the European Parliament
adopted by a vote of 468 to 149 (with 41 abstentions) a document
criticizing the continued existence of homophobia in member states
of the Union and calling upon nations to
92
Worldwide Perspective

ensure that same-sex partners enjoy the same respect,
dignity and protection as the rest of society; [and] enact
legislation to end discrimination faced by same-sex part-
ners in the areas of inheritance, property arrangements,
tenancies, pensions, tax, social security etc. (European
Parliament 2006; Belien 2006)
Other Regions of the World
Same-sex marriage is legal in two other nations of the world:
South Africa and Canada. The ﬁrst action by the South African
government in this regard came in 1999 when the parliament
adopted an act extending to same-sex couples the right of
common-law marriage, similar to that enjoyed by opposite-sex
couples in the nation. There then followed, however, a series of
judicial pronouncements indicating that laws that distinguished
between opposite-sex and same-sex couples were discriminatory
under the nation’s constitution. Finally, in 2005 the nation’s high-
est judicial body, the Constitutional Court, ruled that the federal
legislature was required to pass a law extending full marriage
beneﬁts to same-sex couples. The legislature did so on Novem-
ber 14, 2006, an act that was then signed by Acting President
Phumzile Mlamblo-Ngcuka on December 30, making South
Africa the ﬁfth country in the world to approve of same-sex
marriage (Alexander 2006).
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
93
TABLE 3.2
Civil Partnerships Formed in the United Kingdom, 2005–2008
Year
United Kingdom
England and Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
2005
1,953
1,857
84
12
(1,287; 666)a
(1,228; 629)
(53; 31)
(6; 6)
2006
16,106
14,943
1,047
116
(9,648; 6,458)
(9,003; 5,940)
(580; 467)
(65; 51)
2007
8,728
7,929
688
111
(4,770; 3,958)
(4,371; 3,558)
(339; 349)
(60; 51)
2008
7,169
6,558
525
86
(3,824; 3,345)
(3,536; 3,022)
(245; 280)
(43; 43)
a(male; female).
Source: Ofﬁce for National Statistics. 2009. “Civil Partnership Formations: Numbers and Rates.” http://www
.statistics.gov.uk/StatBase/Product.asp?vlnk=14675.

Progress toward the approval of same-sex marriage in
Canada has been similar to, although earlier than, that in the
United States. That is, court actions requiring individual prov-
inces to recognize same-sex marriages in Canada ﬁrst appeared
as early as 2003, although the federal government itself did not
take action on the issue until 2005. Between June 10, 2003, when
the Court of Appeals for Ontario ruled that Canadian law on mar-
riage violated the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and
February 1, 2005, when the federal legislature ﬁrst began debate
on the subject, 8 of 10 provinces and one of three territories had
changed their laws to permit same-sex marriage. More than
90 percent of the nation’s populations live within these jurisdic-
tions. Only the provinces of Alberta and Prince Edward Island
and the territories Nunavut and Northwest Territories had not
approved of same-sex marriage during this period (“The
Supreme Court and Same-Sex Marriage” 2005).
The debate that took place in the federal legislature over
same-sex marriage in 2005 was, therefore, somewhat anticlimatic.
Although the parliament had overwhelmingly adopted a bill
declaring that marriage was an institution between one man and
one woman “to the exclusion of all others” as recently as 1999
(“Same-Sex Marriage in Canada” 2007), the 2005 bill moved
quickly through both houses of parliament, passing the House
on June 28 by a vote of 158 to 133 and the Senate on July 19 by a
vote of 47 to 21. Deputy Governor General Beverly McLachlin
then provided the Royal Assent needed to make the bill law. A
year later, under a new Conservative government, the issue of
same-sex marriage was once more raised with a government res-
olution asking for reconsideration of the subject in the House
and Senate. That resolution was defeated on December 6, 2006,
by a vote of 175 to 123 in the House, essentially putting the ques-
tion of same-sex marriage in Canada to rest (Hurley 2005).
Canada counted the number of same-sex couples ofﬁcially
for the ﬁrst time in its 2006 census. That census found that
45,300 same-sex couples were ofﬁcially registered in the nation,
of whom 7,500 (16.5%) were legally married and 37,900 (83.5%)
were in common-law relationships (Statistics Canada 2007, 6; no
explanation is given for the modest discrepancy in totals pro-
vided here). The number of same-sex couples grew at ﬁve times
the rate of opposite-sex couples between 2001 and 2006, from
34,200 to 45,300 (an increase of 32.6%, compared to 5.9% for
opposite-sex couples). Half of the same-sex couples who were
94
Worldwide Perspective

legally married lived in just three cities, Montre´al, Toronto, and
Vancouver (also the three largest cities in Canada). Census ofﬁ-
cials reported that same-sex couples accounted for 0.6 percent of
all legal marriages in Canada, a rate comparable to that for New
Zealand and Australia districts where same-sex unions are per-
mitted (0.7% and 0.6%, respectively) (Statistics Canada 2007, 12).
As of mid-2010, data on the number of same-sex marriages
performed in South Africa, Norway, and Sweden are not avail-
able, largely because such marriages have become legal so
recently.
Marriage-like legal entities have also been created in a small
number of other countries around the world. For example, New
Zealand passed legislation in 2000 creating a same-sex alternative
to common-law legislation previously intended for opposite-sex
couples. That law was modiﬁed in 2004, establishing the category
of civil unions for same-sex couples. It provides nearly all of the
same rights and responsibilities available to opposite-sex couples
in a traditional marriage. In 2005, conservative members of the
New Zealand introduced the Marriage (Gender Clariﬁcation)
Amendment Bill designed to speciﬁcally deﬁne marriage as an
institution between one man and one woman and to prohibit
the recognition of civil unions in the country. That bill was
defeated by a vote of 73 to 47, and the legislature has apparently
been satisﬁed since that vote with the status quo for same-sex
couples (Department of Internal Affairs [New Zealand] 2010;
Berry 2005).
Two additional nations in which same-sex unions have been
implemented are New Caledonia and Wallis and Futuna, both in
the South Paciﬁc Ocean. Both countries are dependencies of
France, and, although they have their own governments, they
are subject to laws passed in the mother country. In April 2009,
the French National Assembly voted to extend the nation’s pacte
civil de solidarite´ to the two South Paciﬁc nations, requiring them
to bring their marriage laws into consonance with that of France
(SSO 2009).
In some ways, the most surprising developments in the ﬁeld
of same-sex unions have taken place in South America. In spite of
the strong Roman Catholic inﬂuence on government policies in
virtually all Latin American nations, approval for some form of
same-sex unions has slowly begun to spread through the conti-
nent. Arguably the most liberal nation in this respect is Uruguay,
which granted the right to form civil unions to same-sex couples
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
95

in 2007. The unions, known as cohabitation unions (los sindicatos
de la cohabitacio´n), grant same-sex couples essentially all of the
same rights as those available to opposite-sex couples in a tradi-
tional marriage, including inheritance and pension rights and
rights of child custody (Grew 2008). In early 2010, a senator from
the coalition of ruling parties in the country announced that,
should they win reelection in fall balloting, they would introduce
legislation providing full marriage rights to all same-sex couples
(Hoffman 2010).
A second South American nation in which same-sex unions
have been approved is Ecuador. In September 2008, the nation
voted on a new national constitution consisting of 444 articles,
some of which were quite controversial. Among the controversial
articles was one granting the right to have civil unions to same-
sex couples. The constitution was eventually adopted by a vote
of 63 percent to 39 percent (Romero 2008; 365Gay 2008). One
other South American nation in which the status of same-sex
civil union is somewhat problematic is Colombia. In June 2007,
the Chamber of Representatives of the Colombian Congress
voted 62 to 43 for a bill granting civil unions to same-sex couples.
The bill was defeated in the Senate, however, when a group of
senators from the ruling party, normally expected to vote for
the bill, cast their ballots instead against it. The bill was defeated,
then, by a vote of 34 to 29, with 39 members not voting on the
measure (“Colombian Conservatives Derail Gay Union Bill”
2007). In the meantime, the nation’s highest court has issued a
series of rulings that extend many, if not all, of the rights enjoyed
by married opposite-sex couples to same-sex couples. In these
rulings, the court has said that same-sex couples must have the
same rights as opposite-sex couples in areas such as social secu-
rity, health insurance, employment, inheritance, and property
rights (GayLawNet 2009). Finally, in 2009 the court ruled that
same-sex couples in a civil union must be granted virtually of
the same rights as those enjoyed by married heterosexuals, estab-
lishing a de facto equality between the two forms of relationships
(Martinez 2009).
Actions by Subnational Entities
Some forms of government permit governmental units below
that of the national level to make decisions on a variety of policy
issues. The United States is, of course, a good example of this
96
Worldwide Perspective

situation. Individual states are allowed to make virtually all basic
decisions about marriage, including the age at which a man or a
woman may marry, the cost of a marriage license, blood tests that
may be required, and waiting periods that may be necessary.
They are also allowed to determine whether or not same-sex cou-
ples may be granted licenses to marry.
Apparently the ﬁrst subnational governmental entity in the
world to grant some form of marriage-like arrangement to same-
sex couples was the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). In 1994,
the ACT legislature passed the Domestic Relationships Act,
which provided limited marriage-like rights to same-sex couples,
including certain death beneﬁts typically granted to opposite-sex
couples (Domestic Relationships Act 1994). Over the next decade,
a number of efforts were made to expand the range of privileges
offered to same-sex couples, most of which failed because of
strong opposition from the national government. Finally, in 2009
the legislature passed a domestic partnership act that included
many of the rights and privileges usually reserved for married
couples (Green 2009).
Currently, same-sex couples in all states of Australia are
covered by a federally recognized entity known as a de facto
relationship. Similar to a common law marriage, a de facto rela-
tionship allows same-sex couples to receive certain beneﬁts typ-
ically available only to opposite-sex couples in a common-law
marriage. These beneﬁts include joint Social Security and vet-
eran beneﬁts, worker’s compensation, inheritance rights, hospi-
tal visitation privileges, the right to ﬁle a joint income tax
return, and immigration rights (Gay and Lesbian Rights Lobby
2008). Two Australian state, Tasmania and Victoria, have entities
that more closely approximate opposite-sex marriage. The
Tasmanian Domestic Partnerships 2003 Act provides for two
levels of relationships, known as signiﬁcant relationships and
caring relationships, depending on the precise nature of the rela-
tionship between individuals in the association. The law has
been modiﬁed and amended to provide to same-sex couples
essentially all of the rights available to opposite-sex couples in
the state (“Relationships Act: The Tasmanian Approach” 2006).
The state of Victoria has also passed a same-sex relationship
act similar to that of Tasmania’s. Provision for domestic partner-
ships was made in two laws passed in 2001, the Statute Law
Amendment (Relationships) Act 2001 and the Statute Law Fur-
ther Amendment (Relationships) Act 2001. These laws are based
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
97

on the presumption that “[a]ll Victorian couples, regardless
of gender or marital status, have equal rights under the law”
(“A Fair Go for All Victorian Couples” 2010). They amended
60 different state acts that originally provided beneﬁts for
opposite-sex couples that were not available to same-sex cou-
ples. (It should be noted that same-sex marriage is speciﬁcally
prohibited in Australian law by an amendment to the 1961
Marriage Act adopted by the national legislature in 2004; see
Marriage Amendment Act 2004.)
The other nation, in addition to Australia, where laws
regarding same-sex relationships have been the source of con-
siderable activity is Spain. In the period between 1998 and
2003, 11 separate governmental entities enacted some form of
recognition of marriage-like arrangements for same-sex couples.
The ﬁrst of these was the government of Catalonia, which
in 1998 established a category known as a stable union (unio´n
estable), which provided same-sex couples with certain beneﬁts
generally available to opposite-sex couples (Merin 2002, 151–
55; Leston 1998). Other governmental entities have used the
same or other titles for legal arrangements of this kind, includ-
ing stable couples (parejas estables; Aragon, Navarre, Asturias,
Balearic Islands), de facto couples (las parejas de hecho; Andalusia,
Extremadura, Canary Islands, and Basque Country), and de
facto unions (las uniones de hecho; Valencia and Madrid)
(Pichardo Gala´n 2010). All such arrangements became moot, of
course, with the federal government’s adoption of same-sex
legislation in 2005.
A number of subnational governmental entities that have
approved some form of same-sex unions for their citizens are
the following:
Argentina
The city legislature of Buenos Aires established civil unions
for residents of the city on December 13, 2002. Four days later,
the provincial legislature of the province of Rio Negro adopted
very similar legislation. Many rights are granted to same-sex cou-
ples by both bodies, with the primary exception of formal mar-
riage and adoption of children “(Argentina: Civil Union
Proposals Passed in Rio Negro Province and Buenos Aires City”
2002). Civil union legislation has also been approved by two other
Argentine cities, Villa Carlos Paz, in 2007, and Rio Cuarto, in 2009
98
Worldwide Perspective

(“Co´rdoba: Aprueban La Unio´n Civil Entre Homosexuales en Villa
Carlos Paz” 2007; “Rı´o Cuarto: Aprueban La Unio´n Civil De Parejas
Gays” 2009).
Mexico
Two governmental bodies in Mexico have recognized some
form of same-sex union. The ﬁrst of these bodies was the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the Federal District (D.F.), which approved an
entity known as coexistence partnerships (sociedades de convivencia)
on November 9, 2007, by a vote of 43 to 17. The bill establishing
this entity had ﬁrst been proposed in 2000 by Enoe´ Uranga,
an open lesbian member of the assembly. Although the bill had
been passed four times by the Assembly, it did not receive ﬁnal
approval until 2007.
Two years later, legislative assemblyman David Razu´ intro-
duced a bill legalizing same-sex marriage in the D.F. The bill passed
the Assembly on December 21, 2009, by a vote of 39 to 20 (“Mexico
City Lawmakers OK Gay Marriage” 2009). The main import of the
bill was simply to change the wording of the city’s marriage laws to
refer to “a free union between two people,” rather than “a free
union between a man and a woman (ofﬁcial test of the law is avail-
able in Spanish at Jurist: Legal News and Research 2009).
Somewhat unexpectedly, the second governmental entity to
approve same-sex marriages in Mexico was the state of Coahuila,
which borders Texas. On January 11, 2007, the state legislature cre-
ated the category of civil pact of solidarity (pacto civil de solidaridad),
similar to the French entity of the same name. After the legislature
approved the measure by a vote of 20 to 13, one legislator said that
“[t]his does not have to do with morality. It has to do with legality”
(Walker 2007).
One off-shore territory of the United Kingdom, the island of
Jersey, approved a civil partnership bill similar to that of the home
country on October 20, 2009. The vote was 48 to 1. In a second
such territory, the Isle of Man, the House of Keys passed a civil
partnership bill like that of the United Kingdom in the spring of
2010, and ﬁnal adoption of the legislation was pending as of the
summer of 2010.
Finally, two territories in the Caribbean, Aruba and the
Netherlands Antilles, are required to recognize marriages con-
ducted in their parent nation, the Netherlands, although they do
not allow such marriages on their own soil.
Same-Sex Marriage: Recent Developments: Support
99

Court Decisions on Same-Sex Unions
Same-sex couples in a number of nations have appealed to
the judicial system to obtain recognition of their rights to receive
a marriage license or some similar arrangement, such as a civil
union or registered partnership. Various courts have reached dif-
fering decisions on this issue. In Israel, for example, courts have
consistently ruled that same-sex couples have the same rights of
common-law marriage as do opposite-sex couples (1994); that
same-sex couples are eligible for a variety of social, political, and
economic beneﬁts generally available to opposite-sex couples
(1995, 1996, 2000, 2001, and 2005); and that the government must
recognize same-sex unions and marriages conducted in other
nations (2006) (GayTLVGuide 2010).
Other national courts have followed the lead of the Israeli judi-
ciary in recognizing the right of same-sex couples to enjoy identical
or similar matrimonial rights as those of opposite-sex couples. The
supreme court of Nepal, for example, ruled in November 2008 that
the nation’s new interim constitution required the government to
treat all individuals in exactly the same way, whether they were
gay, nongay, “third sex,” or some other sexual orientation. It indi-
cated that one consequence of this position was that all marriage
rights would have to be available to same-sex couples, just as they
were to opposite-sex couples. As of mid-2010, a legislative commit-
tee was working on a bill designed to achieve the requirements set
out by the court’s ruling (Parashar 2010). Other nations in which
court rulings have been instrumental in the development of same-
sex unions of one form or another include Canada (1999), South
Africa (2005), the United Kingdom (2006), Colombia (2007 and
2009), Slovenia (2009), Portugal (2009), and Poland (2010).
This campaign has been less successful in other nations,
where courts have ruled that same-sex couples do not have the
same or equivalent matrimonial rights as do opposite-sex cou-
ples. Among the nations in which courts have issued such rulings
are Costa Rica (2006), Russia (2010), and Italy (2010).
Public Opinion about Same-Sex Marriage
Many public opinion polls have been conducted to gauge the
feeling of citizens about the possibility of same-sex marriage or
comparable institutions in their countries. As might be expected,
100
Worldwide Perspective

the results of those polls range widely, from very high approval of
such entities for same-sex couples to very strong opposition. One
of the most comprehensive polls was conducted in 2006 by the
European Commission as part of its periodic Eurobarometer pro-
gram, which gauges public opinion in the European Union on a
wide variety of issues. The 2006 study found that 44 percent of
respondents agreed with the statement “Homosexual marriages
should be allowed throughout Europe,” in comparison with
49 percent who disagreed with the statement (Eurobarometer 66
2006, 37). Citizens of various member states differed widely in
their response to this question, with the Dutch, Swedes, Danes,
and Belgians expressing the strongest support for same-sex mar-
riage (82%, 71%, 69%, and 62%, respectively), and the Poles,
Greeks, Cypriots, and Latvians expressing the lowest level of sup-
port (17%, 15%, 14%, and 12%, respectively). As perhaps might be
expected, support for same-sex marriage was highest in nations
that already have laws allowing lesbians and gay men to marry
or join in civil unions and lowest in nations without such institu-
tions (Eurobarometer 66 2006, 41).
The results of public opinion polls on same-sex marriage and
civil unions vary so widely that it is virtually impossible to make
any generalizations worldwide. Some of the trends from recent
polls in speciﬁc countries can, however, be summarized:
•
In a poll conducted about two weeks after the Portuguese
parliament approved same-sex marriage, the Eurosonda-
gem polling ﬁrm found that 52 percent of respondents
approved of same-sex marriage, while 42 percent
opposed (Wockner 2010).
•
Two recent polls in Argentina produced dramatically
different results. One conducted in November 2009 by
the polling ﬁrm Analogı´as found that 66.3 percent of
interviewees in six Argentine cities supported same-sex
marriage, while 23.1 percent opposed the practice. But a
poll conducted by the ﬁrm Poliarquı´a Consultores of
1,000 Argentine adults found most opposed to same-sex
marriage, 60 percent to 35 percent (these results and
those following are from Angus Reid Global Monitor
2010).
•
Citizens of Canada are signiﬁcantly more supportive of
same-sex marriage than are those of Great Britain or the
United States. The support for same-sex marriage was
Public Opinion about Same-Sex Marriage
101

reported to be 61 percent in Canada, 41 percent in Great
Britain, and 33 percent in the United States in a study
conducted by Angus Reid Strategies.
•
In a somewhat surprising result, a narrow majority of
Israelis said that they thought that homosexual behavior
was an “aberration” (46% to 42%), but a signiﬁcant
majority (61% to 31%) supported the rights of same-sex
couples to marry legally.
•
A poll by GfK Polonia conducted in July 2009 found that
75 percent of 1,000 Polish adults queried opposed same-
sex marriage, while 14 percent approved.
•
Although same-sex marriage is not legal in Australia,
59 percent of 1,100 adult Australians polled in May 2009
supported same-sex marriage in their country, while
36 percent opposed.
•
Two-thirds (65.2%) of Chileans polled in March and
April 2009 opposed granting marriage rights to same-sex
couples, while one-third (33.2%) approved.
The results of these polls must be viewed with the same cau-
tion recommended for any public opinion polling, namely that
they reﬂect not only the opinions of interviewees, but also the
implicit and often unacknowledged biases of the interviewers
and the precise wording of the questions being asked.
The Future of Same-Sex Marriage
As is the case with almost any social issue, it is next to impos-
sible to suggest the future of same-sex marriage and civil unions
around the world. It seems safe to say that such institutions will
not be permitted in very large parts of the globe, such as those
in which the Islamic religion is dominate. There seems to be
next to no chance that same-sex marriage will be approved in
most parts of Africa either. The future of same-sex marriage in
areas where Christianity has traditionally been strong, such as
Latin America, is more difﬁcult to predict. One might suppose
that the inﬂuence of the Roman Catholic Church would be sufﬁ-
cient to deter same-sex unions of any kind on the continent, but
recent trends raise doubt as to whether such is the case or not.
Same-sex unions are already available in at least three countries,
Ecuador, Uruguay, and parts of Argentina, and are under serious
102
Worldwide Perspective

consideration in other nations, such as Colombia and Venezuela.
Only in Europe, especially Western Europe, does same-sex mar-
riage appear to be a trend that will not be denied, especially given
the strong support for the institution by the European Union (EU)
itself. In retrospect, it is quite remarkable that six nations of the EU
have adopted same-sex marriage over the last decade, and at least
two other countries are expected to approve of the practice in the
near future.
References
Alexander, Mary. 2006. “SA Legalises Gay Marriage.” SouthAfrica.info.
http://www.southafrica.info/services/rights/same-sex-marriage.htm.
Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Angus Reid Global Monitor. 2010. “Issue Watch: Same-Sex Marriage.”
http://www.angus-reid.com/issue/C26/. Accessed on March 29,
2010.
“Argentina: Civil Union Proposals Passed in Rio Negro Province and
Buenos Aires City.” 2002. International Gay & Lesbian Human Rights
Commission. http://www.iglhrc.org/cgi-bin/iowa/article/takeaction/
globalactionalerts/597.html. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Belien, Paul. 2006. “European Parliament Backs Gay Marriage.” The
Brussels Journal. January 22, 2006. http://www.brusselsjournal.com/
node/696. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Berry, Ruth. 2005. “Majority Happy with Civil Union, Prostitution Laws.”
nzherald.co.nz. http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?
c_id=1&objectid=10333649. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Bulgaria—Constitution. 1991. http://www.servat.unibe.ch/icl/bu00000
_.html. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Cambodia Constitution. 1993. http://www.servat.unibe.ch/icl/cb00000
_.html#A045_. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
“Capital Move for Gay Couples.” 2001. BBC News. http://news
.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/1411648.stm. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
“Civil Partnership: A Framework for Legal Recognition of Same-Sex
Couples.” 2003. http://www.equalities.gov.uk/pdf/civil%20partnership
%20-%20a%20framework%20for%20the%20legal%20recognition%20of
%20same-sex%20couples.pdf. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Civil Partnerships Bill (HL). 2002. http://www.publications.parliament.uk/
pa/ld200102/ldbills/041/2002041.pdf. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
References
103

“Colombian Conservatives Derail Gay Union Bill.” 2007. MSNBC. http://
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/19339227/. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Constitution of Honduras—English Translation. 2005. http://www
.honduras.com/honduras-constitution-english.html. Accessed on
March 25, 2010.
“Co´rdoba: Aprueban La Unio´n Civil Entre Homosexuales en Villa Carlos
Paz.” 2007. Cları´n.com. http://www.clarin.com/diario/2007/11/23/
um/m-01547228.htm (in Spanish). Accessed on March 27, 2010.
The Danish Registered Partnership Act. 1996. http://users.cybercity.dk/
~dko12530/s2.htm. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Department of Internal Affairs [New Zealand]. 2010. Civil Unions. http://
www.dia.govt.nz/diawebsite.nsf/wpg_URL/Services-Births-Deaths-and
-Marriages-Civil-Unions?OpenDocument. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Domestic Relationships Act. 1994. Australian Capital Territory
Consolidated Acts. http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/
consol_act/dra1994253/. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
“Dutch Legislators Approve Full Marriage Rights for Gays.” 2000. New
York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2000/09/13/world/dutch
-legislators-approve-full-marriage-rights-for-gays.html?scp=2&sq
=Norway+Gay+Marriages&st=nyt. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Epprecht, Marc. 2008. Heterosexual Africa?: The History of an Idea from the
Age of Exploration to the Age of AIDS. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Eurobarometer 66. 2006. http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/
eb/eb66/eb66_highlights_en.pdf. Accessed on April 29, 2010.
European Parliament. 2006. “Homophobia in Europe.” http://www
.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA
+P6-TA-2006-0018+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
“A Fair Go for All Victorian Couples.” 2010. http://www
.equalopportunitycommission.vic.gov.au/publications/rights
%20brochures/same%20sex%20relationships.asp. Accessed on
March 26, 2010.
FOXNews.com. 2010. “Afghan Men Struggle with Sexual Identity, Study
Finds.” http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2010/01/28/afghan-men
-struggle-sexual-identity-study-ﬁnds/. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Gay & Lesbian Archives of the Paciﬁc Northwest. 2007. “Sodomy Laws:
Laws around the World.” http://www.sodomylaws.org/. Accessed
March 25, 2010.
Gay and Lesbian.net. 2009. “The Civil Partnership Act 2004.” http://
www.gay-and-lesbian.net/legal/8-civil-partnerships/18-the-civil
-partnership-act-2004. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
104
Worldwide Perspective

. 2010. “Gay and Lesbian Marriage: 1979–1999.” http://www.gay
-and-lesbian.net/history/9-timeline-of-gay-marriage/5-1979-1999.
Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Gay and Lesbian Rights Lobby. 2008. “Your Rights Checklist.” http://
glrl.org.au/index.php/Rights/Rights/Your-Rights-Checklist. Accessed
on March 26, 2010.
GayLawNet. 2009. Laws: Colombia. http://www.gaylawnet.com/laws/
co.htm#marriage. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
GayTLVGuide. 2010. “Gay Rights in Israel.” http://www.gaytlvguide.com/
start-here/gay-rights-in-israel. Accessed on March 28, 2010.
Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2010. “After U.S. Evangelicals Visit, Uganda
Considers Death for Gays.” New York Times. January 4, 2010, A1, A9.
Giles, Ciaran. 2005. “Spain: Gay Marriage Bill Clears Hurdle.”
http://web.archive.org/web/20071227125726/http://www
.planetout.com/news/article.html?2005/04/21/5. Accessed on
March 26, 2010.
GlobalGayz.com. 2005. “Honduras Bans Gay Marriage & Adoption.”
http://www.globalgayz.com/country/Honduras/view/HND/
gay-honduras-news-and-reports#article3. Accessed on March 25,
2010.
Gray, J. Patrick. 1998. “Ethnographic Atlas Codebook.” World
Cultures 10 (1): 86–136. http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/
Codebook4EthnoAtlas.pdf. Accessed on March 24, 2010.
Green, Jessica. 2009. “Australian Territory Legalises Gay Civil
Partnership Ceremonies.” pinknews. http://www.pinknews.co.uk/
2009/11/11/australian-territory-legalises-gay-civil-partnership
-ceremonies/. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Grew, Tony. 2008. “Uruguay’s First Gay Union, Four Months after They
Became Legal.” pinknews. http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/
2005-7461.html. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Hall, J. C. 1971. “The Nullity of Marriage Act 1971. The Cambridge Law
Journal 29:208–10.
“Hate Begets Hate.” 2010. New York Times (editorial). January 4, 2010, A12.
Haviland, William A., et al. 2007. Cultural Anthropology: The Human
Challenge, 12th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Higher Learning.
Herskovits, Melville J. 1937. “A Note on ‘Woman Marriage’ in Dahomey.”
Africa 10 (3): 335–41.
Hinsch, Bret. 1990. Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition
in China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
References
105

Hoffman, Matthew Cullinan. 2010. “Uruguayan Socialists Prepare ‘Homo
sexual Marriage’ Legislation.” LifeSiteNews.com. http://www.lifesitenews
.com/ldn/2009/may/09052509.html. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Hurley, Mary C. 2005. Bill C-38: the Civil Marriage Act. http://www2.
parl.gc.ca/Sites/LOP/LegislativeSummaries/Bills_ls.asp?Parl=38&Ses
=1&ls=c38. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Igwe, Leo. 2009. “Tradition of Same Gender Marriage in Igboland.”
Nigerian Tribune. http://revrowlandjidemacaulay.blogspot.com/2009/06/
tradition-of-same-gender-marriage-in.html. Accessed on March 24, 2010.
Jurist: Legal News and Research. 2009. “Mexico City Legislature
Approves Same-Sex Marriage Bill.” http://jurist.law.pitt.edu/
paperchase/2009/12/mexico-city-legislature-approves-same.php.
Accessed on March 28, 2010.
Kenya Catholic Bishops. 1991. Guidelines for the Celebration of the Sacrament
of Baptism for Infants and Special Cases. Nairobi: St. Paul Publications.
Krige, Eileen J. 1937. “Note on the Phalaborwa and Their Morula
Complex.” Bantu Studies 11: 357–66.
Leston, Cesar. 1998. “Catalonia Has Granted Domestic Partnership
Rights.” ILGA Euroletter 61, July 1998. http://www.france.qrd.org/
assocs/ilga/euroletter/61.html#ES. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Marriage Amendment Act. 2004. http://legislation.gov.au/comlaw/
Legislation/Act1.nsf/0/91DFFD1199DF26D8CA2574170007CE06/$ﬁle/
1262004.pdf. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Martinez, Helda. 2009. “Colombia: Equal Rights for Same-Sex Partners.”
IPS. http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=45944. Accessed on
March 27, 2010.
Merin, Yuval. 2002. Equality for Same-Sex Couples: The Legal Recognition of
Gay Partnerships in Europe and the United States. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
“Mexico City Lawmakers OK Gay Marriage.” 2009. CBSNEWS. http://
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2009/12/21/world/main6007081.shtml.
Accessed on March 28, 2010.
Neill, James. 2009. The Origins and Role of Same-Sex Relations in Human
Societies. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company.
Njambi, Wairimu Ngaruiya, and William E. O’Brien. 2000. “Revisiting
‘Woman-Woman Marriage’: Notes on Gikuyu Women. NESA Journal 12 (1):
1–23.
“Norway Passes Law Approving Gay Marriage.” 2008. Los Angeles Times.
http://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-on-norwaymarriage18-2008jun18,
0,402614.story. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
106
Worldwide Perspective

Nyberg, Per. 2009. “Sweden Passes Same-Sex Marriage Law.” CNN.com/
europe. http://edition.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/europe/04/01/sweden
.samesex/index.html. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
O’Brien, Denise. 1977. “Female Husbands in Southern Bantu Societies,”
in Alice Schlegel, ed. Sexual Stratiﬁcation: A Cross-Cultural View. New
York: Columbia University Press, 109–21.
Ofﬁce of Public Sector Information. 2010a. The Marriage (Northern
Ireland) Order 2003. http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2003/20030413
.htm#6. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
. 2010b. Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977. http://www.uk-legislation.
hmso.gov.uk/RevisedStatutes/Acts/ukpga/1977/cukpga_19770015
_en_1#pt3-l1g5. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
. 2010c. Matrimonial Causes Act 1973. http://www.opsi.gov.uk/
RevisedStatutes/Acts/ukpga/1973/cukpga_19730018_en_2#pt1-pb2
-l1g12. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Paraguay—Constitution. 1992. http://www.servat.unibe.ch/law/icl/
pa00000_.html#P001_. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Parashar, Uptal. 2010. “Nepal Charter to Grant Gay Rights.” Hindustan
Times. http://www.hindustantimes.com/News-Feed/nepal/Nepal
-charter-to-grant-gay-rights/Article1-499154.aspx. Accessed on
March 28, 2010.
Pichardo Gala´n, Jose´ Ignacio. 2010. “Same-Sex Couples in Spain.
Historical, Contextual and Symbolic Factors. http://www-same
-sex.ined.fr/WWW/04Doc124Ignacio.pdf. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
“Portugal Parliament Approves Gay Marriage.” 2010. MSNBC. http://
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/34765160/. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
“Portugal’s President to Ratify Same-sex Marriage Law. 2010. BBC News.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/8688503.stm. Accessed on May 18,
2010.
REL: 02/15/2002 EX PARTE H.H. 2010. http://caselaw.lp.ﬁndlaw.com/
scripts/getcase.pl?court=al&vol=1002045&invol=2. Accessed on March 27,
2010.
“Relationships Act: The Tasmanian Approach.” 2006. http://www
.buddybuddy.com/d-p-taz.html. Accessed on March 26, 2009.
Religious Tolerance. 2003. “Same-Sex (SSM) Marriage in Belgium.”
http://www.religioustolerance.org/hom_mar10.htm. Accessed on
March 26, 2010.
“Rı´o Cuarto: Aprueban La Unio´n Civil De Parejas Gays.” 2009. La
Voz.com.ar. http://archivo.lavoz.com.ar/09/05/07/Rio-Cuarto
-aprueban-union-civil-parejas-gays.html. (In Spanish). Accessed on
March 27, 2010.
References
107

Romero, Simon. 2008. “President Wins Support for Charter in Ecuador.”
New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/29/world/
americas/29ecuador.html?_r=1. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Roscoe, Will, and Stephen O. Murray. 2001. Boy-Wives and Female
Husbands: Studies of African Homosexualities. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
“Same-Sex Marriage in Canada.” 2007. http://www.mapleleafweb.com/
features/same-sex-marriage-canada. Accessed on March 26, 2010.
Skolnick, Arlene S., and Jerome H. Skolnick. Families in Transition, 6th ed.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1989.
SSO. 2009. “New Caledonia Catches up with France.” http://www
.starobserver.com.au/soap-box/2009/06/09/new-caledonia-catches-up
-to-france/13739. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Statistics Canada. [2007]. “Family Portrait: Continuity and Change in
Canadian Families and Households in 2006, 2006 Census.” http://
www.samesexmarriage.ca/docs/FamilyCensus2006.pdf. Accessed on
March 29, 2010.
“The Supreme Court and Same-Sex Marriage.” 2005. CBC News. http://
www.cbc.ca/news/background/samesexrights/. Accessed on March 26,
2010.
“The Text of the Constitution of the Republic of Cuba.” 2003. Ofﬁcial
Gazette of the Republic of Cuba. Special Edition No.3 of January 31, 2003.
http://www.walterlippmann.com/cubanconstitution.html. Accessed on
March 25, 2010.
Thottam, Jyoti. 2009. “India’s Historic Ruling on Gay Rights.” Time. July 2,
2009. http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1908406,00.html.
Accessed on March 25, 2010.
365Gay. 2008. “New Ecuador Constitution Includes Gay Rights
Guarantees.” http://www.365gay.com/news/new-ecuador-constitution
-includes-gay-rights-guarantees/. Accessed on March 27, 2010.
Vanita, Rith. 2002. “Homosexuality in India: Past and Present.” IIAS
Newsletter. No. 29. http://www.iias.nl/iiasn/29/IIASNL29_10_Vanita
.pdf. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
Vanita, Ruth, and Saleem Kidwai. 2000. Same-Sex Love in India: Readings
from Literature and History. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Waaldijk, Kees. 2005. “Others May Follow: The Introduction of Marriage,
Quasi-marriage and Semimarriage for Same-Sex Couples in European
Countries.” Judicial Studies Institute Journal. 5: 104–27.
108
Worldwide Perspective

Walker, S. Lynne. 2007. “New Law Propels Gay Rights in Mexico.”
San Diego Union Tribune. http://legacy.signonsandiego.com/uniontrib/
20070305/news_1n5gaylaw.html. Accessed on March 28, 2010.
Wockner, Rex. 2010. “Portuguese Support Same-Sex Marriage, by a
Smidge.” http://www.baywindows.com/index.php?ch=news&sc
=glbt&sc2=news&sc3=&id=101526. Accessed on March 29, 2010.
References
109

This page intentionally left blank

4
Chronology
A
lthough some form of legalized relationships between two
individuals of the same gender has been known for hun-
dreds of years, the details of speciﬁc events in that long his-
tory are not well documented. Most of the signiﬁcant events in
the history of same-sex marriages and their counterparts (civil
unions, domestic partnerships, registered partnerships, and the
like) and same-sex adoption issues date only to the 1990s. This
chapter lists some of the most important events in that chrono-
logical history.
Where known and relevant, the speciﬁc month and day of an
event is listed. In some cases, more than one date may be associ-
ated with an event. For example, legislative bodies typically pass
laws on one date that are then signed by an executive on a differ-
ent date. Those laws may then come into effect immediately or,
more commonly, at some later date. The signiﬁcance of the date
chosen for listing is noted in each instance.
First
century
CE
Same-sex marriages among Roman upper classes are
apparently relatively common and generally accepted.
The emperor Nero legally married at least three young
boys during his reign.
342
The Theodosian Code, issued by the Christian emper-
ors Constantius II and Constans, declares same-sex
marriages to be illegal and requires that any such
couples be put to death.
111

Fourteenth
to seven-
teenth
century
Same-sex marriages were apparently common in the
Chinese province of Fujian during the Ming Dynasty,
1368–1644.
1967
The U.S. Supreme Court, in the case of Loving v.
Virginia, rules that the state of Virginia’s law against
marriage between two individuals of different races is
unconstitutional. The vote is nine-to-zero. The court
bases its decision on the proposition that “[m]arriage
is one of the ‘basic civil rights of man,’ fundamental
to our very existence and survival.”
1970
Two Minnesota men, Jack Baker and James McConnell,
apply for a marriage license in Hennepin County, Min-
nesota. They are refused and proceed to sue the county
(Baker v. Nelson). Their case eventually is appealed to
the U.S. Supreme Court, which declines to hear the case
for lack of any “substantial federal question.”
1971
Baker and McConnell (see 1970) are granted a mar-
riage license in Blue Earth County, Minnesota, and
are married by a Methodist minister, making them
the ﬁrst same-sex couple to be legally married in the
United States.
1972
Two Kentucky women, Marjorie Jones and Tracy
Knight, apply for a marriage license at the Jefferson
County courthouse. They are denied a license, and
their appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Kentucky
is also denied.
Camille Mitchell, a lesbian living in San Jose, California,
is granted custody of her child in a divorce proceed-
ing, although the judge rules that she may not spend
time with her partner when the child is present.
1973
Maryland becomes the ﬁrst state in the union to spe-
ciﬁcally ban marriage between two individuals of
the same sex. Prior to this time, no speciﬁc prohibition
of same-sex marriage existed in any state constitution
or legal code.
112
Chronology

1974
Under the equal rights amendment to the state’s
constitution, a same-sex couple in Washington State,
John F. Singer and Paul Barwick, ﬁle suit against King
County Auditor Lloyd Hara to force him to grant
them a marriage license (Singer v. Hara). The King
County superior court rules that the amendment does
not apply to marriage, only to discriminatory treat-
ment to individuals on the basis of their sex.
1975
Two gay men in Colorado, Richard Adams and
Anthony Sullivan, sue Joseph D. Howerton, acting
district director of the U.S. Immigration and Naturali-
zation Service (INS), to force him to recognize their
marriage, legally performed in the state (Adams. v.
Howerton). The purpose of the recognition was to
allow Sullivan, a citizen of Australia, to remain
legally in the United States. The court ruled that
immigration law prohibited the INS from admitting
homosexuals to the country, so the Congress did not
intend to recognize a marriage between homosexuals.
Virginia becomes the fourth state to prohibit same-
sex marriage.
1976
The citizens of Cuba, with a vote of 97.7 percent in
favor, adopt a new constitution that speciﬁcally
deﬁnes marriage as an institution between one man
and one woman.
1977
In two separate cases, courts in Michigan and Colorado
grant custody rights to lesbians (Jacqueline Stamper
and Donna Levy) over the objections of their ex-
husband, in one case, and their deceased partner’s rel-
atives in the other.
The Florida legislature adopts a law stating that “[n]o
person eligible to adopt under this statute may adopt
if that person is a homosexual.”
1979
The Dutch parliament grants same-sex couples the
same rights of common-law marriage then available
Chronology
113

1994
(cont.)
to opposite-sex couples. The action is the ﬁrst of its
kind in the world in which same-sex couples receive
marriage-like rights comparable or identical to those
for opposite-sex couples.
1984
The city of Berkeley, California, becomes the ﬁrst
legal entity in the United States to create a formal,
legal recognition of same-sex relationships. It estab-
lishes an entity known as a domestic partnership that
provides many of the same beneﬁts for same-sex cou-
ples as are available in a traditional marriage. These
beneﬁts extend only to areas controlled by city law.
May 11
In the case of De Santa v. Barnsley, the Pennsylvania
Superior Court rules that a divorce cannot be granted
to two men (John DeSanto and William Barnsley) who
have lived together in a common-law marriage for
more than 10 years. The judge rules that a common-
law marriage, recognized for opposite-sex couples by
the state of Pennsylvania, cannot exist between two
individuals of the same sex.
1985
The Alaska Supreme Court rules that the fact that a
woman is a lesbian is irrelevant to her ability and
right to adopt a child and awards a minor child to a
lesbian mother and her partner rather than to the
heterosexual father.
1986
The Danish parliament grants to same-sex couples
the same rights of common-law marriage available
to opposite-sex couples.
June 30
In the case of Bowers v. Hardwick, the U.S. Supreme
Court rules that homosexual activity between adults
in the privacy of their own home is not protected by
the U.S. Constitution.
In one of the ﬁrst cases of its kind in the United States,
two lesbians, Annie Afﬂect and Rebecca Smith, are
allowed to legally adopt a child.
114
Chronology

1987
The National Center for Lesbian Rights (at the time,
the Lesbian Rights Project) devises a strategy for
allowing same-sex couples to adopt, a strategy
known as second-parent adoption.
October 10 An estimated two thousand same-sex couples are
“married” on the steps of the Internal Revenue Ser-
vice building during the March on Washington as a
statement against the unequal treatment of same-sex
couples under the nation’s tax laws.
1988
January
The Swedish legislature grants to same-sex couples
the same rights of common-law marriage available
to opposite-sex couples.
October 20 The San Bernardino (California) superior court awards
custody of Shawn Wallace to his father, Artie, a gay
men with AIDS, after Wallace’s ex-wife, a fundamen-
talist Christian, had earlier kidnapped the child to pre-
vent his living with his father. Artie Wallace died a year
later as a result of complications from AIDS.
1989
January
Norway approves common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples identical to those for opposite-sex
couples.
June
Denmark becomes the ﬁrst country in the world
to provide a form of marriage-like legal recognition
for same-sex relationships called a registered
partnership.
July
The New York Court of Appeals rules that a same-sex
couple having lived together for at least 10 years can
be considered a “family unit” for the purpose of rent
control. The ruling is the ﬁrst time that a state court
has deﬁned a same-sex couple as a “family.”
1990
In the case Matter of Cooper, the New York Supreme
Court rules that a gay man cannot sue to inherit from
his deceased partner, who has left by will about
Chronology
115

1990
(cont.)
80 percent of his estate to a former partner. The appel-
lant claims that New York inheritance laws should
apply even though the state refuses to grant marriage
licenses to same-sex couples. The court rules that
state laws do not apply, and that marriage in the state
is limited to couples of the opposite sex.
1991 July
Bulgaria adopts a new constitution that includes a
speciﬁc provision deﬁning marriage as “a free union
between a man and a woman.”
1992
Levi Strauss & Company becomes the ﬁrst Fortune
500 company to offer the same beneﬁts to same-sex
couples as it does to opposite-sex couples employed
at the ﬁrm.
June
Paraguay adopts a new constitution that includes an
article that limits marriage and all marriage-like insti-
tutions to one man and one woman.
1993 April Norway approves registered partnership status for
same-sex couples.
May 5
The Supreme Court of Hawaii rules that the state’s
ban on same-sex marriage is illegal unless the state
can provide a compelling reason for the necessity of
such a ban.
August 1
Norway becomes the second country in the world to
establish registered partnerships for same-sex couples.
September Cambodia’s new constitution speciﬁcally restricts
marriage to “one husband and one wife.”
1994
The Australian Capital Territory adopts the Domestic
Relationship Act 1994 granting to same-sex couples
many of the same rights available to opposite-sex
couples in the district. The act is the ﬁrst of its kind
in Australia and one of the ﬁrst in the world by a gov-
ernmental body.
The Israeli Supreme Court rules that same-sex cou-
ples are entitled to the same legal beneﬁts as are
116
Chronology

opposite-sex couples in common-law relationships.
Over the next three years, the court continues to
expand the range of beneﬁts available to same-sex
couples.
June
Sweden establishes registered partnerships for same-
sex couples.
1995
Utah becomes the ﬁrst state to pass a so-called
defense of marriage act (DOMA) speciﬁcally prohib-
iting any legal relationship between two individuals
of the same sex.
April 21
In one of the most famous early cases of adoption by
same-sex couples, Bottoms v. Bottoms, the Virginia
Supreme Court rules that a lesbian, Sharon Bottoms,
is not ﬁt to have custody of her child, Tyler, and that
the child is to be placed with his grandmother, Pamela
Bottoms. Tyler’s father has supported Sharon’s
request to retain custody of the child. Later appeals
by the mother are all unsuccessful.
1996
April 26
The parliament of Greenland adopts registered part-
nership provisions of a Danish act passed in 1989.
May
Hungary approves common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples that are comparable to those avail-
able to opposite-sex couples.
June
Iceland approves registered partnerships for same-
sex couples.
September The U.S. Congress passes and President Bill Clinton
signs the Defense of Marriage Act, which bans the
U.S. government from recognizing same-sex mar-
riages performed in any state or any other nation.
December
3
A trial judge in Hawaii rules that the state has pro-
vided no compelling reason for restricting marriage
to opposite-sex couples. He delays implementation
of his ruling a day later to allow the state supreme
court to consider his decision.
Chronology
117

1997 May
A proposal to extend some marriage rights to same-
sex couples in Slovakia is rejected by the cabinet of
Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar.
July
The Netherlands approves the creation of a marriage-
like entity known as registered partnership for same-
sex couples.
October 22 The Bergen County (New Jersey) superior court rules
that the New Jersey Department of Youth and Family
Services had violated three state adoption statutes in
disallowing a homosexual couple from adopting a
child, creating for the ﬁrst time a right for same-sex
adoption in the state.
1998 June
The Czech parliament defeats a proposal to establish
registered partnerships for same-sex couples by a
margin of two votes.
June
Catalonia becomes the ﬁrst Spanish province to
approve same-sex unions (“stable union of a couple”;
unio´n estable de una pareja). Nearly all other provinces
follow the Catalonian example over the next ﬁve
years.
November The parliament of Belgium approves common-law
marriage rights for same-sex couples.
November
3
Voters in the state of Hawaii approve by a vote of
69 percent to 31 percent an amendment to the state
constitution limiting marriage to one man and one
woman.
November
3
The voters of Alaska approve ballot measure 2, which
amends the state constitution to restrict marriage to
couples of the opposite sex.
February
27
Alaska superior court judge Peter A. Michalski rules
that the state’s marriage laws violate the state
constitution and, therefore, the state must provide a
compelling reason for withholding a marriage license
from two men who wish to marry.
118
Chronology

1999
The South African government grants to same-sex cou-
ples the same rights as those available to opposite-sex
couples in a common-law marriage.
January
Only two months after extending common-law-
marriage rights to same-sex couples, Belgium creates
the new and more extensive category of registered
partnership to cover such couples.
November The French parliament approves a registered-
partnership-type entity for both gay and nongay
couples called a pacte civil de solidarite´ (civil pact of
solidarity) with many of the beneﬁts typically avail-
able to married heterosexual couples.
May 4
The New Hampshire state legislature rescinds a ban
on same-sex adoption and foster parenting that it
had instituted in 1987. The action leaves Florida
as the only state in the union with this type of
legislation.
December
The Vermont Supreme Court rules that same-sex
marriage, or some equivalent institution, must be
enacted by the state legislature within 100 days.
December
The Czech parliament defeats a bill to establish regis-
tered partnerships for the second time, this time by a
vote of 91 to 69.
2000
Same-sex couples in New Zealand are granted the
same rights of common-law marriage as those avail-
able to opposite-sex couples.
April 1
A law in Vermont permitting civil unions between
same-sex couples takes effect.
November Voters in Nebraska pass a constitutional amendment
by a vote of 70 percent to 30 percent banning same-
sex marriage, civil unions, and domestic partnerships.
November
10
The German parliament, the Bundestag, approves a
bill creating registered life partnerships (eingetragene
Chronology
119

November
10 (cont.)
Lebenspartnerschaften), providing beneﬁts such as hos-
pital visitation rights, the right to take the same sur-
name, inheritance of pensions, right to act as next of
kin, resident status for nonnational partners, rights
to adopt children of one’s partner, and all rights for
insurance, tax purposes, and other ﬁnancial matters
identical to those of opposite-sex couples in a
marriage.
December
The Dutch parliament approves by votes of 49 to 26
(upper house) and 109 to 33 (lower house) and Queen
Beatrice grants royal assent to a bill granting full mar-
riage rights to same-sex couples, an act that takes
effect in April 2001.
2001
January 14
Kevin Bourassa is married to Joe Varnell and Elaine
Vautour is married to Anne Vautour, both in Toronto,
the ﬁrst legal marriages of same-sex couples in Can-
ada. As a result of legal challenges, the marriages
are not fully approved until June 10, 2003.
March 15
Registered partnerships (unia˜o de facto) in Portugal,
previously available only to opposite-sex couples,
are made available to same-sex couples.
September The Finnish parliament approves registered partner-
ships (rekistero¨idysta¨ parisuhteesta) for same-sex cou-
ples, an act that takes effect on March 1, 2002.
2002
June 5
A new Swedish law permitting same-sex couples to
adopt children goes into effect.
October
The Italian parliament defeats a bill creating same-sex
unions similar to those of the French civil pact of sol-
idarity. As of mid-2010, the Italian government has
yet to approve any form of same-sex marital entity.
October 26 The Czech parliament rejects a bill recommended by
the cabinet to establish registered partnerships for
same-sex couples. The parliament’s action is its third
rejection of registered partnerships for same-sex
couples.
120
Chronology

December
13
The city of Buenos Aires, Argentina, passes a law
establishing a registry for same-sex civil unions in
the city.
2003
January 30
A bill approving same-sex marriage passes the
Belgian Chamber of Representatives by a vote of 91
to 22. The bill had previously (November 28, 2002)
passed the Senate by a vote of 46 to 15. The act goes
into effect on June 1, 2003, making Belgium the second
nation in the world, after the Netherlands, to approve
same-sex marriage.
March
The provincial legislature of Rio Negros, Argentina,
establishes civil unions for same-sex couples.
May 1
The supreme court of British Columbia rules that the
federal government is required by the national
constitution to recognize marriage between two indi-
viduals of the same sex.
June 10
The Ontario Appeals Court rules that bans on same-
sex marriage violate the nation’s Charter of Rights
and Freedoms. The court’s decision takes effect
immediately, and the ﬁrst same-sex marriages take
place in Toronto the same day (see 2001).
June 26
In a decision reversing Bowers v. Hardwick (see 1986),
the U.S. Supreme Court rules by a six-to-three vote
that a Texas law criminalizing sodomy was uncon-
stitutional and that, according to Justice Anthony
M. Kennedy, ‘‘adults may choose to enter upon this
relationship in the conﬁnes of their homes and their
own private lives and still retain their dignity as free
persons.’’
July 14
Croatia extends to same-sex couples the same rights
afforded unmarried, cohabiting opposite-sex couples
who have lived together for at least three years.
November
18
The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court issues its
ruling in Goodrich v. Department of Public Health that
Chronology
121

November
18 (cont.)
the prohibition on same-sex marriage in the Common-
wealth violates the state constitution.
2004 Feb-
ruary 20
Sandoval County (New Mexico) county clerk Victoria
Dunlap issues marriage licenses to about 60 same-sex
couples because she is unaware of any state law pro-
hibiting same-sex marriages. Essentially all couples
eventually marry, although the state quickly nulliﬁes
Dunlap’s actions.
February
24
President George W. Bush announces his support for
an amendment to the U.S. Constitution deﬁning
marriage as a civil right available only to couples of
opposite sexes.
May
The government of Luxembourg recognizes civil
unions (pacte civil de solidarite´; civil pact of solidarity)
between same-sex couples.
May 17
The ﬁrst legal marriages between same-sex couples in
the United States take place in Massachusetts.
August 14
The Australian parliament passes a law deﬁning mar-
riage as occurring between one man and one woman
only.
November Thirteen states pass constitutional amendments ban-
ning same-sex marriage, some of which also include
civil unions and/or domestic partnerships.
November
18
Queen Elizabeth II grants a decree of Royal Assent to
legislation passed by the House of Commons (by a
vote of 426 to 29) and the House of Lords (by a vote
of 251 to 136) granting the right of civil partnership
to same-sex couples. The law takes effect on Decem-
ber 5, 2005.
November
18
A bill is introduced into the Norwegian parliament to
make the nation’s marriage laws gender neutral. It is
later withdrawn with a request for the government
to further study such an action.
122
Chronology

November
29
The U.S. Supreme Court declines to hear a case from
one citizen and 11 legislators from Massachusetts
in an effort to overturn that state’s law on same-sex
marriage
December
8
The parliament of New Zealand enacts legislation
permitting same-sex civil unions.
December
30
The Montana Supreme Court rules that the Univer-
sity of Montana system must provide the same health
insurance beneﬁts to same-sex couples as it does for
opposite-sex couples.
2005
March
The coprinces of Andorra, the President of France,
and the Bishop of Urgell, sign a new civil code that
includes civil unions for same-sex couples.
April 7
New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg orders city
agencies to recognize legal same-sex marriages from
other states and countries.
April
The state of Connecticut adopts legislation establish-
ing civil unions for same-sex couples.
June 5
In a national referendum on a number of issues,
Swiss voters approve by a vote of 58 to 42 registered
partnerships for same-sex couples.
June 22
The Slovenian National Assembly adopts legislation
creating registered partnerships (registrirano part-
nerstvo) by a vote of 44 to 3. Opposition parties boy-
cott the vote claiming that the bill is too weak. This
decision sets off a series of legislative actions that
eventually lead to the passage of same-sex marriage
legislation in early 2010.
June 28
The Canadian House of Commons passes bill C-38,
legalizing same-sex marriage in Canada.
July 2
The Spanish Congress of Deputies votes 187 to 147
to override a decision by the Senate to reject a bill
Chronology
123

July 2
(cont.)
establishing same-sex marriage in Spain. The ﬁrst
marriage between two women takes place in
Barcelona 11 days later.
July 19
The Canadian Senate approves bill C-38, legalizing
same-sex marriage in Canada.
July 20
Queen Elizabeth II grants Royal Assent for bill C-38,
and same-sex marriage becomes fully legal in the
country.
September The parliament of Uganda passes the Constitutional
Amendment Bill that revokes term limits for sitting
president Yoweri Museveni. The bill also includes a
section amending the constitution to prohibit the
marriage of two individuals of the same sex.
December
5
The Civil Partnership Act takes effect in the United
Kingdom (see 2004).
December
21
Vaira Vike-Freiberga, the president of Latvia, signs a
constitutional amendment deﬁning marriage as an
institution between a man and a woman. Latvia
becomes the ﬁrst (and so far only) nation in Europe
to include such an amendment in its constitution.
2006
January 26
A bill establishing registered partnerships (registrova-
ne´ho partnerstvı´) for Czech same-sex couples passes
the Senate by a vote of 65 to 14. The bill had earlier
passed the Chamber of Deputies by a vote of 86 to
54 on December 16, 2005. The bill was then vetoed
by President Va´clav Klaus.
March 15
The Czech Chamber of Deputies overturns President
Va´clav Klaus’s veto of the registered partnership act
by a vote of 101 to 76, exactly the number required
for an override. The new law goes into effect on July 1,
2006.
March 30
The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court relies on a
1913 law to rule that out-of-state couples may not be
124
Chronology

issued marriage licenses if they are not eligible to
marry in their own states.
May 18
Legislation permitting adoption by same-sex couples
is approved in Belgium. The law becomes effective
on June 20.
July 6
The New York Court of Appeals, the state’s highest
court, rules that the state constitution does not guar-
antee same-sex couples the right to marry.
July 23
Same-sex civil unions become legal in Slovenia.
October 25 The New Jersey Supreme Court rules that same-sex
couples are entitled to legal recognition equivalent
to that of heterosexual marriage. In a four-to-three
vote, the justices order the state legislature to estab-
lish some sort of equivalent legal entity, whether it
be called marriage, civil union, or domestic partner-
ship. The three dissenting justices do so because they
would go even further and require that same-sex cou-
ples be allowed to marry in the state.
November Voters in Arizona reject a constitutional amendment
that would have banned same-sex marriages in the
state. Voters in eight other states adopt such an
amendment, and Arizona voters reconsider their
decision in 2008.
The Israeli Supreme Court rules that same-sex cou-
ples married in other nations are entitled to the same
legal beneﬁts as those available to opposite-sex cou-
ples married overseas.
November
9
For the ﬁrst time anywhere in the country, Mexico
City approves a law establishing civil unions for
same-sex couples living within the city.
November
14
The South African parliament approves by a vote of
230 to 41 legislation approving same-sex marriage in
the nation. The action is the ﬁrst of its kind on the
Chronology
125

November
14 (cont.)
African continent and takes effect on December 1,
2006.
2007
January
The Mexico state of Coahuila establishes a category of
civil pact of solidarity (pacto civil de solidaridad) for
same-sex couples.
January 3
The Alaska Supreme Court rules that the state is
required to provide the same beneﬁts to same-sex
couples in its employ as it does to opposite-sex cou-
ples. Governor Sarah Palin says she disagrees with
the ruling, but will comply with it.
February
The Italian government of Prime Minister Romano
Prodi approves a bill creating a form of union called
“rights and duties of stable co-habitants” (diritti e
doveri delle persone stabilmente conviventi). The
government falls before the Senate, under the strong
inﬂuence of the Roman Catholic Church and
conservative politicians, is able to act on the bill. As
of mid-2010, Italy has not yet adopted any form of
matrimonial arrangement for same-sex couples.
February 7 Rhode Island state attorney general Patrick C. Lynch
issues an advisory opinion to the effect that the state
should recognize marriages performed in neighbor-
ing Massachusetts. Observers anticipate that the
opinion may presage the state’s passage of its own
laws permitting same-sex marriage.
June 14
Massachusetts legislators vote to uphold its 2004
decision to approve same-sex marriage, making it
impossible for further actions against that policy until
2012.
July
A proposal to legalize same-sex marriage in Luxem-
bourg is defeated by a vote of 38 to 22 in the national
legislature.
July 22
A law establishing domestic partnerships for same-
sex couples takes effect in Washington State.
126
Chronology

December
19
Uruguay becomes the ﬁrst nation in Latin America to
grant same-sex couples rights similar to those of
opposite-sex marriage, an arrangement known as a
cohabitation union (convivencia unio´n).
2008
January 1
A law establishing civil unions for same-sex couples
goes into effect in New Hampshire. (Also see 2010.)
February 1 A law creating domestic partnerships for same-sex
couples takes effect in Oregon. The law was passed
by the state legislature in May 2007.
May 8
The Michigan Supreme Court rules that local govern-
ments and public colleges and universities are
not allowed to offer same-sex couples the same bene-
ﬁts available to opposite-sex couples because of
voters’ earlier approval of a constitutional amend-
ment banning marriage between two people of the
same sex.
May 15
The California Supreme Court, in the case of In re:
Marriage Cases, rules that the state’s ban on same-sex
marriage violates the state’s constitutional guarantee
of equality for all citizens. (Also see November 4,
2008.)
June
The Norwegian parliament approves same-sex mar-
riage with a vote of 23 to 17 in the upper house and
84 to 41 in the lower house.
June 23
Largely through the efforts of the Roman Catholic
Church, the senate of Colombia defeats a bill to legal-
ize same-sex relationships.
July 1
A limited form of domestic partnership between
same-sex couples becomes legal in Maryland.
August 19
The legislature of Argentina adopts legislation
allowing one member of a same-sex couple to become
eligible for a deceased partner’s pension.
Chronology
127

August 30
District Court justice Robert B. Hanson, in Polk
County, Iowa, rules that the state’s ban on same-sex
marriage (Iowa Code §595.2[1]) is unconstitutional,
and that same-sex couples are allowed to marry in
the state. (Also see 2009.)
September The people of Ecuador adopt a new constitution for
the nation with a vote of 63.9 percent to 36.1 percent.
The new constitution makes it legal for same-sex cou-
ples to form civil unions.
September
18
The Maryland Court of Appeals rules on a four-to-
three vote that the state’s ban on same-sex marriages
does not violate the state’s constitutional guarantees
of equal treatment for all citizens.
October
The Portuguese Assembly of the Republic defeats a
proposal to permit same-sex marriage by a vote of
196 to 28. (But see also April 2010.)
October 10 The Supreme Court of Connecticut rules that the state
constitution guarantees same-sex couples equal right
to marriage. The ﬁrst same-sex marriages in the state
are performed on November 12.
November Voters in Arizona change their mind (see 2006) and
approve a constitutional amendment banning same-
sex marriage in the state.
November
4
Voters in California, Arizona, and Florida adopt con-
stitutional amendments deﬁning marriage as a con-
tract between one man and one woman.
November
19
The Supreme Court of Nepal orders the national
legislature to adopt legislation permitting marriage
between two persons of the same sex.
2009
January 28
The Colombian Supreme Court rules that same-sex
couples are entitled to virtually all of the same legal
rights as opposite-sex couples (adoption being an
exception).
128
Chronology

March
The Nigerian House of Representatives adopts a bill
by unanimous vote (360 to 0) banning marriage and
all marriage-like institutions between individuals of
the same sex. The bill has widespread provisions, call-
ing for prison terms of up to ﬁve years not only for
anyone who attempts to marry or join in a union with
someone of the same sex, but also for anyone who per-
forms, aids, abets, or witnesses such a ceremony or for
anyone who has any type of association whatsoever
with any type of same-sex organization or for anyone
who is involved in “amorous displays” between
same-sex individuals either in public or in private.
April
The Swedish parliament votes 261 to 22 to legalize
same-sex marriage in the country. The bill goes into
effect on May 1, 2009.
April 3
The Iowa Supreme Court afﬁrms an earlier ruling by
district judge Robert B. Hanson, declaring the state’s
ban on same-sex marriage to be unconstitutional.
(Also see 2007.)
April 7
Same-sex marriage becomes legal in Vermont.
April 20
The parliament of Hungary passes a bill legalizing
registered partnerships for same-sex couples.
May 6
The state legislature passes and Governor John Bal-
dacci signs a law extending full marriage rights to
same-sex couples in Maine. (See also November 4.)
May 18
The Washington State legislature passes and Governor
Chris Gregoire signs an “everything-but-marriage” bill
that grants same-sex couples all legal rights available to
opposite-sex couples, with the one exception of the
name given to the entity. (Also see November 4.)
May 26
The California Supreme Court upholds the results of
the November 4, 2008, vote on Proposition 8, a consti-
tutional amendment deﬁning marriage as a contract
between one man and one woman.
Chronology
129

May 31
The legislature of Nevada overrides governor Jim
Gibbons’s veto of an act providing domestic partner-
ships for same-sex couples.
June 3
The New Hampshire legislature passes and governor
John Lynch signs a bill legalizing same-sex marriage.
The bill takes effect on January 1, 2010.
June 26
Ireland grants the right of registered partnership,
with most of the same privileges associated with
opposite-sex marriages, to same-sex couples.
July 1
Hungary’s same-sex registered partnership law goes
into effect.
August 3
Domestic partnerships for same-sex couples with
limited legal beneﬁts become available in Wisconsin.
October 22 The synod (ruling body) of the Swedish Lutheran
Church, the nation’s largest denomination, votes to
participate in same-sex marriage ceremonies begin-
ning on November 1, 2009.
November
4
Voters in Maine overturn the state legislature’s act
permitting same-sex marriage.
Voters in Washington State decline to overturn the
state’s “everything-but-marriage” law, making the
state the sixth state in the union to provide same-sex
couples with rights equal to those of opposite-sex
couples (except for the name of the entity).
November
13
A local court in Buenos Aires, Argentina, rules that
two men must be issued a marriage license. (Also
see December 1.)
December
Both houses of the Austrian parliament vote to estab-
lish registered partnerships for same-sex couples by
votes of 44 to 8 and 110 to 64.
December
1
The Buenos Aires city council rules that the marriage of
Alex Freyre and Jose´ Marı´a Di Bello (see November 13)
130
Chronology

must be placed on hold until the nation’s supreme
court rules on the legality of the marriage license
granted the couple.
December
15
The District of Columbia city council votes to
approve legislation granting equal marriage rights to
same-sex couples.
December
22
The Mexico City assembly passes legislation, by a
vote of 39 to 20, granting same-sex couples the right
to marry and to adopt children. The new law changes
the deﬁnition of marriage as the union of a man and a
woman to “the free uniting of two people.”
December
28
Alex Freyre and Jose´ Marı´a Di Bello (see December 1)
are married in a private civil ceremony in the registry
ofﬁce at Usuhaia, the capital of Tierra del Fuego prov-
ince, Argentina.
2010
January
A Russian court rules that two women married in
Canada cannot be considered to be legally married
in Russia since the Russian constitution does not rec-
ognize marriage between two individuals of the same
gender.
January 7
By a vote of 20 to 14, the New Jersey state senate
rejects a proposal to legalize same-sex marriage.
January 8
The parliament of Portugal votes 125 to 99 to legalize
same-sex marriage, making the nation the sixth coun-
try in Europe to approve same-sex marriage.
February
10
The Australian Senate votes 45 to 5 against a proposal
to legalize same-sex marriage. The action is taken
despite current polls showing that Australians
approve granting marriage rights to same-sex cou-
ples by a majority of 60 percent to 36 percent.
March 3
A law for a new family code, which recognizes the
right of same-sex couples to marry and adopt chil-
dren, passes its ﬁrst reading in the Slovenia
parliament
Chronology
131

March 8
Judge Felix Gustavo de Igarzabal of Buenos Aires
declares the marriage between Alex Freyre and Jose´
Marı´a Di Bello (see December 28, 2009) null and void.
The couple is ordered to turn in their marriage license
or face a ﬁne.
May
Reporters learn that Revered George Alan Rekers, a
founder of the anti-same-sex marriage Family
Research Council, has hired a male escort from
rentboy.com to accompany him on a ten-day trip to
Europe. Rekers explains that he needed someone to
carry his luggage.
May 18
Representative Mark Souder (R-IN), a vocal oppo-
nent of same-sex marriage, resigns his post in the
U.S. Congress because of the revelation of his extra-
marital affair with a staffer.
May 18
Portuguese President Anibal Cavaco Silva announces
that he will sign pending legislation to legalize same-
sex marriage, making Portugal the sixth nation in
Europe to permit such arrangements.
132
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
T
his chapter contains brief biographical sketches of some indi-
viduals who have been important ﬁgures in the history of
same-sex marriage and adoption. The majority of these
individuals are not world-famous politicians, scientists, lawyers,
or other renowned ﬁgures. Instead, they tend to be rather ordi-
nary men and women who, at some time in their lives, decided
that they wanted to work for equal civil rights available to their
heterosexual friends and neighbors. Because they are often not
otherwise famous, their biographical information may be some-
one limited. But they are included in the chapter because the
actions they took moved forward the struggle for equal treatment
for lesbians and gay men at some point in the history of that
effort. Biographies of some individuals who have worked against
equal civil rights in marriage and adoption are also included.
Barry T. Albin (1952–)
Albin wrote the majority opinion in the case of Lewis v. Harris (908
A.2d 196) in 2006, an opinion that held that withholding a
marriage license from a same-sex couple violated the New Jersey
state constitution. The court ruled that the state had to either issue
such marriage licenses or ﬁnd some alternative legal entity that
provided same-sex couples with exactly the same rights as those
enjoyed by married opposite-sex couples. The ruling was unani-
mous, although three justices wrote a dissenting opinion that
argued that the court erred in simply not requiring the state to
recognize same-sex marriages in the state.
133

Barry T. Albin was born in Brooklyn, New York, on July 7,
1952. He attended Rutgers College, from which he received his
bachelor’s degree in 1973, and Cornell Law School, which awarded
him his JD in 1976. After graduation, he accepted an appointment
as deputy attorney general in the Appellate Section of the New
Jersey Division of Criminal Justice, where he served until 1978. He
then became assistant prosecutor in Passaic and Middlesex
Counties, a post he held until 1982. He then joined the law ﬁrm of
Wilentz, Goldman & Spitzer, in Woodridge, New Jersey, where he
was named a partner four years later. During his tenure at Wilentz,
Albin was elected president of the New Jersey Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers and chosen by his peers to be listed in
the “Best Lawyers in America” publication for 2000–2001.
In July 2002, governor James E. McGreevey nominated Albin
for a seven-year term on the New Jersey Supreme Court. He was
conﬁrmed by the state senate on September 12, 2002. On May 15,
2009, governor Jon Corzine renominated Albin for a permanent
position on the court, a nomination that was conﬁrmed by the state
senate on June 26, 2009. As a result of that action, Albin is eligible to
remain on the court until he reaches mandatory retirement age of
70 in 2022.
Jack Baker (1942–)
Jack Baker and his life partner, Michael McConnell, were among
the ﬁrst same-sex couples in the United States to apply for a
marriage license. They made that application on May 18, 1970, at
the ofﬁces of the Hennepin County (Minnesota) Clerk of Court’s
ofﬁce. They were denied that application and eventually sued the
county on the grounds that they were being discriminated against
on the basis of their gender. They lost that case in district court and
again before the Minnesota Supreme Court. Finally, the U.S.
Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal of the case on the
grounds that it did not involve any substantial federal question.
The decision issued by the Minnesota Supreme Court in Baker
v. Nelson is generally regarded as one of the most inﬂuential court
opinions on same-sex marriage, one that is still cited by courts today.
Jack Baker was born Richard John Baker in 1942. He attended
the University of Minnesota, where he became politically active
early in his career as a student. He was one of the founding
members and a president of the group Fight Repression of Erotic
134
Biographical Sketches

Expression (FREE), often called the ﬁrst student gay group in the
United States. The group was established a month before the
Stonewall riots in New York City in 1969. In 1971, Baker ran for
student body president in a campaign in which he appeared in
high-heeled shoes with the slogan, “Put Yourself in Jack Baker’s
Shoes.” To the surprise of almost everyone, he was elected and
then, a year later, reelected, an accomplishment that no other stu-
dent body president had achieved at Minnesota. Baker eventually
earned his law degree from Minnesota in 1972. He then formed
his own law ﬁrm in south Minneapolis, where he continued to
work for more than 30 years.
In addition to his legal practice, Baker continued his work as a
gay activist. Unable to obtain the marriage license they sought,
Baker and McConnell decided to pursue another avenue, adult
adoption. In August 1972, McConnell legally adopted Baker in
Hennepin County. The action is generally thought to have been
the ﬁrst action of its kind by two adults of the same sex. The action
brought Baker and McConnell a few of the legal rights usually
reserved to opposite-sex couples, such as inheritance rights and
reduced university fees at Minnesota, where they were both still
students at the time. Also in 1971, Baker and McConnell applied
for a marriage license a second time, this time in Mankato (Blue
Earth County). With the license, they were married in Minneapolis
by the Rev. Roger Lynn, a minister in the Methodist Church. Baker
and McConnell relied on this marriage to ﬁle joint federal tax
returns until 2004, when the Internal Revenue Service rejected their
ﬁling because of the newly passed Defense of Marriage Act.
As of 2010, Baker and McConnell continue to live in South
Minneapolis.
Bob Barr (1948–)
Barr introduced the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) in the U.S.
House of Representatives on May 7, 1996. The act deﬁnes
marriage as a contract between one man and one woman, and
gives all states, territories, possessions, and Indian tribes the right
to ignore legal recognition of same-sex marriages, civil unions,
domestic partnerships, and other arrangements enacted in other
states, essentially excusing those governmental entities from the
legal provisions of the Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Consti-
tution. In 2004, Barr changed his position on same-sex marriage
Biographical Sketches
135

and testiﬁed before Congress in support of the Respect for
Marriage Act, a bill to revoke DOMA.
Robert Laurence Barr Jr. was born in Iowa City, Iowa, on
November 5, 1948. As a member of a military family, Barr moved
frequently during his childhood, attending schools in Iraq,
Malaysia, Pakistan, Panama, and Peru, before ﬁnally graduating
from the Community High School in Teheran, Iran, in 1956. He
then matriculated at the University of Southern California
(USC), from which he received his bachelor’s degree in 1970.
Originally a liberal Democrat, Barr changed his political views at
USC, eventually adopting a strongly conservative position that
informed most of the rest of his political career.
Barr continued his educational career at George Washington
University, from which he received his MA in international affairs
in 1972 and at Georgetown University, which awarded him his JD
in 1977. Barr then worked brieﬂy as an analyst at the Central Intel-
ligence Agency (CIA) before moving to Georgia and becoming
politically active. After a failed run to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives, he was appointed U.S. Attorney for the Northern District
of Georgia by President Ronald Reagan in 1986, a post he held
until 1990. Barr ran for the House of Representatives again in
1994, this time defeating six-term Democrat Buddy Darden for
the seat in Georgia’s seventh congressional district (north-central
Georgia). Largely as the result of redistricting, Barr lost his seat
in the election of 2002.
Since leaving Congress, Barr has been increasingly critical of
the Republican Party and its policies. In 2006 he ofﬁcially left the
party and became a member of the Libertarian Party and in 2008
was the party’s nominee for president of the United States. Barr
remains an active spokesperson for many libertarian and
conservative causes. He now practices law at the ﬁrm of Edwin
Marger and operates a consulting ﬁrm, Liberty Strategies, Inc.,
both in Atlanta, Georgia.
David Boies (1941–)
Boies was paired with attorney Ted Olson representing the
plaintiffs in the 2009 court case, Perry v. Schwarzenegger, that chal-
lenged the outcome of the November 2008 vote on Proposition 8,
a constitutional amendment deﬁning marriage as a legal institution
between one man and one woman. The decision of Boies and Olson
136
Biographical Sketches

to work together on this case was the subject of considerable
comment because the two men represent opposite poles of the legal
spectrum and, in fact, argued the opposing sides in the 2000 U.S.
Supreme Court case of Bush v. Gore, which determined the outcome
of the 2000 U.S. presidential election.
David Boies was born in Sycamore, Illinois, on March 11, 1941.
His family moved to California while Boies was still in high school,
and he eventually graduated from Fullerton High School, in
Fullerton, California. Boies then attended the University of
Redlands, in Redlands, California, and Northwestern University,
in Evanston, Illinois, from which he received his bachelor’s degree
in 1964. He the continued his education at Yale Law School, where
he earned his LLB in 1966 and at the New York University School
of Law, which awarded his LLM in 1967.
After graduating from Yale, Boies joined the law ﬁrm of
Cravath, Swaine & Moore, in New York City, where he remained
until 1997. He was made a partner in the ﬁrm in 1973. In 1997, Boies
left Cravath, Swaine & Moore to found his own ﬁrm, Boies, Schiller
& Flexner LLP, where he continues to work. Boies has also served
brieﬂy in the federal government, ﬁrst as chief counsel and staff
director of the United States Senate Antitrust Subcommittee in
1978, and then as chief counsel and staff director of the United
States Senate Judiciary Committee in 1979. Boies was named Law-
yer of the Year by Time magazine in 2000 and was awarded an
honorary doctor of laws degree by New York University in 2007.
Boies has been married three times and is the father of six children.
Mary Bonauto (1961–)
Bonauto was lead attorney in the case of Goodrich v. Department of
Public Health in 2004 in which the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court ruled that the state could not withhold marriage licenses
from same-sex couples. She was also very active in the 2009
campaign to uphold the Maine state legislature’s passage of an
act legalizing same-sex marriage in that state, a campaign that
ultimately failed in the November election on the issue.
Mary Bonauto was born in Newburgh, New York, in 1961.
She attended Hamilton College in Clinton, New York, from which
she received her bachelor’s degree in comparative literature and
history in 1983. It was at Hamilton that she realized she was
attracted to women and came out on campus as a lesbian. She
Biographical Sketches
137

continued her studies at the Northeastern University School of
Law in Boston, where she earned her JD in 1987. Northeastern
has a cooperative studies program in which students alternate
their time between academic courses on campus and professional
training in the ﬁeld of their choice. During this period, Bonauto
worked at the Public Protection Bureau of the Ofﬁce of the Massa-
chusetts Attorney General; the Divorce Unit of Greater Boston
Legal Services; the law ﬁrm of Julian & Olsen, in Madison,
Wisconsin; and the law ﬁrm of Sugarman & Sugarman, in Boston.
Bonauto’s ﬁrst job after graduation from Northeastern was
with Mittle & Herrernan, a small law ﬁrm in Portland, Maine. In
1989, she was hired for a new position with Gay & Lesbian Advo-
cates & Defenders (GLAD) in which she would be responsible for
enforcing a new Massachusetts law prohibiting discrimination in
jobs, housing, and public accommodation on the basis of sexual
orientation. She has remained with GLAD ever since, currently
serving as Civil Rights Project Director of the organization. She
lives in Portland, Maine, with her partner of 19 years, Jennifer
Wriggins, and their ﬁve-year-old twin daughters.
John E. Boswell (1947–94)
Boswell was one of the world’s preeminent students of the history
of same-sex relationships. In his book Same-Sex Unions in Premo-
dern Europe (Villard Books, 1994), he argued that same-sex unions
were relatively common during the period explored in the book
(the eighth to sixteenth century) and were routinely blessed by
the Roman Catholic Church. Although this thesis was strongly
criticized by a number of scholars, Boswell’s evidence for his con-
tention is very strong indeed. It has, in any case, caused scholars
to take a new and very different view of same-sex relationships,
especially among members of the clergy in the Catholic church,
during the Middle Ages.
John Eastburn Boswell was born in Boston on March 20, 1947,
to Catharine and Colonel Henry Boswell Jr. He attended the Col-
lege of William and Mary, from which he received his bachelor’s
degree in 1969, and Harvard University, which granted Boswell
his PhD in 1975. He then joined the faculty of history at Yale
University, where he was appointed full professor with tenure in
1982. He was named A. Whitney Griswold Professor of History
in 1990. Boswell was an extraordinary philologist, with a mastery
138
Biographical Sketches

of 17 languages, including ancient Latin and Greek; Arabic;
Catalan; Church Slavonic; Old Icelandic; and classical Armenian,
Syriac, and Persian. In addition to Same-Sex Unions in Premodern
Europe, Boswell authored a number of other ground-breaking
books, including The Royal Treasure: Muslim Communities Under
the Crown of Aragon in the Fourteenth Century (1977); Christianity,
Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality (1980); Rediscovering Gay History:
Archetypes of Gay Love in Christian History (1982); The Kindness of
Strangers: The Abandonment of Children in Western Europe from Late
Antiquity to the Renaissance (1989); Homosexuality in the Priesthood
and the Religious Life (1991; coauthor); and Forms of Desire: Sexual
Orientation and the Social Constructionist Controversy (1992).
Boswell converted from Episcopalian to Roman Catholic at
the age of 16 and devoted much of his scholarship to demonstrat-
ing that the Roman Catholic Church was not historically opposed
to same-sex relationships. In addition to his signiﬁcant research
contributions, he was highly regarded as a teacher, with his
course in medieval history consistently receiving ratings among
the 10 most popular at Yale. In 1987, Boswell was one of the
founders of the Lesbian and Gay Studies Center at Yale, now the
Research Fund for Lesbian and Gay Studies. He died in New
Haven, Connecticut, on December 24, 1994, as the result of
complications of AIDS.
Chris Bryant (1962–)
Bryant is a member of parliament for the Labour Party from the
Rhondda district of Wales. He and his partner, Jared Cranney,
made history in March 2010, when they were joined in a civil part-
nership in the Houses of Parliament, the ﬁrst such event in British
history.
Christopher John Bryant was born on January 11, 1962, in Car-
diff, Wales, to a Scottish mother and a Welsh father, who was a
computer engineer. He grew up in Wales, Spain, and England as
his father moved from job to job. He attended Cheltenham College,
in Cheltenham, England, and matriculated at Mansﬁeld College,
Oxford, from which he earned a BA in English in 1983. He later
earned his master’s degree at Oxford also. He then enrolled at
Ripon College, in Cuddesdon, Oxfordshire, where he studied for
the priesthood, earning his degree in theology. He was ordained a
priest of the Anglican Church in December 1986 and spent two
Biographical Sketches
139

years as curate at All Saints parish, High Wycombe. He then was
youth chaplain for the diocese of Peterborough, where he
remained until leaving the priesthood in 1991. He is said to have
been concerned about the problems of being openly gay and a
member of the priesthood.
After leaving the church, Bryant decided to pursue a career in
politics, working at ﬁrst as an election agent for the Labour Party in
the Holborn and St. Pancras constituency. He also pursued a career
in writing, publishing biographies of Sir Stafford Cripps and
Glenda Jackson. In his ﬁrst run for a seat in parliament, he was
narrowly defeated for the seat from Wycombe in the 1997 election.
Three years later, however, he was selected to run for the safe
Labour seat in Rhondda, a post he has held ever since. Over the
past decade, Bryant has held a number of leadership positions in
Labour governments, including parliamentary private secretary
to the Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs; deputy leader
of the House of Commons; Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs; and, most recently, Minister of State for
Europe. Bryant and Cranney have been together since 2008.
Charles J. Cooper (1952–)
Cooper was lead attorney for the defense in the 2009–10 trial,
Perry v. Schwarzenegger, that challenged the outcome of the
November 2008 vote on Proposition 8. That proposition offered
a constitutional amendment limiting marriage in California to
opposite-sex couples. Cooper was at the time, and remains, a
founding member and senior partner at the ﬁrm Cooper & Kirk,
PLLC.
Charles J. Cooper was born in Dayton, Ohio, on March 8,
1952. He attended the University of Alabama at Birmingham,
from which he received his BS in business administration in
1974. He then continued his studies at the University of Alabama
School of Law, where he earned his JD in 1977. He was ﬁrst in his
class academically and editor of the school law review. After
graduation, Cooper took a job as law clerk to judge Paul Roney,
judge of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
(1977–78) and then as law clerk for Justice William H. Rehnquist,
of the U.S. Supreme Court (1978–79). Cooper then joined the Civil
Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice, where he
remained until 1985. He was then appointed assistant attorney
140
Biographical Sketches

general in the Ofﬁce of Legal Counsel at the Department of
Justice, a post he held until 1988. He then returned to private
practice with the Washington, DC, ﬁrm of McGuire Woods. After
two years at McGuire Woods, he joined the ﬁrm of Shaw, Pittman,
Potts & Trowbridge, where he was a partner and head of the
ﬁrm’s Constitutional and Government Litigation Group. In 1996,
he became one of the founding members of Cooper & Kirk, PLLC.
Cooper has been named by the National Law Journal as one of the
10 best civil litigators in the nation.
Irwin Cotler (1940–)
Cotler is member of parliament in the Canadian parliament for
the district of Mount Royal, in Quebec, Canada. In February 2005,
Cotler introduced bill C-38 to the House of Commons, a bill legal-
izing marriage between couples of the same sex in Canada. That
bill passed in the House on June 28, 2005, in the Senate on July 19,
2005, after which it received Royal Assent from Queen Elizabeth
II on the following day.
Irwin Cotler was born in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, on
May 8, 1940. He attended McGill University in Montreal, from
which he received his BA in 1961 and his law degree in 1964. He
then continued his studies at Yale University before accepting an
appointment as professor of law at McGill, where he also served
as director of the university’s Human Rights Program. He sub-
sequently was visiting professor of law at Harvard University
and Woodrow Wilson Fellow at Yale. In 1999, he was elected to
the House of Commons with probably the largest margin of
victory in Canadian history, winning 92 percent of the total vote.
In 2003, he was appointed Minister of Justice and Attorney
General of Canada, a post he held until the fall of the Liberal Party
in the election of 2006. He continues to serve as a member of
parliament while on leave of absence from McGill.
Cotler may be best known for his work in international human
rights cases, where he has served as council for a number of
individuals best known for their struggle in that area, individuals
such as Nelson Mandela, Andrei Sakharov, Nathan Sharansky,
Indonesian trade union leader Muchtar Pakpahan, Nigerian play-
wright and Nobel Laureate Wole Soyinka, Bangladeshi journalist
Shoaib Choudhury, and Chinese-Canadian political prisoner,
KunLun Zhang.
Biographical Sketches
141

Dennis Damon (1948–)
Damon is a state senator who introduced legislation in January
2009 to legalize same-sex marriage in the state of Maine. The legis-
lation later went on to be approved by the state house and
senate and was signed by Governor John Baldacci on May 6,
2009. On November 4, 2009, the voters of Maine passed an initia-
tive petition that revoked the act, leaving same-sex marriage ille-
gal in the state.
Dennis Damon was born in Bar Harbor, Maine, on December
21, 1948. He earned his BS degree in education at the University of
Maine at Orono in 1971 and then taught school for 14 years, ﬁrst in
Orono and then at Mount Desert High School. In 1985 he left teach-
ing to become vice president of the Norumbeja Moving and Storage
Company. Two years later, he opened his own company, Mount
Desert Spring Water Company, which he ran for 10 years. In addi-
tion to his current senate seat, Damon has also been special project
consultant to the Bureau of Rehabilitation Services of the Maine
Department of Labor since 2001.
Damon served for one year as Hancock County Commis-
sioner (1992) before being elected as a Democrat to the state senate
in 2002. He was reelected in 2004, 2006, and 2008, which he says is
his last term in the senate. In the senate he has served as chair of the
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources, the Joint Standing
Committee on Transportation, and a number of joint select
committees, most recently the Joint Select Committee on Property
Tax Reform. In introducing bill LD 1020, “An Act to End Discrimi-
nation in Civil Marriage and Afﬁrm Religious Freedom,” Damon
noted that “[r]arely do we as legislators have the opportunity and
the privilege to introduce legislation that so wholly corrects
discrimination and provides the means for us to move forward as
a civil society bound by laws.”
Damon currently resides in Trenton, Maine, with his wife
and three children.
James Dobson (1936–)
Dobson is an American evangelical Christian who founded the
organization Focus on the Family in 1977. The purpose of Focus on
the Family is to nurture and defend the traditional heterosexual
142
Biographical Sketches

family consisting of a husband, wife, and children. He served as
chair of the organization until his resignation in 2003. He also
founded the Family Research Council, an organization that pro-
motes traditional marriage and the traditional heterosexual family,
in 1981. Dobson has long taken a strong stand against same-sex rela-
tionships and the promotion of civil rights for gay men and lesbians.
On one occasion, he stated that “[h]omosexuals are not monoga-
mous. They want to destroy the institution of marriage. It will
destroy marriage. It will destroy the Earth” (The Daily Oklahoman,
October 23, 2004).
James Clayton Dobson Jr. was born in Shreveport, Louisiana,
on April 21, 1936. His father, grandfather, and great-grandfather
were all ministers in the Church of the Nazarene, so religion was
an essential part of his life from his childhood. He said that he
responded to a call from his father at the altar at the age of three,
when he promised to devote his life to the Christian church. He
attended the Church of the Nazarene’s Pasadena College (now
the Point Loma Nazarene College), where he earned his bache-
lor’s degree in psychology. He then continued his studies at the
University of Southern California (USC), which granted him his
PhD in child psychology in 1967. After his graduation, Dobson
was offered a position as associate professor of pediatrics at the
USC school of medicine. Concurrently he served on the staff of
the division of child development at Children’s Hospital in Los
Angeles.
In 1970, Dobson published his ﬁrst book, Dare to Discipline,
which has since sold more than two million copies. The book
encouraged parents to use corporal punishment on their children
in order to enforce an appropriate moral standard. The book was
the ﬁrst of a number of books that became very popular among
evangelical and conservative Christians, including Hide or Seek
(1974), What Wives Wish Their Husbands Knew About Women
(1975), Preparing for Adolescence (1978), and The Strong-Willed Child
(1978). Since then, Dobson has written dozens more books,
pamphlets, brochures, and other materials. In 1977, he founded
Focus on the Family, an organization that he headed for the next
26 years. In the same year, he began his radio program of the same
name that began as a 15-minute broadcast and eventually
expanded to a half-hour program.
Dobson resigned as president and CEO of Focus on the Family
in 2003, although he continues to host his radio program and to
write for the organization’s newsletter.
Biographical Sketches
143

William N. Eskridge, Jr. (1951–)
Eskridge is currently John A. Garver Professor of Jurisprudence at
Yale Law School, in New Haven, Connecticut. He has written
extensively about the history and legal aspects of same-sex mar-
riage and has testiﬁed on a number of occasions in legal proceed-
ings dealing with same-sex marriage. He is author and coauthor
of two important books on the subject of gay marriage, The Case
for Same-Sex Marriage: From Sexual Liberty to Civilized Commitment
(The Free Press, 1996) and Gay Marriage: For Better or for Worse?:
What We’ve Learned from the Evidence (with Darren R. Spedale;
Oxford University Press, 2006).
William N. Eskridge Jr. was born on October 27, 1951, in Prince-
ton, West Virginia. He attended Davidson College, from which he
received his bachelor’s degree in history summa cum laude in
1973. He then attended Harvard University, from which he earned
his MA in history in 1974 and Yale University, which granted him
his JD in 1978. He then served for one year as law clerk for Judge
Edward Weinfeld and attorney with the ﬁrm of Shea & Gardner
before accepting an appointment as assistant professor of law at
the University of Virginia in 1982. He moved to Georgetown Univer-
sity, where he served as associate professor (1987–90) and professor
(1990–98) of law before returning to Yale as John A. Garver Professor
of Jurisprudence. Eskridge has also served as visiting professor of
law at New York University (1993), Harvard University (1994), Stan-
ford University (1995), and Yale University (1995). He has written a
dozen books in addition to The Case for Same-Sex Marriage and Gay
Marriage, and nearly 100 refereed papers on a variety of issues,
including same-sex marriage. One of those papers, “A History of
Same-Sex Marriage” (Virginia Law Review, volume 79, 1993), is one
of the most comprehensive reviews of the subject currently avail-
able. Eskridge has also testiﬁed before a number of legislative bodies
in the United States and Canada on a variety of issues, including
same-sex marriage, asbestos compensation, ethics in government,
military sales to Pakistan, and adjustable rate mortgages.
Maggie Gallagher (1960–)
Gallagher is a writer and political organizer who has advocated
against the right of same-sex couples to marry. She is the president
of two groups organized to work against the legalization of same-
144
Biographical Sketches

sex marriage, the National Organization for Marriage (NOM) and
the Institute for Marriage and Public Policy (IMPP). In the 2009
New York Senate debate over the legalization of same-sex
marriage in the state, NOM spent over $600,000 on behalf of the
antimarriage position.
Margaret Gallagher was born on September 16, 1960, in Lake
Oswego, Oregon. She attended Lakeridge High School in Lake
Oswego before matriculating at Yale University. At Yale, she was
a member of the conservative Party of the Right of the Yale Political
Union. She received her bachelor’s degree in religious studies from
Yale in 1982.
Gallagher ﬁrst became well known as the result of an anony-
mous editorial she wrote for the New York Times in September 1992.
Entitled “An Unwed Mother for Quayle,” Gallagher explained in
her piece why she supported the position about women who have
children out of wedlock Quayle had taken in criticizing the Murphy
Brown television program. Gallagher later married Raman Srivastav,
with whom she is raising her two children.
In an August 2003 article in the journal Weekly Standard,
Gallagher explained her objection to same-sex marriage. The prob-
lem with same-sex marriage, she said, “is not that it would allow a
handful of people to choose alternative family forms, but that it
would require society at large to gut marriage of its central
presumptions about family in order to accommodate a few adults’
desires.” Gallagher has authored and coauthored a number of
books in support of her position on same-sex marriage and other
social issues, including The Abolition of Marriage; The Case for
Marriage: Why Married People Are Happier, Healthier, and Better Off
Financially (with Linda Waite); Enemies of Eros: How the Sexual
Revolution Is Killing Family, Marriage, and Sex and What We Can Do
About It; Can Government Strengthen Marriage?: Evidence from the
Social Sciences; and The Age of Unwed Mothers: Is Teen Pregnancy the
Problem?: A Report to the Nation.
Julie Goodridge (1957–)
Goodridge and her partner, Hillary Goodridge, were lead plain-
tiffs in the case Goodridge v. Department of Public Health, which
resulted in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts becoming the
ﬁrst state in the United States to legalize marriage between two
individuals of the same sex. In their complaint, the Goodridges
Biographical Sketches
145

and the 12 other plaintiffs argued that the sole reason the state
would not issue them a marriage license was because of their
sex, and that position violated the equal rights provisions of the
Massachusetts constitution, a position that was eventually upheld
by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in November 2003.
Julie Goodridge was born in Greenwich, Connecticut, on
July 14, 1957. She attended Boston University, from which she
received her BA in philosophy in 1979, and Harvard University,
which granted her an EdM in human development in 1983. After
graduating from Harvard, she worked as a stock broker with
E. F. Hutton and with Merrill Lynch. She later served as vice
president at Dean Witter Reynolds. In 1984, she founded her
own investment ﬁrm, Northstar Asset Management, Inc., with
ofﬁces in Boston. The ﬁrm is dedicated to assisting its clients in
placing their investments in socially responsible corporations.
The ﬁrm’s name was chosen to reﬂect the practice that African-
American slaves escaping from their masters used in following
the North Star to reach their freedom. In carrying out its mission,
Northstar also participates in and contributes to a number of
organizations that work for social justice and change, including
Responsible Wealth, a project of United for a Fair Economy; the
Social Investment Forum; Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders
(GLAD); the Gay, Lesbian, & Straight Education Network
(GLSEN); the Boston Alliance of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and
Transgendered Youth (BAGLY); Boston Women’s Fund; Spontane-
ous Celebrations, an organization devoted to forging relationships
between culturally diverse people; and Mass Equality, an organi-
zation working to achieve full equality for the lesbians, gay men,
bisexuals, and transgendered individuals and to protect marriage
equality in Massachusetts and other New England states.
At the time Goodridge v. Department of Public Health was being
heard, Goodridge and her partner had been together for 19 years
and were parents of a ﬁve-year-old girl. In 2006, two years after
being married, the couple decided to separate and began to begin
“amicably living apart.”
Phyllis Lyon (1924–)
Lyon’s name is inextricably linked with that of Del Martin, her
domestic partner of 56 years. Lyon and Martin founded the Daugh-
ters of Bilitis in 1955, the ﬁrst political and social organization in the
146
Biographical Sketches

United States designed speciﬁcally for lesbians. Throughout their
lives, Lyon and Martin were involved in a number of gay,
lesbian, and feminist organizations, including the Council on
Religion and the Homosexual, whose goal it was to encourage reli-
gious leaders to include gay men and lesbians in church activities,
and the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club, the ﬁrst gay
and lesbian political organization in San Francisco, and still one of
the most inﬂuential such groups in the city.
Phyllis Lyon was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on November 10,
1924. She grew up in Seattle, Southern California, and San
Francisco, graduating from Sacramento High School in 1943. She
then attended the University of California at Berkeley, from which
she received her BA in journalism in 1946. Like many women of
her day, Lyon felt that her life would eventually have to center on
a man. As she told historian John D’Emilio, “If you were a woman,
you had to have a man. There was no other way.” By the 1950s,
however, she learned otherwise. After a stint as a general reporter
for the Chico Enterprise-Record, Lyon moved to Seattle to work on a
trade magazine. There she met Del Martin and fell in love. In 2004,
they were the ﬁrst same-sex couple to be married in San Francisco
after Mayor Gavin Newsom had issued an order permitting
same-sex marriage licenses in the city. Four years later, after the
California Supreme Court ruled that same-sex marriages were
legal in the state, the couple was married a second time.
In 1972, Lyon and Martin coauthored Lesbian/Woman, a book
that discussed lesbian lives in a strongly positive tone, an
approach that was virtually unknown at the time. Publisher’s
Weekly called the book one of the 20 most important women’s
book of its generation. In the last three decades, Lyon has been
especially interested in the topic of human sexuality in general
and, in 1970, cofounded the Institute for Advanced Study of
Human Sexuality in San Francisco, from which she received her
EdD in 1976. She also served on the San Francisco Human Rights
Commission for more than a decade, acting as chairperson for
two of those years.
Richard Malone (1946–)
Malone is bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland,
Maine. He was one of the leading voices in opposition to legisla-
tion legalizing same-sex marriage adopted by the Maine state
Biographical Sketches
147

legislature in Maine. His position on the issue, expressed in
advertisements paid for by the diocese during the repeal cam-
paign, was that same-sex marriage is a “dangerous sociological
experiment that I believe will have negative consequences for
society as a whole. Children will be taught in schools . . . [that
the logical concept that] marriage and reproduction are intrinsi-
cally linked is no longer valid.” Malone said that these are “pro-
found changes that will reverberate throughout society with
tragic consequences.”
Richard Joseph Malone was born in Salem, Massachusetts,
on March 19, 1946. He attended St. John’s Prep, in nearby Danvers,
Massachusetts, and then continued his studies at Cardinal
O’Connell Seminary in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts. He received
his BA in philosophy, his bachelor’s degree in divinity, and a mas-
ter’s degree in theology, all from St. John Seminary, in Boston. In
1981, he was awarded his doctorate in theology (ThD) degree by
Boston University. He then continued his studies at the Weston
Jesuit School of Theology in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where
he was awarded his licentiate in sacred theology in 1990.
Malone was ordained a priest of the Roman Catholic Church
in May 1972. His ﬁrst pastoral assignment was at the St. Patrick
parish in Stoneham, Massachusetts. In 1974, he became a member
of the faculty at St. Clement High School, in Somerville, Massa-
chusetts. Two years later, he was appointed a member of the
faculty and chaplain at the Xaverian High School in Westwood,
Massachusetts. In 1979, he joined the faculty at St. John Seminary,
where he taught religion and theology. During his years at
St. John, Malone also served as chaplain at Wellesley College,
in Wellesley, Massachusetts, and at Regis College, in Weston,
Massachusetts. He later served also as chaplain at the Harvard-
Radcliffe Catholic Student Center, as director of the ofﬁce of
religious education for the archdiocese of Boston, as secretary of
education for the archdiocese, and as auxiliary bishop of Boston
for the south region. In 2004, he was appointed the 11th bishop
of Portland.
Del Martin (1921–2008)
With her longtime domestic partner, Phyllis Lyon, Martin had
been deeply involved in the gay and lesbian political rights
movement for more than half a century. In 1955, Martin and Lyon
148
Biographical Sketches

founded the Daughters of Bilitis, the ﬁrst organization created
to push for political rights of lesbians in the United States. A year
later, they also founded and edited the nation’s ﬁrst lesbian
periodical, The Ladder. The two women were also involved in cre-
ating the Council on Religion and the Homosexual in 1964
and San Francisco’s Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club
in 1972.
Martin was born Dorothy L. Taliaferro in San Francisco on
May 5, 1921. Early in life, she became better known as Del. She
attended George Washington High School in San Francisco before
matriculating at the University of California at Berkeley. She later
transferred to San Francisco State College (now San Francisco
State University), where she met her future husband, James
Martin. She then left San Francisco State, gave birth to a daughter,
Kendra, and moved with her family to the suburbs. Before long,
she realized that her long-standing attraction to women made
her marriage impossible, and she was divorced from Martin
(although she did keep her husband’s surname).
In 1950, Martin moved to Seattle to take a job with a
publisher of construction trade information. There she met Lyon,
who was working with the same company. They made a commit-
ment to each other in 1952 and, in 1955, moved to San Francisco.
There they bought a house where they continued to live for more
than 50 years.
In addition to her political activities, Martin wrote two
important books, Lesbian/Woman (with Lyon) and Battered Wives,
a book that became critical in the development of a national
movement against domestic violence. Martin and Lyon were
married twice, the ﬁrst time in 2004, and again in 2008. She died
in San Francisco on August 27, 2008, as the result of complications
arising from a broken arm that exacerbated her already poor
health.
Michael McConnell (dates not known)
Michael McConnell and his partner, Jack Baker, are generally
recognized as being one of the ﬁrst same-sex couples in the
United States to apply for a marriage license. That application,
to the Clerk of Courts in Hennepin County, Minnesota, was
denied on May 18, 1970. McConnell and Baker then ﬁled suit to
force the county to issue them a marriage license, a case that
Biographical Sketches
149

eventually worked its way to the U.S. Supreme Court, which
declined to hear the case for lack of a “substantial federal ques-
tion.” Baker and McConnell were later granted a marriage license
by a clerk in a different Minnesota county (Blue Earth), which
they used for a marriage conducted in Minneapolis in late 1970.
McConnell was born James Michael McConnell in Oklahoma,
but has always been known simply as Michael McConnell. He
attended the University of Oklahoma, from which he earned his
bachelor of arts degree in library science (with a minor in phar-
macy) in 1967. He then continued his studies at the University of
Minnesota, which granted his master’s degree in library science
in 1968. After graduation, McConnell took a position as technical
services librarian at the Park College Library, in Kansas City,
Missouri, where he was also assistant professor. In 1971, the
regents of the University of Minnesota offered McConnell a post
as instructor and librarian, but then withdrew that offer when they
heard about Baker and McConnell’s efforts to obtain a marriage
license.
After serving for a year as executive director of Youth Services
Coalition, in Minneapolis, McConnell was offered a job with the
Hennepin County Library system, where he served in the technical
services division, as senior librarian in the Southdale-Hennepin
Area Library, as principal librarian at the Rockford Road Commu-
nity Library, as principal librarian for the Near North Cluster, and
as coordinating librarian for the Hennepin County Library system.
McConnell continues to live with his partner, Baker, in South
Minneapolis.
Thomas S. Monson (1927–)
Monson is president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (LSD; Mormons), the 16th man to hold that title in the
denomination. As leader of the church, Monson is, in principle,
responsible for all policies promoted by and practices carried
out by the church. In practice, he is generally assisted by other
members of the First Presidency, the ruling cadre of the church,
consisting of the ﬁrst president himself and his counselors.
During the campaign to pass Proposition 8 (an anti-same-sex
marriage initiative) in California in November 2008, Monson dis-
tributed a letter to members of the church urging them to “do all
you can to support the proposed constitutional amendment by
150
Biographical Sketches

donating of your means and time to assure that marriage in
California is legally deﬁned as being between a man and a
woman.” Ultimately, members of the Mormon church are thought
to have made 48 percent ($15,305,050.17) of the donations to the
“Yes” on Proposition 8 campaign, although they make up only
about 2 percent of the state’s population.
Thomas Spencer Monson was born on August 21, 1927, in Salt
Lake City. He graduated from West High School in Salt Lake City
in 1944 with plans to enroll at the University of Utah. Those plans
were delayed, however, as he was called to service in the U.S.
Navy for the last few months of World War II. After completing
that tour of duty, he ﬁnally enrolled at the University of Utah, from
which he received his bachelor’s degree in business management
in 1948. After leaving college, he received his ﬁrst ofﬁcial appoint-
ment in the church, as a ward bishop and a counselor to the church
bishopric. He also took a job in the advertising department of the
Salt Lake City Deseret News, where he remained until his appoint-
ment as an apostle of the church in 1963. An apostle is the highest
priesthood ofﬁce in the LSD church with the task of acting as “spe-
cial witness of the name of Jesus Christ who is sent to teach the
principles of salvation to others.” Since 1963, Monson has worked
his way up through the hierarchy of the church, serving as chair of
the Scripture Publication Committee, second counselor to ﬁrst
president Ezra Taft Benson, and ﬁrst counselor to ﬁrst president
Gordon B. Hinckley. Upon Hinckley’s death in February 2008,
Monson was elected ﬁrst president of the denomination, a post
he continues to hold.
Marilyn Musgrave (1949–)
Musgrave was formerly a member of the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives from the fourth district of Colorado. In 2003, she introduced
a bill to add an amendment to the U.S. Constitution deﬁning
marriage as a contract between one man and one woman. A similar
bill had been introduced a year earlier by Representative Ronnie
Shows (D-MS). Musgrave was chief sponsor of the so-called
Marriage Amendment again in 2004 and 2005–6.
Musgrave was born Marilyn Neoma Schuler on January 27,
1949, in Greeley, Colorado. She attended Eaton High School, while
working as a waitress and house cleaner to earn money during her
free time. She matriculated at Colorado State University, from
Biographical Sketches
151

which she earned her bachelor’s degree in social studies in 1972.
She and her husband then opened a bale-stacking business in Fort
Morgan, Colorado, while she also taught school full-time. When
the couple began to have children, Musgrave quit working to
spend her time as a full-time wife and mother.
Musgrave’s ﬁrst foray into politics came in 1990 when she
won a seat on the Fort Morgan board of education. One of her
major interests in this position was having the board adopt an
abstinence-only program as its sole sex education program.
During her tenure on the board, she also served as president of
the Fort Morgan Right to Life chapter. In 1992, she successfully
ran for a seat in the Colorado House of Representatives, where
she served three terms before being elected to the Colorado Senate
in 1998. In 2002, Musgrave ran successfully for the U.S. House of
Representatives from the 4th district of Colorado. She was
re-elected in 2004 and 2006, but was defeated for re-election in
2008. During her three terms in the U.S. House, Musgrave was
especially interested in social issues related to same-sex couples,
including adoption, marriage, and civil unions.
In March 2009, Musgrave was chosen by the Susan
B. Anthony List to head an initiative aimed at defeating sitting
members of the U.S. House of Representatives whose voting
record on abortion was inconsistent with the expressed views of
their constituents. She was quoting as deﬁning her task in the ofﬁce
as “We’re going to say very clearly that these votes [on abortion] do
have consequences, and we will use every form of medium to
defeat these people.”
Jerry Nadler (1947–)
Nadler represents the eighth district of New York in the U.S. House
of Representatives. He has long been a strong supporter of many
liberal causes, one of which is same-sex marriage. In 2009, he was
author and primary sponsor of the Uniting American Families
Act, designed to alter immigration laws to be more accessible for
same-sex couples, and the Respect for Marriage Act, an effort to
revoke the Defense of Marriage Act passed in 1996 by the U.S.
Congress and signed by President Bill Clinton.
Jerrold Lewis Nadler was born in Brooklyn, New York, on
June 13, 1947. He graduated from Stuyvesant High School
in 1965 and received his BA from Columbia University in 1969.
152
Biographical Sketches

In 1978, he received his JD from Fordham Law School. His
political career began when he was elected to the New York
State Assembly in 1976, after which he was reelected seven
more times. In 1992, he was selected to run for the U.S. House
of Representatives when the sitting member, Theodore Weiss,
died one day before the primary election, which he was
expected to win handily. Nadler won the general election (in a
district where no member of the Republic Party has been elected
for more than a century) and has been reelected ever since. In
the 111th Congress (2009–11), Nadler served as chair of the Judi-
ciary Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil
Liberties of the U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary. He is a
member of the American Jewish Congress, the American Civil
Liberties Union, the National Abortion Rights Action League,
America’s Pro-Israel Lobby, and the National Organization for
Women.
Theodore Olson (1940–)
Olson and attorney David Boies represented the plaintiffs in a
court case initiated in 2009 to overturn the November 2008 pas-
sage of Proposition 8, amending the California state constitution
to limit marriage to opposite-sex couples. Olson’s role in this case
was the subject of considerable speculation and discussion, since
he has been a life-long Republican with a strong conservative bent
who served as Solicitor General in the administration of President
George W. Bush. He and his partner in this case, David Boies,
were adversaries in the 2000 U.S. Supreme Court case, Bush v.
Gore, that decided the presidential election of that year.
Theodore Bevry Olson was born in Chicago on September 11,
1940. His family moved to California, where Olson eventually
graduated from Los Altos High School in 1958. He then attended
the University of the Paciﬁc, from which he received his bache-
lor’s degree in 1962, and the University of California at Berkeley
law school (Boalt Hall), from which he received his law degree
in 1965. He then accepted a position as attorney at Gibson, Dunn
& Crutcher, a ﬁrm with which he is still afﬁliated. He also served
as assistant attorney general in charge of the Ofﬁce of Legal
Counsel in the U.S. Department of Justice from 1981 to 1984. In
June 2001, Olson took a leave of absence from Gibson, Dunn &
Crutcher to serve as President Bush’s Solicitor General.
Biographical Sketches
153

In July 2004, Olson resigned from that ofﬁce to return to private
practice in the Washington ofﬁce of Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher.
The decision by Olson and Boies to work together on the
same-sex marriage case in California raised a number of eyebrows,
since the two men have long been about as far apart on most legal
issues as two individuals can be. Olson has been quoted as saying,
however, that “on matters of human decency, human rights,
individual rights, fairness, due process and equal rights,” there
are no “liberal” and no “conservative” positions, just a willingness
to do what is right.
Olson has been married four times. His third wife, the former
Barbara Kay Bracher, a television commentator for Fox News, was
killed in the crash of American Airlines Flight 77 on September 11,
2001.
David Paterson (1954–)
Paterson became governor of New York State on March 17, 2008,
replacing former governor Eliot Spitzer, who had resigned because
of personal ethical issues. Paterson became the ﬁrst African-
American governor of the state, and the second legally blind
governor in the United States (after Bob C. Riley, of Arkansas,
who served for 11 days in January 1975). Almost from his investi-
ture, Paterson worked aggressively to promote the rights of
lesbians and gay men. In April 2008, he introduced legislation in
the state legislature that would legalize same-sex marriage in
New York. The bill was eventually defeated in December 2008,
largely through the efforts of Roman Catholic organizations in the
state. In May 2008, Paterson also issued an executive order
directing all state agencies to begin recognizing same-sex
marriages performed outside the state of New York, effective no
later than June 30.
David Alexander Paterson was born in Brooklyn, New York,
on May 20, 1954, to Basil and Portia Paterson. At the age of three
months, Paterson contracted an ear infection that spread to his
optic nerve, leaving him blind in one eye, and with limited sight
in the other. He has been legally blind ever since. He attended
school in South Hempstead, Long Island, where his family moved
to allow him to attend traditional classes, rather than special edu-
cation classes, to which he would have been assigned in Brooklyn.
He was the ﬁrst special needs student to be mainstreamed in
154
Biographical Sketches

South Hempstead, where he graduated from Hempstead High
School in 1971. Paterson then enrolled at Columbia University,
from which he received his BA in history in 1977. He then contin-
ued his education at Hofstra University, which awarded him his
JD in 1982.
Paterson’s ﬁrst job was with the Queens district attorney’s
ofﬁce, where he remained for three years. When state senator
Leon Bogues died in August 1985, Paterson ran for and won the
empty seat, a seat that his father had once held. At the time, at
the age of 31, he was the youngest member of the state senate.
He was reelected in 1986 and then eight more times. In 2002,
Paterson was chosen minority leader of the senate, the ﬁrst non-
white to hold that position in New York State. Four years later,
gubernatorial candidate Eliot Spitzer chose Paterson as his
running mate for lieutenant governor, a position he assumed after
a successful campaign on January 1, 2007. In late 2009, Paterson
announced his intention to run for another term as governor of
the state.
Jason West (1977–)
In February 2004, West announced that, as mayor of New Paltz,
New York, he would begin conducting marriage ceremonies
between same-sex couples. He performed 25 such ceremonies
before New York state judge Vincent Bradley issued a temporary
restraining order barring the mayor from conducting further
marriage ceremonies for a month. That restraining order was later
made permanent by Ulster County Supreme Court Judge Michael
Kavanagh on June 7, 2004. West was defeated for reelection on
May 1, 2007, by a vote of 514 to 379.
Jason West was born on January 1, 1977, in Latham, New York,
where he attended Shaker High School. He attended the State Uni-
versity of New York at New Paltz, from which he received a BA in
history and a BS in visual arts in 2000. After graduation, West
formed his own company, Jason West Housepainting, which
remains in existence today. He also became interested in politics
and joined the New York State Green Party. He unsuccessfully
ran for the state legislature under the banner of that party in 2000
and 2002. In 2003, he ran for mayor of New Paltz, and, to the
surprise of many observers, was elected. West became the ﬁrst
member of the Green Party to win elective ofﬁce in the state.
Biographical Sketches
155

In general, his tenure of mayor seemed very successful. He was
named Best Mayor of 2003 by Hudson Valley Magazine, and was
honored by a number of political and community organizations,
including the New York State Senate Democratic Conference and
the California State Legislature. After losing his campaign for
reelection, however, he returned to his previous career as a house
painter. He has also remained interested and active in a number
of environmental and political organizations, however. Since
losing his position at New Paltz, he has served on the boards of
directors of Certiﬁed Naturally Grown, a certiﬁcation program
for organically grown foods; Arm of the Sea Theater, which
presents touring productions of socially signiﬁcant programs;
and Young Elected Ofﬁcials’ Network, an association of elected
public ofﬁcials under the age of 35 working to develop socially
aware communities. In March 2010, West was guest speaker at a
rally in New Paltz commemorating the sixth anniversary of the
revoked marriages he conducted as mayor of the town.
156
Biographical Sketches

6
Documents and Data
T
he evolution of the debate over same-sex marriage can be
traced in a number of important documents related to that
issue, documents such as laws, executive orders, reports, and
court decisions. This chapter includes excerpts from a number of
those documents. Included among these documents are three
pieces of legislation and two court cases dealing with same-sex
adoption. One of the major concerns among individuals who
oppose same-sex marriage (as well as among proponents of
same-sex marriage) is the possibility that same-sex couples may
earn the right to adopt children, which they regard as inappropri-
ate in and of itself, as well as being an argument against same-sex
marriage. These documents provide an insight into the reasoning
for and against allowing same-sex couples to adopt children.
The chapter concludes with a collection of statistics and data
related to same-sex marriage in the United States and other
nations around the world.
Legislation
Federal Defense of Marriage Act (1996)
In September 1996, the U.S. Congress passed and President Bill Clinton
signed the federal Defense of Marriage Act, declaring that marriage was
deﬁned as a legal relationship between a man and a woman. The act was
codiﬁed in two parts of the Federal Code, Chapter 1, Section 7, and
Chapter 28, Section 1738C. Those sections are reprinted here.
157

TITLE 1. CHAPTER 1. §7. Deﬁnition of “marriage” and “spouse”
In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of any ruling,
regulation, or interpretation of the various administrative bureaus and
agencies of the United States, the word “marriage” means only a legal
union between one man and one woman as husband and wife, and the
word “spouse” refers only to a person of the opposite sex who is a
husband or a wife.
TITLE 28. PART V. CHAPTER 115. §1738C. Certain acts, records,
and proceedings and the effect thereof
No State, territory, or possession of the United States, or Indian tribe,
shall be required to give effect to any public act, record, or judicial
proceeding of any other State, territory, possession, or tribe respecting
a relationship between persons of the same sex that is treated as a
marriage under the laws of such other State, territory, possession,
or tribe, or a right or claim arising from such relationship.
Source: U.S. Code, Chapters 1 and 28
Alabama Marriage Protection Act
(1998/2006)
As of early 2010, 41 states had passed legislation speciﬁcally prohibiting
same-sex marriage. Thirty states had adopted constitutional provisions
for the same purposes. Some states had laws, but not constitutional pro-
visions; other states had constitutional provisions, but not laws; and
some states had both laws and constitutional provisions. An example of
a state with both kinds of provisions is Alabama, whose legislature
passed the Alabama Marriage Protection Act in 1998. That act later
became a model for a constitutional amendment, Amendment 774,
which was adopted in 2006. The ﬁrst ﬁve sections of both law and
amendment are the same, while the constitutional amendment adds
two additional sections, as shown in the excerpt below.
Code of Alabama
Section 30-1-19
Marriage, recognition thereof, between persons of the same sex
prohibited.
(a) This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Alabama
Marriage Protection Act.”
(b) Marriage is inherently a unique relationship between a man and a
woman. As a matter of public policy, this state has a special interest in
encouraging, supporting, and protecting the unique relationship in
order to promote, among other goals, the stability and welfare of society
158
Documents and Data

and its children. A marriage contracted between individuals of the
same sex is invalid in this state.
(c) Marriage is a sacred covenant, solemnized between a man and a
woman, which, when the legal capacity and consent of both parties is
present, establishes their relationship as husband and wife, and which
is recognized by the state as a civil contract.
(d) No marriage license shall be issued in the State of Alabama to
parties of the same sex.
(e) The State of Alabama shall not recognize as valid any marriage of
parties of the same sex that occurred or was alleged to have occurred as
a result of the law of any jurisdiction regardless of whether a marriage
license was issued.
[Constitutional additions:]
(f) The State of Alabama shall not recognize as valid any common law
marriage of parties of the same sex.
(g) A union replicating marriage of or between persons of the same sex
in the State of Alabama or in any other jurisdiction shall be considered
and treated in all respects as having no legal force or effect in this state
and shall not be recognized by this state as a marriage or other union
replicating marriage.
Sources: Code of Alabama, Section 30-1-19, http://www.legislature
.state.al.us/CodeofAlabama/1975/coatoc.htm; Constitution of
Alabama—1901, Amendment 774, http://www.legislature.state.al.us/
CodeofAlabama/Constitution/1901/Constitution1901_toc.htm
Federal Marriage Amendment (2003)
In 2003, Representative Marilyn Musgrave (R-CO) introduced into the
U.S. House of Representative a proposed amendment to the U.S.
Constitution dealing with the issue of same-sex marriage. The amend-
ment, with a slight modiﬁcation, has been reintroduced every year since
then, except for 2007. (The modiﬁcation consists of a deletion of the itali-
cized phrase in the document below.) The most favorable action on the
amendment thus far occurred in 2006, when the House voted 236 to
187 in favor of the amendment, although a cloture motion to force a vote
on the amendment in the Senate failed 49 to 48. (A two-thirds vote is
required in both houses for adoption of the amendment.)
Marriage in the United States shall consist only of the union of a man and
a woman. Neither this Constitution or the constitution of any State, nor
state or federal law, shall be construed to require that marital status or the
legal incidents thereof be conferred upon unmarried couples or groups.
Legislation
159

Source: 108th Congress, 1st Session, H. J. Res. 56, “Proposing an
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States Relating to
Marriage,” http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c108:H.J.RES.56
Oregon Family Fairness Act (2007)
Almost all states in the United States currently have prohibitions against
same-sex marriage in their state constitutions or in laws dealing with the
issue. However, a number of states have adopted or are considering legisla-
tion that provides all the beneﬁts and responsibilities of marriage without
calling the relationship by that name. The most common alternative to
same-sex marriage thus far has been a domestic partnership. The most
recent state to adopt domestic partnership legislation, an extract of which
is provided here, is Oregon. In the ﬁnal versions of the bill, the term “civil
union” was replaced by the term “domestic partnership.”
House Bill 2007
Summary
[The bill begins with a summary of its main features.]
Establishes requirements and procedures for entering into [civil
union] domestic partnership contract between individuals of same sex.
Provides that any privilege, immunity, right or beneﬁt granted by law
to individual who is or was married is granted to individual who is or was
in [civil union] domestic partnership. Provides that any responsibility
imposed by law on individual who is or was married is imposed on
individual who is or was in [civil union] domestic partnership.
Provides that any privilege, immunity, right, beneﬁt or
responsibility granted or imposed by law to or on spouse with respect to
child of either spouse is granted to or imposed on partner with respect to
child of either partner.
A Bill for an Act
Relating to same-sex relationships; creating new provisions; and
amending ORS 107.615, 192.842, 205.320, 409.300, 432.005,
432.235, 432.405 and 432.408.
Be It Enacted by the People of the State of Oregon:
SECTION 1. Sections 1 to 9 of this 2007 Act may be cited as the Oregon
Family Fairness Act.
160
Documents and Data

[Section 2 lists the ﬁndings of the state legislature that have led to this bill.
Only the ﬁrst of those ﬁndings is listed here.]
SECTION 2. The Legislative Assembly ﬁnds that:
(1) Section 20, Article I of the Oregon Constitution, has always
enshrined the principle that all citizens of this state are to be provided
with equal privileges and immunities under the laws of the State. In
addition, as provided in ORS 659A.006, it has long been the public
policy of this state that discrimination against any of the citizens of this
state is a matter of state concern that threatens not only the rights and
privileges of the state’s inhabitants but menaces the institutions and
foundation of a free democratic state. These fundamental principles are
integral to Oregon’s constitutional form of government, to its
guarantees of political and civil rights and to the continued vitality of
political and civil society in this state.
[Section 3 provides deﬁnitions for important terms used in the bill.]
[Section 4 lists certain types of domestic partnerships that are prohibited.]
[Section 5 mandates the forms to be used in registering domestic partnerships.]
[Sections 6–8 state the requirements to be followed by individuals registering
for a domestic partnership.]
[Section 9 provides a general overview of the rights and responsibilities
associated with domestic partnerships, as extracted here.]
SECTION 9. (1) Any privilege, immunity, right or beneﬁt granted by
statute, administrative or court rule, policy, common law or any other
law to an individual because the individual is or was married, or
because the individual is or was an in-law in a speciﬁed way to another
individual, is granted on equivalent terms, substantive and procedural,
to an individual because the individual is or was in a domestic
partnership or because the individual is or was, based on a domestic
partnership, related in a speciﬁed way to another individual. because
the individual is or was in a domestic partnership or because the
individual is or was, based on a domestic partnership, related in a
speciﬁed way to another individual.
(2) Any responsibility imposed by statute, administrative or court rule,
policy, common law or any other law on an individual because the indi-
vidual is or was married, or because the individual is or was an in-law in a
speciﬁed way to another individual, is imposed on equivalent terms, sub-
stantive and procedural, on an individual because the individual is or was
in a domestic partnership or because the individual is or was, based on a
domestic partnership, related in a speciﬁed way to another individual.
(3) Any privilege, immunity, right, beneﬁt or responsibility granted or
imposed by statute, administrative or court rule, policy, common law or
A Bill for an Act
161

any other law to or on a spouse with respect to a child of either of the
spouses is granted or imposed on equivalent terms, substantive and
procedural, to or on a partner with respect to a child of either of the
partners.
(4) Any privilege, immunity, right, beneﬁt or responsibility granted or
imposed by statute, administrative or court rule, policy, common law or
any other law to or on a former or surviving spouse with respect to a
child of either of the spouses is granted or imposed on equivalent
terms, substantive and procedural, to or on a former or surviving
partner with respect to a child of either of the partners.
(5) Many of the laws of this state are intertwined with federal law, and
the Legislative Assembly recognizes that it does not have the
jurisdiction to control federal laws or the privileges, immunities, rights,
beneﬁts and responsibilities related to federal laws.
(6) Sections 1 to 9 of this 2007 Act do not require or permit the extension
of any beneﬁt under ORS chapter 238 or 238A, or under any other
retirement, deferred compensation or other employee beneﬁt plan, if the
plan administrator reasonably concludes that the extension of beneﬁts
would conﬂict with a condition for tax qualiﬁcation of the plan, or a
condition for other favorable tax treatment of the plan, under the
Internal Revenue Code or regulations adopted under the Internal
Revenue Code.
(7) Sections 1 to 9 of this 2007 Act do not require the extension of any
beneﬁt under any employee beneﬁt plan that is subject to federal
regulation under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
(8) For purposes of administering Oregon tax laws, partners in a
domestic partnership, surviving partners in a domestic partnership and
the children of partners in a domestic partnership have the same
privileges, immunities, rights, beneﬁts and responsibilities as are
granted to or imposed on spouses in a marriage, surviving spouses and
their children.
[Remaining sections of the bill deal with “housekeeping” issues and with
bringing this act into agreement with other relevant state laws.]
Source: 74th Oregon Legislative Assembly—2007 Regular Session,
A-Engrossed, House Bill 2007, Available online at http://www.leg.state
.or.us/07reg/measpdf/hb2000.dir/hb2007.a.pdf)
Arkansas Same-Sex Adoption Law (2008)
Five states in the United States have laws that speciﬁcally prohibit the
adoption of a child by a same-sex couple. The most recent of these laws
was adopted in the general election of November 4, 2008, by the voters
162
Documents and Data

of Arkansas. The vote was on an initiative brought before the electorate
by the Arkansas Family Council. The proposed initiative passed by a
vote of 57 percent to 43 percent. The somewhat lengthy title and full text
of that initiative are reprinted here.
Popular Name
AN ACT PROVIDING THAT AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS
COHABITING OUTSIDE OF A VALID MARRIAGE MAY NOT ADOPT
OR BE A FOSTER PARENT OF A CHILD LESS THAN EIGHTEEN
YEARS OLD
Ballot Title
A PROPOSED ACT PROVIDING THAT A MINOR MAY NOT BE
ADOPTED OR PLACED IN A FOSTER HOME IF THE INDIVIDUAL
SEEKING TO ADOPT OR TO SERVE AS A FOSTER PARENT IS
COHABITING WITH A SEXUAL PARTNER OUTSIDE OF A
MARRIAGE WHICH IS VALID UNDER THE CONSTITUTION AND
LAWS OF THIS STATE; STATING THAT THE FOREGOING
PROHIBITION APPLIES EQUALLY TO COHABITING OPPOSITE-SEX
AND SAME-SEX INDIVIDUALS; STATING THAT THE ACT WILL
NOT AFFECT THE GUARDIANSHIP OF MINORS; DEFINING
“MINOR” TO MEAN AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF
EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS; STATING THAT THE PUBLIC POLICY OF
THE STATE IS TO FAVOR MARRIAGE, AS DEFINED BY THE
CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF THIS STATE, OVER UNMARRIED
COHABITATION WITH REGARD TO ADOPTION AND FOSTER
CARE; FINDING AND DECLARING ON BEHALF OF THE PEOPLE
OF THE STATE THAT IT IS IN THE BEST INTEREST OF CHILDREN
IN NEED OF ADOPTION OR FOSTER CARE TO BE REARED IN
HOMES IN WHICH ADOPTIVE OR FOSTER PARENTS ARE NOT
COHABITING OUTSIDE OF MARRIAGE; PROVIDING THAT THE
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL
PROMULGATE REGULATIONS CONSISTENT WITH THE ACT; AND
PROVIDING THAT THE ACT APPLIES PROSPECTIVELY
BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2009.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
Section 1: Adoption and foster care of minors.
(a)
A minor may not be adopted or placed in a foster home if the
individual seeking to adopt or to serve as a foster parent is
cohabiting with a sexual partner outside of a marriage which
is valid under the constitution and laws of this state.
(b)
The prohibition of this section applies equally to cohabiting
opposite-sex and same-sex individuals.
A Bill for an Act
163

Section 2: Guardianship of minors.
This act will not affect the guardianship of minors.
Section 3: Deﬁnition.
As used in this act, “minor” means an individual under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
Section 4: Public policy.
The public policy of the state is to favor marriage, as deﬁned by the
constitution and laws of this state, over unmarried cohabitation with
regard to adoption and foster care.
Section 5: Finding and declaration.
The people of Arkansas ﬁnd and declare that it is in the best interest
of children in need of adoption or foster care to be reared in homes
in which adoptive or foster parents are not cohabiting outside of
marriage.
Section 6: Regulations:
The Director of the Department of Human Services, or the successor
agency or agencies responsible for adoption and foster care, shall
promulgate regulations consistent with this act.
Section 7: Prospective application and effective date.
This act applies prospectively beginning on January 1, 2009.
Source: NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC. http://www.sos.arkansas.gov/
elections/elections_pdfs/proposed_amendments/2007-293_Adopt_or
_Foster_parent.pdf
Uniting American Families Act (2009)
Under U.S. immigration law, a man or woman may sponsor his or her
wife or husband from a country other than the United States to live and
work permanently in this country. Same-sex spouses do not have the
same privilege. Even couples that have been legally married in the United
States or some other country are not eligible to take advantage of the priv-
ileges offered by immigration law to heterosexual couples. In 2000,
Representative Jerry Nadler (D-NY) introduced legislation to revise
immigration law so that it would apply to same-sex couples as well as
to opposite-sex couples. Rep. Nadler’s bill was never reported out of com-
mittee, and he reintroduced the bill in 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007, and 2009.
Beginning in 2003, Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) has introduced a com-
parable bill into the U.S. Senate. None of the bills has ever been reported
out of committee, let alone been debated on the ﬂoor of the House or
Senate. The wording of the bill has remained essentially the same upon
each reintroduction, as given below. The extract provided here shows
164
Documents and Data

how changes in deﬁnition and terminology in the original immigration
laws would accomplish the objective of providing equal treatment for
same-sex couples.
[Section 2 of the bill provides the fundamental changes required to make the
necessary adjustments in existing immigration law:]
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS OF PERMANENT PARTNER
AND PERMANENT PARTNERSHIP.
Section 101(a) (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)) is amended—
(1)
in paragraph (15)(K)(ii), by inserting “or permanent
partnership” after “marriage”; and
(2)
by adding at the end the following:
“(52) The term ‘permanent partner’ means an individual
18 years of age or older who—
“(A) is in a committed, intimate relationship with
another individual years of age or older in which
both individuals intend a lifelong commitment;
“(B) is ﬁnancially interdependent with that other
individual;
“(C) is not married to, or in a permanent
partnership with, any individual other than that
other individual;
“(D) is unable to contract with that other individual
a marriage cognizable under this Act; and
“(E) is not a ﬁrst, second, or third degree blood
relation of that other individual.
“(53) The term ‘permanent partnership’
means the relationship that exists between 2
permanent partners.”
SEC. 3. WORLDWIDE LEVEL OF IMMIGRATION.
Section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)) is amended—
(1)
by “spouse” each place it appears and inserting “spouse or
permanent partner”;
(2)
by striking “spouses” and inserting “spouse, permanent
partner,”;
(3)
by inserting “(or, in the case of a permanent partnership,
whose permanent partnership was not terminated)” after
“was not legally separated from the citizen”; and
(4)
by striking “remarries.” and inserting “remarries or enters a
permanent partnership with an other person.”
A Bill for an Act
165

SEC. 4. NUMERICAL LIMITATIONS ON INDIVIDUAL
FOREIGN STATES
(a)
PER COUNTRY LEVELS.—Section 202(a)(4) (8 U.S.C. 1152(a)
(4)) is amended—
(1)
in the paragraph heading, by inserting “, PERMANENT
PARTNERS,” after “SPOUSES”;
(2)
in the heading of subparagraph (A), by inserting
“, PERMANENT PARTNERS,” after “SPOUSES”; and
(3)
in the heading of subparagraph (C), by striking “AND
DAUGHTERS” inserting “WITHOUT PERMANENT
PARTNERS AND UNMARRIED DAUGHTERS
WITHOUT PERMANENT PARTNERS”
(b)
RULES FOR CHARGEABILITY.—Section 202(b)(2) (8 U.S.C.
1152(b)(2)) is amended—
(1)
by striking “his spouse” and inserting “his or her spouse
or permanent partner”;
(2)
by striking “such spouse” each place it appears and
inserting “such spouse or permanent partner”; and
(3)
by inserting “or permanent partners” after “husband and
wife”
[The following sections make changes in the allocation of immigrant visas,
procedures for granting immigrant status, admission of immigrants for
emergency purposes, inadmissible aliens, conditional permanent resident
status, and related issues.]
Source: H. R. 1024, Uniting American Families Act of 2009, http://
thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/F?c111:1:./temp/~c111imxoE0:e5119
An Act to End Discrimination in Civil
Marriage and Affirm Religious
Freedom (2009)
As of early 2010, same-sex marriage was legal in ﬁve states: Connecti-
cut, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont. In each of
these states, approval of same-sex marriage was achieved by an act of
the legislature or by court decree. In no state was same-sex marriage
approved by a vote of the general electorate. The closest that event came
to occurring was in Maine, where the state legislature passed a bill on
May 6, 2009, legalizing same-sex marriage in the state. That action
was overturned, however, by a vote of the general electorate on Novem-
ber 3, 2009. The act’s name indicates efforts by the legislature to placate
166
Documents and Data

religious leaders who were concerned that they would be required to per-
form or otherwise support same-sex marriages. An extract of the original
act follows.
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
Sec. 1. 19-A MRSA §650, as enacted by PL 1997, c. 65, §2, is repealed.
Sec. 2. 19-A MRSA §650-A is enacted to read:
§ 650-A. Codiﬁcation of marriage
Marriage is the legally recognized union of 2 people. Gender-speciﬁc
terms relating to the marital relationship or familial relationships,
including, but not limited to, “spouse,” “family,” “marriage,”
“immediate family,” “dependent,” “next of kin,” “bride,” “groom,”
“husband,” “wife,” “widow” and “widower,” must be construed to be
gender-neutral for all purposes throughout the law, whether in the
context of statute, administrative or court rule, policy, common law or
any other source of civil law.
Sec. 3. 19-A MRSA §650-B is enacted to read:
§ 650-B. Recognition of marriage licensed and certiﬁed in another
jurisdiction
A marriage of a same-sex couple that is validly licensed and certiﬁed in
another jurisdiction is recognized for all purposes under the laws of this
State.
[Section 4 outlines the process by which applications for marriage must be ﬁled.]
Sec. 5. 19-A MRSA §655, sub-§3 is enacted to read:
3. Afﬁrmation of religious freedom. This Part does not authorize any
court or other state or local governmental body, entity, agency or
commission to compel, prevent or interfere in any way with any
religious institution’s religious doctrine, policy, teaching or
solemnization of marriage within that particular religious faith’s
tradition as guaranteed by the Maine Constitution, Article 1, Section 3
or the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. A person
authorized to join persons in marriage and who fails or refuses to join
persons in marriage is not subject to any ﬁne or other penalty for such
failure or refusal.
[Section 6 modiﬁes the section of the state’s original marriage law dealing with
“prohibitions” to marriage in the state, one of which involves individuals of the
same gender.]
Source: SP0384, LD 1020, item 1, 124th Maine State Legislature, An
Act to End Discrimination in Civil Marriage and Afﬁrm Religious
Freedom, http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/bills_124th/
billpdfs/SP038401.pdf
A Bill for an Act
167

Reports
United States General Accounting
Office (2003)
In January 1997, the U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) responded
to an inquiry from Representative Henry Hyde (R-IL) about federal ben-
eﬁts available to married couples under U.S. law. The GAO found
“1,049 federal statutory provisions classiﬁed to the United States Code
in which beneﬁts, rights, and privileges are contingent on marital status
or in which marital status is a factor.” Seven years later, the GAO
received a similar request from Senator Bill Frist (R-TN), then majority
leader of the U.S. Senate. The GAO responded with the following
summary of its ﬁndings, to which it appended a table listing the actual
beneﬁts provided to opposite-sex married couples by U.S. law.
Dear Senator Frist:
The Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) provides deﬁnitions of
“marriage” and “spouse” that are to be used in construing the meaning
of a federal law and, thus, affect the interpretation of a wide variety of
federal laws in which marital status is a factor. (footnote 1) In 1997, we
issued a report identifying 1,049 federal statutory provisions classiﬁed
to the United States Code in which beneﬁts, rights, and privileges are
contingent on marital status or in which marital status is a factor.
(footnote 2) In preparing the 1997 report, we limited our search to laws
enacted prior to September 21, 1996, the date DOMA was signed into
law. Recently, you asked us to update our 1997 compilation.
We have identiﬁed 120 statutory provisions involving marital status
that were enacted between September 21, 1996, and December 31, 2003.
During the same period, 31 statutory provisions involving marital
status were repealed or amended in such a way as to eliminate marital
status as a factor. Consequently, as of December 31, 2003, our research
identiﬁed a total of 1,138 federal statutory provisions classiﬁed to the
United States Code in which marital status is a factor in determining or
receiving beneﬁts, rights, and privileges.
To prepare the updated list, we used the same research methods and
legal databases that we employed in 1997. Accordingly, the same
caveats concerning the completeness of our collection of laws apply to
this updated compilation, as explained more fully in our prior report.
For example, because of the inherent limitations of any global electronic
search and the many ways in which the laws of the United States Code
may deal with marital status, we cannot guarantee that we have
168
Documents and Data

captured every individual law in the United States Code in which
marital status ﬁgures. However, we believe that the probability is high
that the updated list identiﬁes federal programs in the United States
Code in which marital status is a factor.
We have organized our research using the same 13 subject categories as
the 1997 report. As agreed with your staff, in addition to providing you
with a primary table of new statutory provisions involving marital
status, we have prepared a second table identifying those provisions in
our prior report that subsequently have been repealed or amended in a
manner that eliminates marital status as a factor. Finally, in a third table,
we have listed those provisions identiﬁed in our 1997 report that have
since been relocated to a different section of the United States Code. We
have also attached a brief summary of the 13 research categories; a full
description of each category is set forth in the 1997 report.
We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date
of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of this letter to interested
congressional committees. The letter will also be available on GAO’s
home page at http://www.gao.gov.
[Footnote 1: The Defense of Marriage Act deﬁnes “marriage” as “a legal
union between one man and one woman as husband and wife”; it
deﬁnes “spouse” as referring “only to a person of the opposite sex who
is a husband or a wife.” The Act requires that these deﬁnitions apply
“[i]n determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of any ruling,
regulation, or interpretation of the various administrative bureaus and
agencies of the United States.” 1 U.S.C. § 7.
Footnote 2: U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce, Defense of Marriage Act,
GAO/OGC-97-16 (Washington, D.C.: January 31, 1997).]
Source: United States General Accounting Ofﬁce, http://www.gao.gov/
new.items/d04353r.pdf, January 23, 2004)
Adoption by Same-Sex Couples (2009)
The United States and the individual states thereof are by no means the
only nation in the world where same-sex adoption is an issue of debate.
Not surprisingly, however, the issues involved in this debate tend to
be similar no matter where it takes place. In July 2009, the Standing
Committee on Law and Justice of the New South Wales (Australia)
Legislative Council issued a report on its extended study of same-sex
adoption. The committee recommended that the state’s Adoption Act
2000 be amended to permit same-sex adoption, while adding language
that would not require faith-based agencies to participate in such adop-
tions. Some key points from that report follow.
Reports
169

[From the Chair’s Forward:]
The Committee has determined that the Adoption Act 2000 should be
amended to allow same-sex couples to adopt, but that an exemption
from the application of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1977 be created for
faith-based adoption agencies. The Committee has concluded that
reform to allow same-sex couples to adopt in NSW will protect
children’s rights and help to ensure children’s best interests. It will do
so by providing the security of legal recognition for existing parent-
child relationships, by broadening the pool of potential applicants from
which the most appropriate parents for any individual child are
selected, and by enabling children currently fostered by same-sex
couples to have that relationship permanently secured where
appropriate. Such reform will also address discrimination against same-
sex couples and their children, and address anomalous inconsistencies
in their present treatment under the law.
[The report itself consists of six chapters: “Introduction,” “Background,” “Best
Interests of the Child,” “Research on Family Form and Family Functioning,”
“Human Rights and Legal Issues,” and “Exemptions.” The core of the
committee’s reasoning about its ﬁnal decision occurs in Chapter 3, a section of
which is quoted here. Footnotes are omitted from the selection.]
3.118 Some members of the Committee share the views expressed by
many during the inquiry that the best interests of children are met in
the context of a family comprised of a mother and a father in a
permanent, preferably married relationship, where children can
experience on a daily basis the fundamental complementarity of
motherhood and fatherhood. These members consider that mothers and
fathers bring unique qualities to their parenting roles, both of which are
essential to optimal child development. These members agree with
numerous participants that the state has a duty of care to ensure that
children are adopted into families that will provide “optimal care”,
believing strongly that same-sex parenting denies children such care, to
their detriment in the short and longer term. Correspondingly, these
members consider that the Government has a responsibility to adoptive
children and to broader society to maintain the status quo and prevent
adoption by same-sex couples.
3.119 The majority of Committee members, however, consider that the
gender of parents is not a signiﬁcant determinant of children’s
wellbeing, and that as such, the sexual orientation of prospective
parents is of no material relevance to the best interests of adoptive
children. Nor do the majority consider that the sexuality of gay and
lesbian people precludes them from being ﬁt and proper parents, or
that children in same-sex families necessarily have insufﬁcient access to
both male and female role models. The majority of Committee members
are persuaded by the argument that an adoptive child’s best interests
170
Documents and Data

are determined in the context of an assessment of the individual child’s
needs and the individual parents’ capacity to meet those needs. Same-
sex parents should be able to be assessed on exactly the same basis as
other prospective parents.
3.120 The majority note that if legally eligible to adopt, gay and lesbian
people will, like all prospective parents, be subject to a rigorous
assessment process by accredited adoption agencies to determine their
suitability to adopt; they will also be subject to the preferences of
relinquishing parents; and they must ultimately satisfy a court that they
can fulﬁl the best interests of the child concerned. The majority of
Committee members are conﬁdent in the rigour of the adoption system
to continue to ensure that only those who would make ﬁt and proper
parents go on to adopt.
3.121 In addition, the majority of Committee members are persuaded
by a number of other arguments examined in this chapter that adoption
by same-sex couples is in the best interests of the child. It is highly
desirable to broaden the pool of adoptive parents in order to increase
the likelihood of the best match between individual child and
prospective parent. Also, the permanency that is so desirable for many
children in out-of-home care would be facilitated by enabling same-sex
couples to adopt their foster children.
3.122 The majority of Committee members are also mindful that the
views of children and young people either expressed directly to the
Committee, or reported to us, suggest that most are supportive of
adoption by same-sex couples. Other Committee members believe that
the evidence from children to the inquiry was limited and should not be
used to assert a generalised position by children in NSW towards
adoption by same-sex couples.
3.123 The Committee members who form the majority are conscious
that the views presented in this chapter were quite clearly delineated
along religious versus secular lines. They uphold the right of church-
based organisations to voice their beliefs with a view to inﬂuencing
policy, and acknowledge the validity of those views. At the same time,
it is their view that the more secular views presented in this chapter,
which accept parenting by gay and lesbian people as valid and support
adoption by same-sex couples as being in the interests of children, are
more aligned with prevailing standards and community aspirations
about parenting, the welfare of children and the inclusiveness of society.
Other Committee members reject the argument that the debate about
adoption by same-sex couples is a religious versus secular contest.
Many of the participants in the inquiry who expressed belief-based
views also articulated reason-based arguments as to why they opposed
adoption by same-sex couples. For many of these participants the key
issue is the importance of a child having the opportunity to be raised by
Reports
171

a mother and a father in a permanent, preferably married relationship,
a view to which a number of people subscribe, not just theists or those
of religious persuasion.
3.124 Finally, the majority of Committee members also observe that the
focus of many participants’ evidence, as captured in this chapter, was
on the adoption of unknown young infants. It is clear that a larger
number of other children stand to beneﬁt from adoption: ﬁrst,
(generally older) children who as a result of abuse and/or neglect are in
foster care; and second, children who are already parented by gay and
lesbian people but whose parental relationship with their non-biological
parent is not legally recognised. This divergence in the evidence
becomes more apparent in subsequent chapters. For now, the majority
of the Committee suggest that there may be a certain protectiveness felt
towards young infants relinquished for adoption that obscures the
broader picture of adoption generally and adoption by same-sex
couples in particular.
3.125 The majority of Committee members conclude that the best
interests of the child in the adoption context will be served by decisions
based on the individual needs of the child and the particular capacities
of the parents, without regard to the sexual orientation of the parents.
Source: Standing Committee on Law and Justice, “Adoption by Same-
sex Couples,” http://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/Prod/parlment/
committee.nsf/0/c81be8593a9fec64ca2575ed000e043f/$FILE/090703
%20Final%20Compiled%20-%20Adoption%20report.pdf
European Parliament Resolution of
14 January 2009 on the Situation of
Fundamental Rights in the European Union
2004–8 (2009)
Same-sex marriage has been a topic of discussion for some time within
the European Union and the European Parliament. The most recent
action by the parliament was a resolution adopted on January 14,
2009, covering a number of human and civil rights issues, among them
the treatment of same-sex couples. The relevant sections of that resolu-
tion are reprinted here.
Sexual orientation
71. Takes the view that discriminatory comments against homosexuals
by religious, social and political leaders fuel hatred and violence, and
calls on the relevant governing bodies to condemn them;
172
Documents and Data

72. In this regard, wholeheartedly endorses the French initiative, which
is supported by all the Member States, for the universal decriminalisa-
tion of homosexuality, as in 91 countries homosexuality is still a
criminal offence, and in some cases even a capital offence;
73. Welcomes the publication of the ﬁrst thematic report by the Agency,
drawn up at Parliament’s request, on “homophobia and discrimination on
grounds of sexual orientation in the EU [European Union] Member
States” and asks the Member States and EU institutions to urgently follow
the Agency’s recommendations or state their reasons for not doing so;
74. Reminds all Member States that, in line with ECtHR [European Court
of Human Rights] case-law, freedom of assembly may be exercised even
if the opinions of those exercising that right go against the majority, and
that, accordingly, a discriminatory ban on marches and any failure to
meet the requirement to give appropriate protection to those taking part
breach the principles guaranteed by the ECtHR, by Article 6 of the EU
Treaty on common EU values and principles, and by the Charter;
75. Calls on those Member States who have adopted legislation on
same-sex partnerships to recognise provisions with similar effects
adopted by other Member States; calls on those Member States to
propose guidelines for mutual recognition of existing legislation
between Member States in order to guarantee that the right of free
movement within the European Union for same-sex couples applies
under conditions equal to those applicable to heterosexual couples;
76. Urges the Commission to submit proposals ensuring that Member
States apply the principle of mutual recognition for homosexual
couples, whether they are married or living in a registered civil
partnership, in particular when they are exercising their right to free
movement under EU law;
77. Calls on those Member States who have not yet done so, and in
application of the principle of equality, to take legislative action to
overcome the discrimination experienced by some couples on the
grounds of their sexual orientation;
78. Calls on the Commission to make sure that Member States grant
asylum to persons ﬂeeing from persecution on the grounds of their
sexual orientation in their country of origin, to take initiatives at the
bilateral and multilateral level to stop the persecutions of persons on
the basis of their sexual orientation, and to launch a study on the
situation of trans-sexual people in the Member States and candidate
countries, with regard inter alia to the risk of harassment and violence.
Source: European Parliament Resolution of 14 January 2009 on the
Situation of Fundamental Rights in the European Union 2004–2008
[2007/2145(INI)], http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do
?type=TA&reference=P6-TA-2009-0019&language=EN
Reports
173

Court Cases
E. B. v. France, Application No. 43546/02
(2008)
The legal status of same-sex adoptions in the United States is still a mat-
ter of considerable disagreement and dispute. From at least a theoretical
standpoint, such is no longer the case in Europe. In January 2008, the
Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights ruled that a
series of decisions by local governmental units in France on this topic
had violated Articles 8 and 14 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR). The case was brought by a 45-year-old primary school
teacher, designated as “E. B.” in the case, who was in a long-term rela-
tionship with another woman and was seeking to adopt a young child.
Her application to adopt was denied at both local and regional levels by
relevant authorities. Denial was allegedly based on two objections, the
lack of a paternal ﬁgure in the household and the ambiguity of E. B.’s
partner with regard to the adoption.
The Grand Chamber found, by a vote of 11 to 6, in favor of the applicant, E. G.
The decision was based on the court’s conclusion that the state objections by
local and regional French authorities were not, in fact, the real reason for
denying E. B.’s application. Instead, it found that her homosexuality was the
primary, and probably sole, reason for the denial. And, since discrimination on
the basis of sexual orientation is prohibited by the ECHR, the governmental
units were deemed to have violated the articles named in the complaint. Key
parts of the court’s decision are as follows. Omitted citations are designated by
ellipses ( . . . ).
82. With regard to the judicial phase, the Nancy Administrative Court of
Appeal noted that the decision was based on two grounds: the lack of a
paternal referent and the ambivalence of the commitment of each
member of the household. It added that the documents in the ﬁle and
the conclusions reached after examining the application showed that the
applicant’s lifestyle did not provide the requisite safeguards for
adopting a child, but disputed that the president of the council for
the de´partement had refused authorisation on the basis of a position
of principle regarding her choice of lifestyle, namely, her
homosexuality. . . .
83. Subsequently, the Conseil d’Etat held that the two grounds on which
the applicant had been refused authorisation to adopt were in keeping
with the statutory provisions. It also held that the reference to the
applicant’s “lifestyle” could be explained by the documents in the ﬁle
submitted to the tribunals of fact, which showed that the applicant was,
174
Documents and Data

at the time of her application, in a stable homosexual relationship, but
that this could not be construed as a decision based on a position of
principle regarding her sexual orientation or as any form of
discrimination. . . .
84. The Court therefore notes that the administrative courts went to some
lengths to rule that although regard had been had to the applicant’s
sexual orientation, it had not been the basis for the decision in question
and had not been considered from a hostile position of principle.
85. However, in the Court’s opinion the fact that the applicant’s
homosexuality featured to such an extent in the reasoning of the domestic
authorities is signiﬁcant. Besides their considerations regarding the
applicant’s “lifestyle”, they above all conﬁrmed the decision of the
president of the council for the de´partement. The Court points out that
the latter reached his decision in the light of the opinion given by the
adoption board whose various members had expressed themselves
individually in writing, mainly recommending, with reasons in support
of that recommendation, that the application be refused on the basis of
the two grounds in question. It observes that the manner in which certain
opinions were expressed was indeed revealing in that the applicant’s
homosexuality was a determining factor. In particular, the Court notes
that in his opinion of 12 October 1998 the psychologist from the
children’s welfare service recommended that authorisation be refused,
referring to, among other things, an “unusual attitude [on the part of the
applicant] to men in that men are rejected.” . . .
. . .
88. Thus, notwithstanding the precautions taken by the Nancy
Administrative Court of Appeal, and subsequently by the Conseil
d’Etat, to justify taking account of the applicant’s “lifestyle”, the
inescapable conclusion is that her sexual orientation was consistently at
the centre of deliberations in her regard and omnipresent at every stage
of the administrative and judicial proceedings.
. . .
90. The applicant therefore suffered a difference in treatment. Regard
must be had to the aim behind that difference in treatment and, if the
aim was legitimate, to whether the different treatment was justiﬁed.
91. The Court reiterates that, for the purposes of Article 14, a difference
in treatment is discriminatory if it has no objective and reasonable
justiﬁcation, which means that it does not pursue a “legitimate aim” or
that there is no “reasonable proportionality between the means
employed and the aim sought to be realized.” . . . Where sexual
orientation is in issue, there is a need for particularly convincing and
weighty reasons to justify a difference in treatment regarding rights
falling within Article 8. . . .
Court Cases
175

92. In that connection the Court observes that the Convention is a living
instrument, to be interpreted in the light of present-day conditions. . . .
93. In the Court’s opinion, if the reasons advanced for such a difference
in treatment were based solely on considerations regarding the
applicant’s sexual orientation this would amount to discrimination
under the Convention. . . .
94. The Court points out that French law allows single persons to adopt
a child. . . . thereby opening up the possibility of adoption by a single
homosexual, which is not disputed. Against the background of the
domestic legal provisions, it considers that the reasons put forward by
the Government cannot be regarded as particularly convincing and
weighty such as to justify refusing to grant the applicant authorisation.
95. The Court notes, lastly, that the relevant provisions of the Civil Code
are silent as to the necessity of a referent of the other sex, which would
not, in any event, be dependent on the sexual orientation of the
adoptive single parent. In this case, moreover, the applicant presented,
in the terms of the judgment of the Conseil d’Etat, “undoubted personal
qualities and an aptitude for bringing up children”, which were
assuredly in the child’s best interests, a key notion in the relevant
international instruments. . . .
96. Having regard to the foregoing, the Court cannot but observe that,
in rejecting the applicant’s application for authorisation to adopt, the
domestic authorities made a distinction based on considerations
regarding her sexual orientation, a distinction which is not acceptable
under the Convention. . . .
. . .
98. There has accordingly been a breach of Article 14 of the Convention
taken in conjunction with Article 8.
Source: Case of E. B. v. France (Application no. 43546/02), http://cmiskp
.echr.coe.int/tkp197/view.asp?item=2&portal=hbkm&action=html
&highlight=She%20%7C%20has%20%7C%20been%20%7C%20a%20
%7C%20nursery%20%7C%20school%20%7C%20teacher&sessionid
=38351901&skin=hudoc-en
Goodridge v. Department of Public Health,
440 Mass. 309 (2003)
Probably the most signiﬁcant judicial decision dealing with same-sex
marriage in the United States is an opinion issued by the Massachusetts
Supreme Judicial Court on November 18, 2003. In that decision, the
court ruled that the prohibition of same-sex marriage in Massachusetts
176
Documents and Data

was illegal under the state’s constitution. It gave the state legislature
180 days to rectify its current ban on same-sex marriage. Some impor-
tant sections of the majority opinion and of three individual dissents
are reprinted here. Omitted citations are designated by ellipses ( . . . ).
[From the majority opinion:]
Marriage is a vital social institution. The exclusive commitment of two
individuals to each other nurtures love and mutual support; it brings
stability to our society. For those who choose to marry, and for their
children, marriage provides an abundance of legal, ﬁnancial, and social
beneﬁts. In return it imposes weighty legal, ﬁnancial, and social
obligations. The question before us is whether, consistent with the
Massachusetts Constitution, the Commonwealth may deny the
protections, beneﬁts, and obligations conferred by civil marriage to two
individuals of the same sex who wish to marry. We conclude that it may
not. The Massachusetts Constitution afﬁrms the dignity and equality of
all individuals. It forbids the creation of second class citizens. In
reaching our conclusion we have given full deference to the arguments
made by the Commonwealth. But it has failed to identify any
constitutionally adequate reason for denying civil marriage to same-sex
couples.
We are mindful that our decision marks a change in the history of our
marriage law. Many people hold deep-seated religious, moral, and
ethical convictions that marriage should be limited to the union of one
man and one woman, and that homosexual conduct is immoral. Many
hold equally strong religious, moral, and ethical convictions that same-
sex couples are entitled to be married, and that homosexual persons
should be treated no differently than their heterosexual neighbors.
Neither view answers the question before us. Our concern is with the
Massachusetts Constitution as a charter of governance for every person
properly within its reach. “Our obligation is to deﬁne the liberty of all,
not to mandate our own moral code.” . . .
Whether the Commonwealth may use its formidable regulatory
authority to bar same-sex couples from civil marriage is a question not
previously addressed by a Massachusetts appellate court. . . . It is a
question the United States Supreme Court left open as a matter of
Federal law in Lawrence, supra at 2484, where it was not an issue.
There, the Court afﬁrmed that the core concept of common human
dignity protected by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution precludes government intrusion into the deeply personal
realms of consensual adult expressions of intimacy and one’s choice of
an intimate partner. The Court also reafﬁrmed the central role that
decisions whether to marry or have children bear in shaping one’s
Court Cases
177

identity. . . . The Massachusetts Constitution is, if anything, more
protective of individual liberty and equality than the Federal
Constitution; it may demand broader protection for fundamental rights;
and it is less tolerant of government intrusion into the protected spheres
of private life.
Barred access to the protections, beneﬁts, and obligations of civil
marriage, a person who enters into an intimate, exclusive union with
another of the same sex is arbitrarily deprived of membership in one of
our community’s most rewarding and cherished institutions. That
exclusion is incompatible with the constitutional principles of respect
for individual autonomy and equality under law.
[From dissent by Justice Cordy:]
The court’s opinion concludes that the Department of Public Health has
failed to identify any “constitutionally adequate reason” for limiting
civil marriage to opposite-sex unions, and that there is no “reasonable
relationship” between a disqualiﬁcation of same-sex couples who wish
to enter into a civil marriage and the protection of public health, safety,
or general welfare. Consequently, it holds that the marriage statute
cannot withstand scrutiny under the Massachusetts Constitution.
Because I ﬁnd these conclusions to be unsupportable in light of the
nature of the rights and regulations at issue, the presumption of
constitutional validity and signiﬁcant deference afforded to legislative
enactments, and the “undesirability of the judiciary substituting its
notions of correct policy for that of a popularly elected Legislature”
responsible for making such policy, . . . , I respectfully dissent. Although
it may be desirable for many reasons to extend to same-sex couples the
beneﬁts and burdens of civil marriage (and the plaintiffs have made a
powerfully reasoned case for that extension), that decision must be
made by the Legislature, not the court.
. . .
[After a review of the evidence presented to the court during this case, Cordy
continues:]
Taking all of this available information into account, the Legislature
could rationally conclude that a family environment with married
opposite-sex parents remains the optimal social structure in which to
bear children, and that the raising of children by same-sex couples, who
by deﬁnition cannot be the two sole biological parents of a child and
cannot provide children with a parental authority ﬁgure of each
gender, . . . presents an alternative structure for child rearing that has
not yet proved itself beyond reasonable scientiﬁc dispute to be as
optimal as the biologically based marriage norm. . . . Working from the
assumption that a recognition of same-sex marriages will increase the
178
Documents and Data

number of children experiencing this alternative, the Legislature could
conceivably conclude that declining to recognize same-sex marriages
remains prudent until empirical questions about its impact on the
upbringing of children are resolved. . . .
[From dissent by Justice Spina:]
What is at stake in this case is not the unequal treatment of individuals
or whether individual rights have been impermissibly burdened, but
the power of the Legislature to effectuate social change without
interference from the courts, pursuant to art. 30 of the Massachusetts
Declaration of Rights. . . . The power to regulate marriage lies with the
Legislature, not with the judiciary. . . . Today, the court has transformed
its role as protector of individual rights into the role of creator of rights,
and I respectfully dissent.
[From dissent by Justice Sosman:]
In applying the rational basis test to any challenged statutory scheme,
the issue is not whether the Legislature’s rationale behind that scheme
is persuasive to us, but only whether it satisﬁes a minimal threshold of
rationality. Today, rather than apply that test, the court announces that,
because it is persuaded that there are no differences between same-sex
and opposite-sex couples, the Legislature has no rational basis for
treating them differently with respect to the granting of marriage
licenses. . . . Reduced to its essence, the court’s opinion concludes that,
because same-sex couples are now raising children, and withholding
the beneﬁts of civil marriage from their union makes it harder for them
to raise those children, the State must therefore provide the beneﬁts of
civil marriage to same-sex couples just as it does to opposite-sex
couples. Of course, many people are raising children outside the
conﬁnes of traditional marriage, and, by deﬁnition, those children are
being deprived of the various beneﬁts that would ﬂow if they were
being raised in a household with married parents. That does not mean
that the Legislature must accord the full beneﬁts of marital status on
every household raising children. Rather, the Legislature need only
have some rational basis for concluding that, at present, those alternate
family structures have not yet been conclusively shown to be the
equivalent of the marital family structure that has established itself as a
successful one over a period of centuries. People are of course at liberty
to raise their children in various family structures, as long as they are
not literally harming their children by doing so. . . . That does not mean
that the State is required to provide identical forms of encouragement,
endorsement, and support to all of the inﬁnite variety of household
structures that a free society permits.
. . .
Court Cases
179

More importantly, it is not our conﬁdence in the lack of adverse
consequences that is at issue, or even whether that conﬁdence is
justiﬁable. The issue is whether it is rational to reserve judgment on
whether this change can be made at this time without damaging the
institution of marriage or adversely affecting the critical role it has
played in our society. Absent consensus on the issue (which obviously
does not exist), or unanimity amongst scientists studying the issue
(which also does not exist), or a more prolonged period of observation
of this new family structure (which has not yet been possible), it is
rational for the Legislature to postpone any redeﬁnition of marriage
that would include same-sex couples until such time as it is certain
that that redeﬁnition will not have unintended and undesirable social
consequences. Through the political process, the people may decide
when the beneﬁts of extending civil marriage to same-sex couples
have been shown to outweigh whatever risks—be they palpable or
ephemeral—are involved. However minimal the risks of that
redeﬁnition of marriage may seem to us from our vantage point,
it is not up to us to decide what risks society must run, and
it is inappropriate for us to arrogate that power to ourselves
merely because we are conﬁdent that “it is the right thing
to do.”
Source: Hillary Goodridge & Others vs. Department of Public Health
& Another, 440 Mass. 309, http://masscases.com/cases/sjc/440/440mass
309.html, 312–13, 357–58, 362, 363–64, 388, 350
Lewis v. Harris, 908 A.2d 196 (2006)
As of early 2010, a number of state and federal courts have handed
down opinions about the legality of same-sex marriage, with decisions
ranging rather widely across the spectrum. In 2006, the New Jersey
Supreme Court issued a decision in a case in which seven same-sex cou-
ples had sued the state to have it issue them marriage licenses. The court
decided unanimously that withholding marriage licenses from same-sex
couples violated the state constitution, and the state legislature was
required to change state law or to provide some legal entity equivalent
to marriage within 180 days of the court’s ruling. Perhaps the most
interesting feature of the ruling was that three of the seven justices dis-
sented from the majority view, not, as one might expect, because they
disagreed with the decision, but because they thought it did not go far
enough. That is, they saw no reason, having given its reasoning in the
case, the court did not simply require that the state begin to issue mar-
riage licenses to same-sex couples. (In response to the court decision,
the state legislature created civil unions as equivalent to marriage in
the state.)
180
Documents and Data

[From the court’s syllabus for the case:]
HELD: Denying committed same-sex couples the ﬁnancial and social
beneﬁts and privileges given to their married heterosexual counterparts
bears no substantial relationship to a legitimate governmental purpose.
The Court holds that under the equal protection guarantee of Article I,
Paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution, committed same-sex
couples must be afforded on equal terms the same rights and beneﬁts
enjoyed by opposite-sex couples under the civil marriage statutes. The
name to be given to the statutory scheme that provides full rights and
beneﬁts to same-sex couples, whether marriage or some other term, is a
matter left to the democratic process.
[The court then outlines the reasons for its decision. Page references are to the
actual decision.]
1. As this case presents no factual dispute, the Court addresses
solely questions of law. The Court perceives plaintiffs’ equal
protection claim to have two components: whether committed
same-sex couples have a constitutional right to the beneﬁts and
privileges afforded to married heterosexual couples, and, if so,
whether they have a constitutional right to have their relation-
ship recognized by the name of marriage. (pp. 19–21)
2. In attempting to discern the substantive rights that are “funda-
mental” under Article I, Paragraph 1, of the State Constitution,
the Court has followed the general standard adopted by the
United States Supreme Court in construing the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. First, the asserted funda-
mental liberty interest must be clearly identiﬁed. In this case, the
identiﬁed right is the right of same-sex couples to marry. Second,
the liberty interest in same-sex marriage must be objectively and
deeply rooted in the traditions, history, and conscience of the
people of this State. (pp. 21–25)
3. New Jersey’s marriage laws, which were ﬁrst enacted in 1912,
limit marriage to heterosexual couples. The recently enacted
Domestic Partnership Act explicitly acknowledges that same-sex
couples cannot marry. Although today there is a national debate
over whether same-sex marriages should be authorized by the
states, the framers of the 1947 New Jersey Constitution could not
have imagined that the liberty right protected by Article I, Para-
graph 1 embraced same-sex marriage. (pp. 25–28)
4. Times and attitudes have changed. There has been a developing
understanding that discrimination against gays and lesbians is
no longer acceptable in this State. On the federal level, the United
States Supreme Court has struck down laws that have unconsti-
tutionally targeted gays and lesbians for disparate treatment.
Court Cases
181

Although plaintiffs rely on the federal cases to support the argu-
ment that they have a fundamental right to marry under our State
Constitution, those cases fall far short of establishing a funda-
mental right to same-sex marriage “deeply rooted in the tradi-
tions, history, and conscience of the people of this State.” Despite
the rich diversity of this State, the tolerance and goodness of its
people, and the many recent advances made by gays and lesbians
toward achieving social acceptance and equality under the law,
the Court cannot ﬁnd that the right to same-sex marriage is a
fundamental right under our constitution. (pp. 28–33)
5. The Court has construed the expansive language of Article I,
Paragraph 1 to embrace the fundamental guarantee of equal
protection, thereby requiring the Court to determine whether the
State’s marriage laws permissibly distinguish between same-sex
and heterosexual couples. The test the Court has applied to equal
protection claims is a ﬂexible one that includes three factors: the
nature of the right at stake, the extent to which the challenged
statutory scheme restricts that right, and the public need for the
statutory restriction. (pp. 34–36)
6. In conducting its equal protection analysis, the Court discerns two
distinct issues. The ﬁrst is whether same-sex couples have the right
to the statutory beneﬁts and privileges conferred on heterosexual
married couples. Assuming that right, the next issue is whether
committed same-sex partners have a constitutional right to deﬁne
their relationship by the name of marriage. (p. 37)
7. New Jersey’s courts and its Legislature have been at the forefront
of combating sexual orientation discrimination and advancing
equality of treatment toward gays and lesbians. In 1992, through
an amendment to the Law Against Discrimination (LAD), New
Jersey became the ﬁfth state to prohibit discrimination on the
basis of “affectional or sexual orientation.” In making sexual
orientation a protected category, the Legislature committed New
Jersey to the goal of eradicating discrimination against gays and
lesbians. In 2004, the Legislature added “domestic partnership
status” to the categories protected by the LAD. (pp. 37–40)
8. Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is also outlawed
in our criminal law and public contracts law. The Legislature,
moreover, created the New Jersey Human Relations Council to
promote educational programs aimed at reducing bias and bias-
related acts, identifying sexual orientation as a protected cat-
egory. In 2004, the Legislature passed the Domestic Partnership
Act, which confers certain beneﬁts and rights on same-sex part-
ners who enter into a partnership under the Act. (pp. 40–42)
9. The Domestic Partnership Act has failed to bridge the inequality
gap between committed same-sex couples and married
182
Documents and Data

opposite-sex couples. Signiﬁcantly, the economic and ﬁnancial
inequities that are borne by same-sex domestic partners are also
borne by their children. Further, even though same-sex couples
are provided fewer beneﬁts and rights by the Act, they are sub-
ject to more stringent requirements to enter into a domestic
partnership than opposite-sex couples entering a marriage.
(pp. 43–48)
10. At this point, the Court does not consider whether committed
same-sex couples should be allowed to marry, but only whether
those couples are entitled to the same rights and beneﬁts
afforded to married heterosexual couples. Cast in that light, the
issue is not about the transformation of the traditional deﬁnition
of marriage, but about the unequal dispensation of beneﬁts and
privileges to one of two similarly situated classes of people.
(p. 48)
11. The State does not argue that limiting marriage to the union of a
man and a woman is needed to encourage procreation or to cre-
ate the optimal living environment for children. Other than sus-
taining the traditional deﬁnition of marriage, which is not
implicated in this discussion, the State has not articulated any
legitimate public need for depriving committed same-sex cou-
ples of the host of beneﬁts and privileges that are afforded to
married heterosexual couples. There is, on the one hand, no
rational basis for giving gays and lesbians full civil rights as
individuals while, on the other hand, giving them an incomplete
set of rights when they enter into committed same-sex relation-
ships. To the extent that families are strengthened by encourag-
ing monogamous relationships, whether heterosexual or
homosexual, the Court cannot discern a public need that would
justify the legal disabilities that now afﬂict same-sex domestic
partnerships. (pp. 48–51)
12. In arguing to uphold the system of disparate treatment that dis-
favors same-sex couples, the State offers as a justiﬁcation the
interest in uniformity with other states’ laws. Our current laws
concerning same-sex couples are more in line with those of Ver-
mont, Massachusetts, and Connecticut than the majority of other
states. Equality of treatment is a dominant theme of our laws and
a central guarantee of our State Constitution. This is ﬁtting for a
state with so diverse a population. Article I, Paragraph 1 protects
not only the rights of the majority but also the rights of the dis-
favored and the disadvantaged; they too are promised a fair
opportunity for “pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness.”
(pp. 51–56)
13. The equal protection requirement of Article I, Paragraph 1 leaves
the Legislature with two apparent options. The Legislature could
Court Cases
183

simply amend the marriage statutes to include same-sex couples,
or it could create a separate statutory structure, such as a civil
union. Because this State has no experience with a civil union
construct, the Court will not speculate that identical schemes
offering equal rights and beneﬁts would create a distinction that
would offend Article I, Paragraph 1, and will not presume that a
difference in name is of constitutional magnitude. New language
is developing to describe new social and familial relationships,
and in time will ﬁnd a place in our common vocabulary. How-
ever the Legislature may act, same-sex couples will be free to call
their relationships by the name they choose and to sanctify their
relationships in religious ceremonies in houses of worship.
(pp. 57–63)
14. In the last two centuries, the institution of marriage has reﬂected
society’s changing social mores and values. Legislatures, along
with courts, have played a major role in ushering marriage into
the modern era of equality of partners. The great engine for
social change in this country has always been the democratic
process. Although courts can ensure equal treatment, they can-
not guarantee social acceptance, which must come through the
evolving ethos of a maturing society. Plaintiffs’ quest does not
end here. They must now appeal to their fellow citizens whose
voices are heard through their popularly elected representatives.
(pp. 63–64)
15. To bring the State into compliance with Article I, Paragraph 1 so
that plaintiffs can exercise their full constitutional rights, the
Legislature must either amend the marriage statutes or enact an
appropriate statutory structure within 180 days of the date of
this decision. (p. 65)
[Chief Justice Deborah T. Poritz concurred with and dissented to the majority
opinion. The core of her argument is as follows. (Notes and citations are
omitted and indicated by asterisks, ***.)]
I concur with the determination of the majority that “denying the
rights and beneﬁts to committed same-sex couples that are statutorily
given to their heterosexual counterparts violates the equal protection
guarantee of Article I, Paragraph 1 of the New Jersey Constitution *** .
I can ﬁnd no principled basis, however, on which to distinguish those
rights and beneﬁts from the right to the title of marriage, and therefore
dissent from the majority’s opinion insofar as it declines to recognize
that right among all of the other rights and beneﬁts that will be
available to same-sex couples in the future.
I dissent also from the majority’s conclusion that there is no
fundamental due process right to same-sex marriage “encompassed
within the concept of liberty guaranteed by Article I, Paragraph 1.
184
Documents and Data

*** The majority acknowledges, as it must, that there is a universally
accepted fundamental right to marriage “deeply rooted” in the
“traditions, history, and conscience of the people.” *** Yet, by asking
whether there is a right to same-sex marriage, the Court avoids the more
difﬁcult questions of personal dignity and autonomy raised by this case.
Under the majority opinion, it appears that persons who exercise their
individual liberty interest to choose same-sex partners can be denied the
fundamental right to participate in a state-sanctioned civil marriage. I
would hold that plaintiffs’ due process rights are violated when the State
so burdens their liberty interests.
Source: Syllabus. http://lawlibrary.rutgers.edu/courts/wordperfect/
supreme/A-68-05.DOC
In re: Gill (2006)
Four states—Arkansas, Florida, Mississippi, and Utah—ban some
form of same-sex adoption. The oldest of these bans is Florida’s law,
passed in 1977, largely as a result of a campaign against same-sex
rights led by entertainer Anita Bryant. In July 2006, a Florida man,
Martin Gill, and his partner ﬁled adoption papers for two boys whom
they had been foster-parenting since December 2004. In Novem-
ber 2008, Miami Circuit Court judge Cindy Lederman ruled in favor
of Gill and his partner, declaring that the state’s adoption law for
same-sex couples was unconstitutional. Judge Lederman’s ruling was
appealed by the state to the Fourth District Court of Appeals in
Miami. Whatever the decision in that appeal, most observers expect
that the case will eventually be referred to and decided by the Florida
Supreme Court.
[In explaining her decision in this case, Judge Lederman reviews the state’s three
major arguments against allowing same-sex adoption and offers her response to
these three points. Citations are indicated by asterisks (***) and omitted.]
i.
Promoting the well-being of children
The Department argues Fla. Stat. §63.042(3) is rationally
related to Florida’s interest by protecting children from the
undesirable realities of the homosexual lifestyle. However, as
thoroughly summarized in the Findings of Fact section of this
Final Judgment, the foregoing is, frankly, false. ***
Obviously, in order to be considered rationally related
to a governmental interest, the distinctions between
individuals may not be based on unsubstantiated
assumptions. *** Based on the statistics, there are no set of
facts for which such a stated interest can be reasonably
Court Cases
185

conceived of to justify the legislation. *** Fortunate for the
Department, the government has no obligation to produce
evidence to sustain the rationality of the statutory
classiﬁcation. *** Here, the two witnesses proffered by the
Department failed to offer any reasonable, credible evidence
to substantiate their beliefs or to justify the legislation.
Viewing the statute from this point of view clearly renders it
“illogical to the point of irrationality.” *** Any exclusion that
would declassify an entire group of people based on
identical factors is clearly “both discriminatory and
overbroad.” *** Interestingly, in distinguishing Cleburne, the
Lofton court posited that homosexuals were not similarly
situated as heterosexuals, citing a 1987 New Hampshire
Supreme Court decision holding that a similar statute was
rationally related. However, in 1999, the New Hampshire
legislature removed its prohibition of adoption and foster
parenting by homosexuals. *** Nevertheless, here, the
evidence proves quite the contrary; homosexuals are no more
susceptible to mental health or psychological disorders,
substance or alcohol abuse or relationship instability than
their heterosexual counterparts. Accordingly, such
governmental interest does not justify the legislation.
ii.
Social Stigmatization/Necessity of dual gender homes
The Department next claims that best interests of
children are served by placing them in an adoptive home
which minimizes the social stigmatization they may
experience. Again applying rational basis review, this Court
rejects the Department’s attempt to justify the statute by
reference to a supposed dark cloud hovering over homes of
homosexuals and their children. Neither the judiciary, nor
the legislature are experts in psychology, psychiatry or child
development. As such, we must rely on the professionals in
those areas to provide an assessment of the relevant science.
Since, the adoption of the statute in 1977, Cox in 1993,
Amer in 1997 or even Lofton in 2004, the amount and quality
of the relevant research and literature is robust. As expressed
by the Florida Supreme Court in Cox, the legislature
should revisit this issue in light of the research that has taken
place in the last ﬁfteen years. In this regard, the professionals
and the major associations now agree there is a well
established and accepted consensus in the ﬁeld that there is
no optimal gender combination of parents. As such, the
statute is no longer rationally related to serve this
interest.
186
Documents and Data

iii.
Morality
The Department’s ﬁnal rationale is that §63.042(3)
rationally relates to Florida’s legitimate moral interest to
promote public morality. However, public morality per se,
disconnected from any separate legitimate interest, is
not a legitimate government interest to justify unequal
treatment. *** promoting public morals, in and of itself, does
not rescue the statute from constitutional inﬁrmity. Under the
rational basis test, a classiﬁcation can only be upheld if it “bears
a reasonable relationship to a permissive legislative objective
and is not discriminatory, arbitrary, or oppressive.” ***
Nevertheless, a public morality interest is inapplicable in
the adoption context. Electing to parent and assume full
responsibility for a child not one’s own is one of the most noble
decisions made in a lifetime; it is respected by many,
considered by some, made by few and approved for fewer still.
Here Petitioner qualiﬁes for approval as an adoptive parent in
all respects but one; his sexual orientation. The Department’s
position is that homosexuality is immoral. Yet, homosexuals
may be lawful foster parents in Florida and care for our most
fragile children who have been abused, neglected and
abandoned. As such, the exclusion forbidding homosexuals to
adopt children does not further the public morality interest it
seeks to combat. Based on this scenario, there can be no
rationally related public morality interest differentiating in the
State’s support of a homosexual’s long-term foster care
relationship with a child and a denial of their legal relationship
through adoption. Consequently, there is no “morality”
interest with regard to one group of individuals permitted to
form the visage of a family in one context but prohibited in
another. The contradiction between the adoption and foster
care statutes defeats the public morality argument and is thus
not rationally related to serving a governmental interest. ***
iv.
Conclusion
This Court ﬁnds Fla. Stat. §63.042(3) violates the Petitioner
and the Children’s equal protection rights guaranteed by
Article I, § 2 of the Florida Constitution without satisfying a
rational basis. Moreover, the statutory exclusion defeats a
child’s right to permanency as provided by federal and
state law pursuant to the Adoption and Safe Families Act
of 1997.
Sources: In the Matter of the Adoption of John Doe and James Doe, http://
reports.jud11.ﬂcourts.org/Judicial_Orders/REDACTED%20Gill
%20Final%20Judgement%20of%20Adoption.pdf
Court Cases
187

Varnum v. Brien, 763 N.W.2D 862
(IOWA 2009)
As of early 2010, the most recent case establishing the right of same-sex
couples to marry was decided in Iowa in April 2009. In that case, a
group of 12 plaintiffs who were refused marriage licenses in Polk County
sued the state claiming that the action was discriminatory under the
Iowa state constitution. In a unanimous opinion, the state Supreme
Court agreed with the plaintiffs. Some important sections of that deci-
sion are provided here. Omitted citations are designated by ellipses
( . . . ).
[The court begins with a review of the tripartite structure of American
government, including that of the state of Iowa. It sets out its responsibilities
under that system of government.]
A statute inconsistent with the Iowa Constitution must be declared
void, even though it may be supported by strong and deep-seated
traditional beliefs and popular opinion. . . . As Chief Justice John
Marshall wrote over two centuries ago, “It is a proposition too plain to
be contested, that the constitution controls any legislative act repugnant
to it. . . .” . . . It is also well established that courts must, under all
circumstances, protect the supremacy of the constitution as a means of
protecting our republican form of government and our freedoms. As
was observed by Justice Robert H. Jackson decades ago in reference to
the United States Constitution, the very purpose of limiting the power
of the elected branches of government by constitutional provisions like
the Equal Protection Clause is “to withdraw certain subjects from the
vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond the reach of
majorities and ofﬁcials and to establish them as legal principles to be
applied by the courts.” . . .
The same principle applies to the provisions of the Iowa
Constitution that limit government power. The idea that courts, free
from the political inﬂuences in the other two branches of government,
are better suited to protect individual rights was recognized at the time
our Iowa Constitution was formed. . . .
In fulﬁlling this mandate under the Iowa Constitution, we look to
the past and to precedent. We look backwards, not because citizens’
rights are constrained to those previously recognized, but because
historical constitutional principles provide the framework to deﬁne our
future as we confront the challenges of today.
Our responsibility, however, is to protect constitutional rights of
individuals from legislative enactments that have denied those rights,
even when the rights have not yet been broadly accepted, were at one
188
Documents and Data

time unimagined, or challenge a deeply ingrained practice or law
viewed to be impervious to the passage of time. The framers of the
Iowa Constitution knew, as did the drafters of the United States
Constitution, that “times can blind us to certain truths and later
generations can see that laws once thought necessary and proper in fact
serve only to oppress,” and as our constitution “endures, persons in
every generation can invoke its principles in their own search for
greater freedom” and equality. . . .
[Having clariﬁed its role in the debate over same-sex marriage, the court then
reviews in great detail all aspects of the arguments for and against this
institution. First, it determines that the Iowa constitution requires that all
state laws be equally applied to all individuals:]
In other words, to truly ensure equality before the law, the equal
protection guarantee requires that laws treat all those who are similarly
situated with respect to the purposes of the law alike.
[Next, the court determines that homosexual couples are situated in precisely
the same way as heterosexual couples with regard to the state’s marriage laws:]
Therefore, with respect to the subject and purposes of Iowa’s marriage
laws, we ﬁnd that the plaintiffs are similarly situated compared to
heterosexual persons. Plaintiffs are in committed and loving
relationships, many raising families, just like heterosexual couples.
Moreover, ofﬁcial recognition of their status provides an institutional
basis for deﬁning their fundamental relational rights and
responsibilities, just as it does for heterosexual couples. Society beneﬁts,
for example, from providing same-sex couples a stable framework
within which to raise their children and the power to make health care
and end-of-life decisions for loved ones, just as it does when that
framework is provided for opposite-sex couples.
In short, for purposes of Iowa’s marriage laws, which are designed
to bring a sense of order to the legal relationships of committed couples
and their families in myriad ways, plaintiffs are similarly situated in
every important respect, but for their sexual orientation.
[Based on this line of reasoning, the court ﬁnally concludes that:]
In the ﬁnal analysis, we give respect to the views of all Iowans on the
issue of same-sex marriage—religious or otherwise—by giving respect
to our constitutional principles. These principles require that the state
recognize both opposite-sex and same-sex civil marriage. Religious
doctrine and views contrary to this principle of law are unaffected, and
people can continue to associate with the religion that best reﬂects their
views. A religious denomination can still deﬁne marriage as a union
between a man and a woman, and a marriage ceremony performed by
a minister, priest, rabbi, or other person ordained or designated as a
leader of the person’s religious faith does not lose its meaning as a
Court Cases
189

sacrament or other religious institution. The sanctity of all religious
marriages celebrated in the future will have the same meaning as those
celebrated in the past. The only difference is civil marriage will now
take on a new meaning that reﬂects a more complete understanding
of equal protection of the law. This result is what our constitution
requires.
J. Constitutional Inﬁrmity. We are ﬁrmly convinced the exclusion
of gay and lesbian people from the institution of civil marriage does not
substantially further any important governmental objective. The
legislature has excluded a historically disfavored class of persons from
a supremely important civil institution without a constitutionally
sufﬁcient justiﬁcation. There is no material fact, genuinely in dispute,
that can affect this determination. We have a constitutional duty to
ensure equal protection of the law. Faithfulness to that duty requires us
to hold Iowa’s marriage statute, Iowa Code section 595.2, violates the
Iowa Constitution. To decide otherwise would be an abdication of our
constitutional duty. If gay and lesbian people must submit to different
treatment without an exceedingly persuasive justiﬁcation, they are
deprived of the beneﬁts of the principle of equal protection upon which
the rule of law is founded. Iowa Code section 595.2 denies gay and
lesbian people the equal protection of the law promised by the Iowa
Constitution.
Source: In the Supreme Court of Iowa, No. 07–1499, http://
www.iowacourts.gov/Supreme_Court/Recent_Opinions/20090403/
07-1499.pdf?search=07%2D1499#_1, pp. 13–15, 27, 28–29, 66–67
Kutil and Hess v. Blake, WL 1579493 (2009)
The legal status of same-sex adoption in the United States might be char-
acterized as being somewhat uncertainty and probably in a state of ﬂux.
Some states have laws speciﬁcally prohibiting adoption of children by
same-sex couples; other states permit same-sex adoption under some
circumstances, but not others; and other states have no laws at all or
laws that are at least somewhat ambiguous. As a consequence, the status
of same-sex adoptions depends to some extent on case law established by
decisions made by state courts. These decisions, like the laws themselves,
tend to vary from very permissive to highly restrictive. The case of Kutil
and Hess v. Blake illustrates some of the fundamental issues faced by
courts confronted with the issue as to whether same-sex couples are
qualiﬁed to adoption children.
190
Documents and Data

[Background: A child identiﬁed only as B. G. C. was born on December 8,
2007. She tested positive for cocaine and oxycodone at birth and, as
required by West Virginia law, was immediately placed in the foster home of a
lesbian couple, Kathryn Kutil and Cheryl Hess. The child’s legal guardian,
appointed by Fayette County Circuit Court judge Paul M. Blake Jr., objected to
this placement, and ﬁled a petition to have the baby removed to a “traditional
home.” The court denied this petition with the following reasoning.]
C. Summary
Central to our deliberation in this case is the reason or motivation
underlying Respondent’s decision to remove a child from her foster
care home. The motion to remove the child was not supported by any
allegation that B. G. C. was receiving improper or unwise care and
management in her foster home, or that she was being subjected to any
other legally recognized undesirable condition or inﬂuence. W.Va. Code
§ 49-2-12 (1970) (Repl. Vol. 2004); see also W.Va. Code § 49-2-14 (2002)
(Repl. Vol. 2004) (criteria and procedure for removal of child from foster
home). Likewise, no evidence supporting a legal reason for removing
the child was presented at the hearings. As a matter of fact, the court
was never presented with any actual evaluation of the home or
evidence of the quality of the relationship B. G. C. had with Petitioners.
Moreover, Respondent deferred hearing testimony from Petitioners’
witnesses regarding their parenting abilities. Nevertheless, there also
was no indication that Petitioners provided B. G. C. with anything other
than a loving and nurturing home. As Respondent observed from the
bench at the November 21 hearing, “there has been absolutely no
allegation that these women have not cared for [B. G. C.] or the other
kids and, in fact, all of the evidence indicates that they have done very
well and have provided very well for the children.” Without any
information that the foster care placement with Petitioners was not pro-
ceeding well, there was no legal reason for the court to remove B. G. C.
from the only home she has known.
It is more than apparent that the only reason why Petitioners were
being replaced as foster care providers was to promote the adoption
of B. G. C. by what Respondent called in his November 12, 2008, order
a “traditionally deﬁned family, that is, a family consisting of both a
mother and a father.” It was only by addressing issues he anticipated
would develop and believed would be problems at a later point in
this case that Respondent was even able to reach the subject of this
conclusion. The conclusion itself thus represents a blurring of legal
principles applicable to abuse and neglect and adoption. Moreover,
even if our current statutes, rules and regulations could somehow be
read to support the adoption preference proposed by Respondent, such
a newfound principle would need to be harmonized with established
Court Cases
191

law. Under our current law which encourages adoption by qualiﬁed
foster parents, one of the Petitioners seeking to adopt B. G. C.
individually would at the very least need to be considered if not
favored in the selection of the prospective adoptive home. (See
footnote 22)
In the present case, all indications thus far are that B. G. C. has formed
a close emotional bond and nurturing relationship with her foster
parents, which can not be trivialized or ignored. State ex rel.
Treadway v. McCoy; In re Jonathan G. As such, it serves as a classic
example of a case in which the permanency plan for adoption should
move quickly to the desired result of a permanent home for B. G. C.
One of the Petitioners who has already adopted a child (See footnote
23) and appreciates the tremendous responsibility adoption entails,
has recently expressed the desire to adopt B. G. C. Clearly, that
Petitioner should not be excluded from consideration for the reason
stated by Respondent. These factors all should serve to facilitate the
selection process, which needs to be completed as expeditiously as
possible in order to further the best interests of B. G. C. and in
recognition and support of the parenting investment which has been
made.
IV. Conclusion
For the reasons stated in this opinion, the writ of prohibition sought by
Petitioners is granted.
Source: In the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia, January 2009
Term, No. 34618, http://www.state.wv.us/wvsca/docs/spring09/
34618.htm
Order on Intervenor’s Plea
to the Jurisdiction (2009)
The increasingly complicated patchwork of laws in the United States
with regard to same-sex relationships (marriage, civil unions, domestic
partnerships, etc.) has almost inevitably begun to lead to complex legal
questions when two or more states are involved in a legal dispute. As
an example, in 2009 two men who were legally married in Massachu-
setts in 2006 and then moved to Texas, ﬁled for divorce in January 2009.
The legal issue is complex in this case because same-sex marriage is spe-
ciﬁcally prohibited by Section 32a of Article I of the Bill of Rights of the
Texas constitution (see below). In October 2009, district court judge
Tena Callahan not only ruled that her court had jurisdiction to hear the
divorce case, but that Texas state law and Section 32a of the Texas
192
Documents and Data

constitution violated the U.S. Constitution. At the time of this writing
(early 2010), the consequences of this ruling—veriﬁcation that laws
against same-sex marriage in Texas are invalid—had not fully been
explored. The judge’s ruling on this issue is reproduced here.
ORDER ON INTERVENOR’S PLEA TO THE JURISDICTION
On the limited issue of whether this Court has jurisdiction to
divorce parties who have legally married in another jurisdiction and
who otherwise meet the residency and other prerequisites required to
ﬁle for a divorce in Dallas County, Texas:
The Court FINDS that Article 1, Section 32(a) of the Texas
Constitution violates the right to equal protection and therefore violates
the 14th Amendment of the United States Constitution,
The Court FINDS that Texas Family Code Section 6.204 violates the
right to equal. protection and therefore violates the 14th Amendment of
the United States Constitution.
Accordingly, the Court FINDS that it has jurisdiction to hear a suit
for divorce ﬁled by persons legally married. in another jurisdiction and
who meet the residency and other prerequisites required to ﬁle for
divorce in Dallas County, Texas, and
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED” that Intervenor’s Plea to the
Jurisdiction is denied and that the Intervention ﬁled by the Ofﬁce of the
Attorney General is hereby stricken. SIGNED: October I, 2009.
Cause No. DF-09-1074. In the Matter of the Marriage of J. B. and H. B.
http://pdfserver.amlaw.com/tx/intervenor.pdf.
[The two documents to which the order refers are as follows:]
Sec. 32. MARRIAGE. (a) Marriage in this state shall consist only of the
union of one man and one woman.
Source: Texas Constitution.http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/
CN/htm/CN.1.htm#1.32
Sec. 6.204. RECOGNITION OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE OR CIVIL
UNION. (a) In this section, “civil union” means any relationship status
other than marriage that:
(1)
is intended as an alternative to marriage or applies primarily
to cohabitating persons; and
(2)
grants to the parties of the relationship legal protections,
beneﬁts, or responsibilities granted to the spouses of a
marriage.
(b) A marriage between persons of the same sex or a civil union is
contrary to the public policy of this state and is void in this state.
Court Cases
193

(c) The state or an agency or political subdivision of the state may not
give effect to a:
(1)
public act, record, or judicial proceeding that creates,
recognizes, or validates a marriage between persons of the
same sex or a civil union in this state or in any other
jurisdiction; or
(2)
right or claim to any legal protection, beneﬁt, or res-
ponsibility asserted as a result of a marriage between persons
of the same sex or a civil union in this state or in any other
jurisdiction.
Source: Family Code. Title 1. The Marriage Relationship. Subtitle C.
Dissolution of Marriage. Chapter 6. Suit for Dissolution of Marriage.
Subchapter A. Grounds for Divorce and Defenses, http://www.statutes
.legis.state.tx.us/Docs/FA/htm/FA.6.htm#6.204
Data and Statistics
Table 6.1: Same-Sex Marriages in
Massachusetts (2009)
As the ﬁrst state in the union to legalize same-sex marriage, Massa-
chusetts has the most complete set of data on the number of such
ceremonies performed thus far. The table below summarizes
unpublished data on same-sex marriages in the commonwealth.
194
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.1
Same-Sex Marriages in Massachusetts (2009)
Same-Sex Marriages
Year
Male-to-Female Marriages
Male-to-Male
Female-to-Female
2004a
27,196 (81.6%)
2,176 (6.4%)
3,945 (11.6%)
2005
37,447 (94.8%)
736 (1.9%)
1,324 (3.4%)
2006
36,550 (96.2%)
543 (1.5%)
899 (2.5%)
2007
36,373 (96.0%)
591 (1.6%)
933 (2.5%)
2008b
33,382 (93.9%)
856 (2.4%)
1,282 (3.6%)
aMay 17 through December 31, 2004.
b2008 data are provisional; they include 23 cases with missing gender information.
Percentages may not add to 100% because of rounding.
Source: Massachusetts Registry of Vital Records and Statistics; unpublished data provided by e-mail to author,
November 30, 2009.

Table 6.2: Number of Same-Sex Couples in
Legally Recognized Relationships (2009)
Data on the number of same-sex couples in legally recognized
relationships (marriage, civil union, domestic partnership, etc.) in
countries around the world is incomplete. Some nations that recog-
nize such relationships do not collect data on the numbers of couple
enrolled in them, and other nations conduct only incomplete
surveys. The table below summarizes some of the most recent data
available from selected countries worldwide on this topic.
Table 6.3: Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex
Marriage Data from the Netherlands (2009)
Critics of same-sex marriage sometimes argue that the practice
should not be given legal approval because it would have
Data and Statistics
195
TABLE 6.2
Number of Couples in Legally Recognized Relationships in Selected Countries
Country
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Canadaa
7,465
Denmarkb
308
347
303
320
333
394
400
425
441
Netherlandsc
1,600
1,976
2,019
New Zealandd
157
348
320
325
Norwaye
154
185
183
204
192
192
227
United Kingdomf
1,953
16,195
8,728
7,169
England
1,790
14,383
7,635
6,276
Wales
67
560
294
282
Scotland
84
1,047
688
525
Northern Ireland
12
116
111
86
aSource: Statistics Canada. Table 2: Distribution of Couples by Conjugal Status, Canada, 2001 and 2006. http://
www12.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2006/as-sa/97-553/table/t2eng.cfm.
bSource: Statistics Denmark. Entered Registered Partnerships by Sex, Age of Youngest Person and Age of Oldest
Person. http://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/SelectVarVal/Deﬁne.asp?Maintable=IREG1&PLanguage=1.
cSource: Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Marriages and Partnership Registrations; Key Figures. http://statline
.cbs.nl/StatWeb/publication/?VW=T&DM=SLEN&PA=37772eng.
dSource: Statistics New Zealand. Provisional Civil Unions and Marriages. http://www.stats.govt.nz/methods
_and_services/access-data/tables/civil-unions-marriages-provisional.aspx.
eSource: Statistics Norway. Table 98: Partnerships Contracted, by Age of the Oldest Partner (1993–2006). http://
www.ssb.no/english/yearbook/tab/tab-098.html.
fSource: Ofﬁce for National Statistics. Table 1: Number of Civil Partnerships and Average Age of Civil Partners by
Country of Formation and Sex, 2005–2008. http://www.statistics.gov.uk/StatBase/Expodata/Spreadsheets/
D9873.xls.

devastating effects on traditional opposite-sex marriages.
Although the speciﬁcs of this argument are not always clearly
stated, one presumes that it implies that, were same-sex couples
given the right to marry, opposite-sex couples would be less
likely to marry or would divorce more commonly. Since the
practice of giving approval for any kind of legal same-sex
relationship isrelatively new, there are few data against which
to test this hypothesis. Probably the most complete set of
data comes from Denmark, the ﬁrst nation in the world to give
legal approval to same-sex relationships, in the form of regis-
treret partnerskab, or registered partnerships. These partner-
ships are identical to opposite-sex marriages except for
three modest exceptions. The data below show trends in tradi-
tional, opposite-sex marriages, and same-sex registered partner-
ships in Denmark from 1989 to 2008.
Table 6.4: Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex
Marriage Data from Belgium (2009)
A second country from which data are available about the effects
of same-sex marriage on opposite-sex marriage is Belgium, which
is the second nation in the world (after the Netherlands) to legalize
same-sex marriage. Data for the number of same-sex and opposite-
sex marriages and divorces are provided here.
196
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.3
Marriage and Divorce Rates in Denmark, 1989–2008
1989
1990
1991
1992 1993
1994
1995
1996
1997 1998
Marriages (per 10,000)
60
61
60
62
61
68
66
68
65
66
Divorces (total)
15,152 13,731 12,655 12,981 12,971 13,709 12,976 12,776 12,774 13,141
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007 2008
Marriages (per 10,000)
67
72
68
69
65
70
67
67
67
68
Divorces (total)
13,537 14,381 14,597 15,304 15,763 15,774 15,300 14,343 14,066 14,695
Source: Statistics Denmark. Summary Vital Statistics. http://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/SelectVarVal/Deﬁne.asp
?Maintable=HISB3&PLanguage=1.

Table 6.5: Divorce Rates by States,
2004–2007 (2009)
Same-sex marriages are such a recent phenomenon that data on
their potential effects on traditional marriage are not yet available.
Based on critics’ argument that same-sex marriage is a threat to
traditional marriage, however, preliminary data are available for
national studies of divorce rates in the 50 states and District of
Columbia. If critics’ argument is correct, one might expect to see
divorce rates beginning to rise in states where same-sex marriage
is legal. As of early 2010, only one state, Massachusetts, provides
sufﬁcient data to permit some assessment of that claim. As the
following data show, however, Massachusetts continues to have
the lowest divorce rate of any state in the union for which data are
available. It may, of course, still be too soon to see the effect of
same-sex marriage on divorce rates.
Data and Statistics
197
TABLE 6.4
Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Marriage Data from Belgium (2009)
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Marriages, Opposite-Sex
41,777
43,296
43,141
44,813
45,561
45,613
Marriages, Same-Sex
793
954
1,170
1,238
1,719
n/a
Divorces
31,355
31,405
30,840
29,189
30,081
35,366
Sources: Marriages: http://statbel.fgov.be/fr/binaries/31171_fr_tcm326-77711.xls; same-sex marriages: http://
statbel.fgov.be/fr/statistiques/chiffres/population/mariage_divorce_cohabitation/cohabitation/index.jsp; divorces:
http://statbel.fgov.be/fr/statistiques/chiffres/population/mariage_divorce_cohabitation/divorces/index.jsp.
TABLE 6.5
Divorce Rates by States, 2004–2007
State
2004
2005
2006
2007
AL
4.9
4.9
5.0
4.6
AK
4.3
4.3
4.2
4.2
AZ
4.2
4.1
3.9
3.9
AR
6.1
6.0
5.9
5.9
CA
—
—
—
—
CO
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.4
CT
3.1
3.0
3.1
3.2
DE
3.7
3.9
3.8
3.7
(continued )

TABLE 6.5
Divorce Rates by States, 2004–2007 (continued)
State
2004
2005
2006
2007
DC
1.9
2.1
2.1
1.7
FL
4.8
4.6
4.8
4.6
GA
—
—
—
—
HI
—
—
—
—
ID
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.9
IL
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.6
IN
—
—
—
—
IA
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.6
KS
3.3
3.1
3.1
3.4
KY
4.9
4.6
5.0
4.7
LA
—
—
—
—
ME
4.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
MD
3.2
3.1
3.0
3.0
MA
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.3
MI
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.4
MN
2.8
—
—
—
MS
4.5
4.4
4.8
4.5
MO
3.8
3.6
3.8
3.8
MT
3.8
4.5
4.4
4.1
NE
3.4
3.3
3.4
3.5
NV
6.4
7.5
6.8
6.5
NH
3.9
3.8
4.0
3.8
NJ
3.0
2.9
3.0
3.0
NM
4.6
4.6
4.3
4.3
NY
3.0
2.8
3.1
2.9
NC
4.2
4.1
4.0
4.0
ND
3.1
3.0
3.1
3.0
OH
3.6
3.5
3.5
3.4
OK
4.9
5.6
5.3
5.2
OR
4.1
4.1
4.0
3.9
PA
3.0
2.3
2.8
2.9
RI
3.0
2.9
3.0
2.8
SC
3.2
2.9
3.0
3.0
SD
3.1
2.8
3.2
3.1
TN
4.9
4.7
4.6
4.3
TX
3.6
3.3
3.4
3.3
UT
4.1
4.0
3.9
3.6
VT
3.9
3.6
3.8
3.6
VA
3.9
4.0
4.0
3.8
WA
4.3
4.3
4.1
4.0
WV
5.0
5.1
5.0
5.1
WI
3.0
2.9
3.0
2.9
WY
5.2
5.3
5.2
5.0
Source: National Center for Health Statistics. “Divorce Rates by State: 1990, 1995, and 1999–2007.” http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvss/
Divorce%20Rates%2090%2095%20and%209907.pdf.

7
Organizations
T
he issues of same-sex marriage and same-sex adoption are now
very contentious issues in the United States and several nations
around the world. A number of organizations are engaged
in promoting one viewpoint or another about these two issues.
On the one hand, gay and lesbian civil rights groups have been
especially active in pushing for legalization of same-sex marriage,
as are a number of groups traditionally interested in human and
civil rights. On the other hand, the most vociferous objections to
same-sex marriage and same-sex adoption have come from reli-
gious groups, including not only those of the Christian faith, but
also those from other faiths, especially those in Muslim countries.
This chapter provides information on a number of these groups
who are lobbying both for and against same-sex marriage and
same-sex adoption, as well as some organizations who attempt to
take a more neutral stance on the issue. The chapter is divided into
three main sections: those that favor same-sex marriage, those that
oppose same-sex marriage, and those that are interested in the issue
of marriage, but neutral on the question of same-sex marriage.
Within each section, groups are then listed alphabetically.
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex
Marriage
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
URL: http://www.aclu.org/
199

The American Civil Liberties Union was founded in 1920 for the
purpose of working for the protection of the civil rights of all
Americans. The ACLU is arguably the best known, most highly
respected, and most successful of all organizations associated
with civil rights issues in the United States. Its current areas of
concern include the rights of disabled people, free speech, prison-
ers’ rights, reproductive freedom, the rights of the poor, voting
rights, and women’s rights. In the area of gay and lesbian rights,
the organization has led or participated in a number of legal
actions, including a lawsuit against the University of Pittsburgh
over beneﬁts for gay and lesbian employees, a lawsuit in Texas
against the state’s sodomy laws, domestic partner beneﬁts for
the lesbian survivor of the 9/11 attack, and a number of legal
actions involving adoption rights of lesbians and gay men. Most
of the ACLU’s current activities on behalf of lesbians and gay
men are conducted through the organization’s Lesbian Gay Bisex-
ual Transgender Project.
Publications: Too High a Price: The Case Against Restricting Gay
Parenting; Transgender People and the Law: Frequently Asked Ques-
tions; Why We’re Asking Courts and Legislatures for Transgender
Equality; The Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgendered Peo-
ple; Where We Are 2003: The Annual Report of the ACLU’s Nationwide
Work on LGBT Rights and HIV/AIDS.
API Equality
URL: http://www.apiequality.org/
API Equality was founded in 2004 as the Asian Paciﬁc American
Coalition for Equality (APACE) in order to work for marriage
equality for all individuals of Asian and Paciﬁc Island heritage.
It later changed its name to Asian Equality and eventually to
API Equality. API Equality is an ad hoc coalition of more than
50 Asian and Paciﬁc Island organizations cooperating in the
effort to attain equal civil rights in marriage for Americans of
Asian and Paciﬁc Island heritage. The organization has been
especially active in efforts to obtain legalization of same-sex
marriage in California, where it ﬁled an amicus curiae brief in
the 2006 Marriage Cases heard before the state supreme court
and in the later statewide election dealing with same-sex
marriage.
Publications: None.
200
Organizations

Children of Lesbians and Gays Everywhere (COLAGE)
URL: http://www.colage.org/
Children of Lesbians and Gays Everywhere grew out of a 1998
national conference of the Gay and Lesbian Parents Coalition
International (now the Family Equality Council), at which sessions
were arranged for children of same-sex parents as well as for
parents themselves. Some of the children attendees at the
conference eventually decided to form a more formal organization
of their own, which they named Just for Us. At its annual
conference in 1993, Just for Us decided to change the organization’s
name to its current name of Children of Lesbians and Gays Every-
where. COLAGE opened its ﬁrst national ofﬁce in San Francisco
in 1995 and hired its ﬁrst paid director two years later. The organi-
zation now has ﬁve paid full-time staff members, as well as fellows,
interns, volunteers, and part-time employees. Much of the organi-
zation’s work is carried out through its 41 chapters in 26 states,
the District of Columbia, Canada, England, and Sweden.
Publications: Just for Us newsletter; free posters about parents of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) persons.
Egale Canada
URL: http://www.egale.ca/
Egale Canada is Canada’s premier organization working to obtain
equal rights for LGBT persons. It has members in every province
and territory, and its board of directors includes one male and one
female member from every such district. Egale Canada has been
involved in every important legal action in Canada aimed at provid-
ing civil and legal equality of all citizens, regardless of their sexual ori-
entation. Members of the organization have also testiﬁed before
parliament on a number of times on issues of interest to LGBT per-
sons, such as tax policy, immigration, same-sex marriage and divorce,
child custody and adoption, and school safety for LGBTyouth.
Publications: INFO Egale (quarterly newsletter); Egale Update
(monthly report); The Year in Review (annual report).
Equality Federation (EF)
URL: http://www.equalityfederation.org/
The Equality Federation was formed in 2006 to work for the ad-
vancement of equal civil rights for LGBT persons. The organization
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
201

focuses its efforts on state and local projects rather than primarily on
the federal level. It provides resources and leadership training for
state and local groups in the pursuit of these goals. One of its most
useful projects is the annual “State of the States” report, which sum-
marizes and analyzes a host of information about the ﬁnances,
organization, activities, and personnel of state and local LGBTorgan-
izations. EF’s Web site also provides an interactive map that allows
access to equal rights organizations in 40 of the 50 states. As of early
2010, the organization’s campaigns of special interest concerned sup-
port for passage of the Employment Non-Discrimination Act
(ENDA) pending in the U.S. Congress, promotion of beneﬁts for
domestic partners of federal employees, support for health care re-
form legislation (an issue of concern for gay men and lesbians as
much as it is for nongays and nonlesbians), and support for the
Reuniting Families Act, also pending in the Congress.
Publications: Occasional online reports on lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender issues.
Families Like Ours (FLO)
URL: http://www.familieslikeours.org/
Families Like Ours is an organization of adoptive and foster parents
offering assistance to other couples who wish to become adoptive
or foster parents. FLO focuses its efforts primarily, but not exclu-
sively, on gay and lesbian couples. It offers advice, counseling,
and mentoring for couples, from the time they begin to consider
fostering or adopting, until that process has been completed. The
organization provides a comprehensive guide to adoption and
fostering in its publication “Adoption 101: A Family Guide,” avail-
able on its Web site. In 2009, the organization was named nonproﬁt
of the year by the Greater Seattle Business Association for its work
in reducing barriers to adoption by qualiﬁed couples.
Publications: Families Like Ours (monthly newsletter); Adoption
101: A Family Guide (online publication); Becoming a Foster Parent
(online publication).
Family Equality Council (FEC)
URL: http://www.familyequality.org/
Founded originally as the Gay Fathers Coalition in 1979, this
organization later changed its name to Gay and Lesbian Parents
202
Organizations

Coalition International in 1986 and to its current name in 2007. FEC
is a national nonproﬁt organization that works to gain equality not
only for same-sex couples, but also for other nontraditional fami-
lies, such as single-parent families and families of mixed race
whose needs may be ignored by society at large. Family Equality
Council operates OUTspoken, a national speakers bureau that
provides speakers on family equality for a wide range of groups
and events. As of early 2010, more than one thousand men and
women from 39 states, the District of Columbia, one U.S. territory,
and three foreign countries have volunteered to participate in the
OUTspoken program.
Publications: 52 Ways to Be OUTspoken; Family Discussions about
Political Attacks on Our Families; Talking to Children about Our
Families; Interactive Tool: The Rainbow Report Card; and many other
brochures available online.
Freedom to Marry
URL: http://www.freedomtomarry.org/
Freedom to Marry was founded by civil rights attorney and activ-
ist Evan Wolfson for the purpose of promoting the rights of all
Americans to marry, regardless of their sexual orientation.
Through its Voices of Equality program, it draws on a diverse
group of prominent Americans who speak out on equality of mar-
riage rights. The group includes individuals such as Rocky
Anderson, mayor of Salt Lake City; Christine Chavez, political
director of the United Farm Workers of America; Dakota Fine,
Washington, DC, activist; Kim Gandy, president of the National
Organization for Women; Congressman John Lewis; and Rever-
end William G. Sinkford, president of the Unitarian Universalist
Association.
Publications: Why Marriage Matters America, Equality, and Gay
People’s Right to Marry (book); Candidates’ Guide on How to Support
Marriage Equality and Get Elected (online publication); Marriage
Makes a Word of Difference (online publication); The Freedom to
Marry: Why Non-Gay People Care and What We Can Do About It
(online publication); For Richer, for Poorer: The Freedom to Marry as
a Matter of Economic Justice (online publication); What Is Freedom
to Marry? (online publication); The Time Is Now to Fight for the Free-
dom to Marry (online publication); Stand Up for Our Constitution
(online publication).
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
203

Gay and Lesbian Advocates and Defenders (GLAD)
URL: http://www.glad.org/
GLAD is one of the oldest gay and lesbian rights organizations in
the nation, having been formed in 1978 to ﬁght for an end to dis-
crimination based on sexual orientation, HIV status, and gender
identity. Some of the issues about which GLAD has litigated in
the past are civil rights, crime and law enforcement, employment,
family issues, health care, marriage and civil unions, public
accommodations, transgender issues, and gay and lesbian youth
and students. GLAD’s current work includes ﬁve major cam-
paigns: the Civil Rights Project, AIDS Law Project, Transgender
Rights Project, New England Marriage Campaign, and DOMA
Section 3 Challenge. The New England Marriage Campaign has
as its goal the legalization of same-sex marriage for all six New
England states by the year 2012.
Publications: Legal publications such as A Legal Q & A for Kids of
Trans Parents; Transgender Students’ Use of Bathrooms and Locker
Rooms; Maine: Joint Adoption Practice and Procedure; New Hampshire
Civil Unions; Legal Issues for Non-MA Couples Who Married in MA;
Marriage Guide for RI Couples; Rights of LGBTQ Youth in RI; Rights
of LGBTQ Youth in ME.
Gill Foundation
URL: http://www.gillfoundation.org/
The Gill Foundation was established in 1994 by Coloradan Tim Gill
in response to a rancorous campaign to limit the rights of gay men
and lesbians in that state. Founder of the software company Quark,
Inc., Gill was ﬁnancially able to provide a solid basis for the foun-
dation. Since its creation, the foundation has awarded more than
$120 million to support programs and organizations working to
ensure equal civil rights for lesbians and gay men in the United
States. Much of the foundation’s work is currently carried out
through two programs, OutGiving and the Democracy Project.
OutGiving is an effort to increase philanthropic giving to gay and
lesbian organizations, while the Democracy Project is a program
to increase the efﬁcient operation of more than 400 groups in the
United States working for gay and lesbian rights. One of the major
areas of concern to the Gill Foundation is the support for efforts to
achieve equal treatment for lesbians and gay men in the ﬁeld of
204
Organizations

personal relationships, such as same-sex marriage, domestic
partnerships, and civil unions.
Publications: Annual Reports (available online).
Human Rights Campaign (HRC)
URL: http://www.hrc.org/
The Human Rights Campaign was founded in 1980 to work for the
civil rights of all gay men and lesbians in the United States. The
organization currently claims 700,000 members and calls itself
the largest organization of its kind in the country. The organization’s
Center for the Study of Equality works to improve the general
understanding of gay and lesbian issues. HRC has published a
number of reports on various aspects of the gay and lesbian rights
movement, such as “Transgender Inclusion in the Workplace,”
“Family Matters,” “Equality from State to State: Gay, Lesbian,
Bisexual and Transgender Americans and State Legislation,” and
“Small Business Basics.” One of the HRC’s current campaigns is
its Millions for Marriage Petition, an effort to obtain more than a
million signatures for a petition to be sent to the U.S. Congress in
support of same-sex marriage. The organization also provides
information about the current status of same-sex marriage and
other arrangements, such as domestic partnerships and civil
unions, on its Web site.
Publications: Resource Guide to Coming Out; A Straight Guide to
GLBT Americans; Coming Out for African Americans; Guı´a de Recur-
sos Para Salir del Clo´set; Coming Out As Transgender; Living Openly
in Your Place of Worship; Buying for Equality 2008; Corporate Equality
Index 2008; Healthcare Equality Index 2008.
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
URL: http://hrw.org/
For many years, Human Rights Watch has included issues of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights as one of its pri-
mary ﬁelds of concern. Each year, it reviews and comments on
progress and problems with regard to these issues in various
countries around the world. HRW activities span the globe; in
2008 alone, for example, it investigated cases of human rights vio-
lation involving lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgendered
people in Colombia, Egypt, Gambia, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan,
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
205

Morocco, Nigeria, Turkey, Uganda, and the United States.
The organization’s Web site contains links to organizations
working for LGBT rights in more than 100 countries around the
world.
Publications (selection only): Courting History: The Landmark
International Criminal Court’s First Years; Still Waiting: Bringing
Justice for War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Genocide in
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Cantonal and District Courts; My Rights,
and My Right to Know: Lack of Access to Therapeutic Abortion in
Peru; “As If I Am Not Human”: Abuses against Asian Domestic
Workers in Saudi Arabia; China’s Forbidden Zones: Shutting the
Media out of Tibet and Other “Sensitive” Stories; United Kingdom:
Brieﬁng on the Counter-Terrorism Bill 2008; Preempting Justice:
Counterterrorism Laws and Procedures in France; “As If They Fell
from the Sky”: Counterinsurgency, Rights Violations, and Rampant
Impunity in Ingushetia; Neighbors In Need: Zimbabweans Seeking
Refuge in South Africa; “We Need a Law for Liberation”: Gender, Sex-
uality, and Human Rights in a Changing Turkey; “We Have the Upper
Hand”: Freedom of Assembly in Russia and the Human Rights of Les-
bian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People; Restrictions on AIDS
Activists in China.
Immigration Equality (IE)
URL: http://www.immigrationequality.org/
Immigration Equality claims a membership of over ten thousand
lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgendered and HIV-positive
people throughout the United States. The organization was formed
in 1994 to work for changes in U.S. immigration law that would
allow such individuals to sponsor their partners for immigration
beneﬁts, which is not possible under current immigration law. IE
works for the passage of the Uniting American Families Act of
2009 to achieve this goal. IE currently focuses its efforts in ﬁve
major areas: binational couples, asylum for individuals who may
be persecuted for their sexual orientation, transgender issues, HIV
issues, and detection for immigrants.
Publications: “Family, Unvalued”; “LGBT/HIVAsylum Manual”;
“LGBT Immigration Basics”; “HIV Immigration Basics” (Web
publications); also available online are archival copies of the
organization’s earlier newsletters and brochures on speciﬁc
topics.
206
Organizations

International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights
Commission (IGLHRC)
URL: http://www.iglhrc.org/cgi-bin/iowa/home/index.html
The International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission is a
New York–based nonproﬁt corporation whose purpose it is to work
for the civil rights of gay men and lesbians in all nations of the world.
IGLHRC coordinates its efforts with other social organizations and
agencies throughout the world, conducts an active program of edu-
cation about issues of human sexuality, and provides rapid
responses to human rights violations related to issues of sexuality
throughout the world. The organization’s work is currently organ-
ized under six major topics: Africa, Asia, Asylum Documentation,
Eastern Europe and Central Asia, HIV/AIDS, and Latin America
and Caribbean. IGLHRC is an excellent source of information on
the status of same-sex marriage, civil unions, and domestic and reg-
istered partnerships in most countries of the world. Its reports can
be found in the Press Room and Take Action sections of its Web sites.
Publications: Numerous newsletters, annual reports, facts sheets,
statements, public presentations, and other resource materials.
International Lesbian and Gay Association (ILGA)
URL: http://www.ilga.org/
The International Lesbian and Gay Association was founded in
1978 to work for achieving equal rights for gay men and lesbians
(and now bisexuals and transgendered persons) in all countries
throughout the world. Today, it consists of more than 600 member
organizations in 90 countries, ranging from small local groups to
national organizations with thousands of members. ILGA holds
an annual conference and a number of regional conferences. It
has produced a number of reports on the status of LGBT people
in various countries and regions of the world, as well as on spe-
ciﬁc topics, such as HIV/AIDS disease, homophobia, same-sex
marriage, the worldwide legal status of same-sex relationships,
workplace discrimination, and hate music. ILGA’s News section
on its Web sites contains useful information on the status of
same-sex marriage in nations around the world. In a recent post-
ing, the section had articles on same-sex marriage and other types
of unions in the United States, Nepal, South Africa, Malawi,
Mexico, Australia, and Russia.
Publications: See reports listed above.
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
207

Lambda Legal
URL: http://www.lambdalegal.org/
Lambda Legal is an organization devoted to achieving equal rights
for LGBT persons by litigating cases, promoting public education
programs, and advocating for appropriate public policy decisions.
The organization has a national ofﬁce in New York City and regional
ofﬁces in Los Angeles, Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta. Lambda Legal
has been involved on some level or another in almost every major
court case related to LGBT issues since its founding in 1973.
Publications: Of Counsel; Of Counsel on Campus (newsletters);
eNews (online newsletter).
Log Cabin Republicans
URL: http://online.logcabin.org/
Log Cabin Republicans is an organization of gay and lesbian
Republicans working to transform the Republican Party on issues
of concern to them from inside the party. The organization main-
tains a full-time staff at its national headquarters in Washington,
DC, and at its western ﬁeld ofﬁce in Sacramento, California, and
has 44 chapters in 30 states. Log Cabin Republicans described
themselves as “loyal Republicans” who subscribe to traditional
party values, such as a strong national defense, individual liberty,
individual responsibility, and a free-market economy. Although
the organization is in agreement with most tenets and policies of
the Republic Party, it holds very different views on some issues
related to same-sex relationships. For example, it supports the
right of same-sex couples to marry and to adopt children. In
2009, for example, the group strongly criticized President Barack
Obama for failing to work for the repeal of the federal Defense of
Marriage Act and for removing the current “don’t ask, don’t tell”
policy for gay men and lesbians in the U.S. military.
Publication: Inclusion Wins (electronic newsletter).
Marriage Equality USA (MEUSA)
URL: http://www.marriageequality.org/
Marriage Equality USA was ofﬁcially formed on Valentine’s Day
and National Freedom to Marry Day, February 12, 1998. The
organization was created by a small group of gay and lesbian
208
Organizations

activists who believed that individuals of the same sex had the
same right to marry as did any other American citizen. The organi-
zation has expanded to include chapters in Arizona, California,
Florida, Indiana, Iowa, New Hampshire, Ohio, and Pennsylvania.
MEUSA works with local groups to push for legislation legalizing
same-sex marriage, and partners with plaintiffs in court cases chal-
lenging the limitation of marriage to opposite-sex couples. It spon-
sors a Same-Sex Wedding Expo in New York City at which gay and
nongay vendors provide information about their services for
same-sex weddings and other commitment ceremonies.
Publications: The MEUSA online shop carries a number of print
and nonprint resources produced by other agencies, such as
“Freedom to Marry” (DVD), “Tying the Knot” (DVD), Why You
Should Give a Damn about Gay Marriage (book), “The Gay Marriage
Thing” (DVD), and “Saving Marriage” (DVD).
National Center for Lesbian Rights (NCLR)
URL: http://www.nclrights.org/
The National Center for Lesbian Rights was founded in 1977 by
lesbian attorneys Roberta Achtenberg and Donna Hitchens to
work for the rights of LGBT persons. Each year the center
provides legal services for about ﬁve thousand seniors, youth,
immigrants, athletes, and other LGBT persons. The organiza-
tion is also active in public advocacy and educational programs
dealing with LBGT issues. It has been involved in all of the impor-
tant court cases involving same-sex marriage and same-sex adop-
tion heard in the United States.
Publications: Press releases, news announcements, and other
media resources online.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF)
URL: http://www.thetaskforce.org/
The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force focuses on a number of
issues of special interest to gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and trans-
gendered people, including elections and politics, issues of aging,
nondiscrimination, parenting and families, hate crimes, and
HIV/AIDS. In addition to its national ofﬁce in Washington, DC, it
maintains regional ofﬁces in Cambridge, Massachusetts; Miami;
New York City; Los Angeles; and Minneapolis. The NGLTF Policy
Institute conducts research and issues periodic reports, issues
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
209

maps, and fact sheets on a variety of topics related to the civil
rights of LGBT people. The Task Force has issued a number of
reports on same-sex marriage, civil unions, and domestic partner-
ships, and has been actively involved in state campaigns for the
legalization of same-sex marriage and adoption and in opposition
to proposed laws deﬁning marriage strictly in heterosexual terms.
Publications: Opening the Door to the Inclusion of Transgender People:
The Nine Keys to Making Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
Organizations Fully Transgender-Inclusive (report); Living in the
Margins: A National Survey of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
Asian and Paciﬁc Islander Americans (report); Same-Sex Marriage
Initiatives and Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Voters in the 2006 Elections
(report); Policy Priorities in the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
Community (report).
National Lesbian and Gay Law Association (NLGLA)
URL: http://www.lgbtbar.org/
The National Lesbian and Gay Law Association was founded at
the 1987 March on Washington for lesbian and gay rights. Within
two years, the new organization had adopted a set of by-laws,
held its ﬁrst Lavender Law conference in San Francisco, and
added 239 paid members to its roles. In 1992, NLGLA became
an ofﬁcial afﬁliate of the American Bar Association (ABA). Its cur-
rent activities in promoting equal treatment of all persons regard-
less of sexual orientation are carried out in cooperation with the
ABA’s Section on Individual Rights and Responsibilities and its
Committee on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.
Publications: Monthly electronic newsletter.
National Organization for Women (NOW)
URL: http://www.now.org/
The National Organization for Women was founded in 1966 by a
group of 28 women led by Betty Friedan as a mechanism by
which they could work for the civil rights of women. The organi-
zation now claims a membership of more than half a million
contributing members in ﬁve hundred chapters in all 50 states
and the District of Columbia. It lists its six top priorities as of
2010 as abortion rights and reproductive issues, violence against
women, constitutional equality, promoting diversity and ending
210
Organizations

racism, lesbian rights, and economic justice. NOW also lists 21
other important issues in which it is interested, including family
and family law, marriage equality, immigration, women-friendly
workplace, and young feminist programs. The organization
devotes an extended Web page on the topic of same-sex marriage
that includes talking points on the issue, NOW conference resolu-
tions, fact sheets, and updated information on the status of same-
sex marriage nationally and in various states.
Publications: Clothing, gifts, bumper stickers, buttons, and
DVDs (“Hollywood’s Smoke and Mirrors” and “Redeﬁning
Liberation”).
New Family Social (NFS)
URL: http://www.newfamilysocial.co.uk/
New Family Social is an English agency organized to provide
information about and support for same-sex couples who wish
to adopt. The organization was formed in 2007, two years after
same-sex adoption became legal in the United Kingdom. The
purpose of the organization is to provide assistance for same-sex
couples who are thinking about adopting a child, are in the process
of adopting a child, or who have already adopted a child and have
questions or need support in these procedures. The NFS Web site
provides useful information on the basics of same-sex adoption,
links to a number of same-sex adoption agencies and organiza-
tions in the United Kingdom, a page for sharing information and
experiences, and access to the organization’s library.
Publications: None.
Our Family Coalition (OFC)
URL: http://www.ourfamily.org/
Our Family Coalition is based in the San Francisco Bay area and
consists of about 750 same-sex couples and their families, educa-
tors, caregivers, children, youth, and others. The wide variety of
programs offered by the group includes social events, school
advocacy programs, peer support groups, parent educational pro-
grams, social justice campaigns, training sessions for medical and
social service agencies, and ﬁscal assistance programs. OFC’s Web
site provides links to a number of relevant state and national
organizations interested in same-sex adoption and families.
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
211

Publications: Our Family Coalition Newsletter; Best of the Gay
(family resource guide); handouts and reports, such as “Our
Families—Attributes of Gay Area LGBTQ Families” and “Quick
Facts”; posters on “Family Values”; and program materials for
educational workshops.
Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians & Gays (PFLAG)
URL: http://community.pﬂag.org/
Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians & Gays is a nonproﬁt
organization of more than 200,000 members and supporters
with over ﬁve hundred chapters in the United States. It operates
out of a national ofﬁce in Washington, DC, and 13 regional ofﬁces.
PFLAG has six strategic goals that focus on building an organiza-
tion strong enough to carry out its objectives: creating a world in
which young people can grow up without fear of violence or dis-
crimination; ending the isolation of gay men, lesbians, bisexuals,
and transgendered people; working for the inclusion of people of
all gender orientations in all religious faiths; eliminating
prejudice and discrimination in the workplace; and achieving full
civil rights and equality for all gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and
transgendered persons. PFLAG issued its ﬁrst statement in sup-
port of equality in marriage in 2000 and has continued to work
for marriage equality ever since. Most recently it was involved in
the writing of three briefs for presentation to the New York state
senate in its consideration of the legalization of same-sex
marriage in the state. The organization has also spoken out in sup-
port of and worked for the adoption of rules recognizing equal
rights for adoption by same-sex couples.
Publications: The PFLAG Web site lists a number of press
releases, “tools for journalists,” “hot topics,” and articles about
PFLAG in the news.
Stonewall
URL: http://www.stonewall.org.uk/
Stonewall is a British organization formed in 1989 in response to
the adoption of Section 28 of the Local Government Act, prohibit-
ing the “promotion of homosexuality” in schools. A number of
gay men and lesbians were outraged at the stigmatizing of same-
sex relationships and decided to create an organization that would
212
Organizations

work toward overturning this legislation and promoting equal
rights of lesbians and gay men in the United Kingdom. Since
1989, the organization has been extraordinarily successful, con-
tributing to changes in the nation’s age-of-consent laws, elimina-
tion of the ban against gay men and lesbians’ serving in the
military, passage of same-sex adoption legislation, the repeal of
Section 28 (in 2003), nondiscrimination in economic transactions
(the Equality Act of 2007), and recent passage of domestic partner-
ship legislation. Stonewall currently has ofﬁces in England, Scot-
land, and Wales. The organization is an invaluable source of
information about the status of same-sex civil partnerships in the
United Kingdom. The “At Home” section of its Web site includes
a number of articles on the battle over approval of civil partner-
ships and the current status of that entity in the United Kingdom.
Publications: Ebulletin (online newsletter); numerous press
releases.
Stonewall Democrats
URL: http://www.stonewalldemocrats.org/
Stonewall Democrats is a political organization afﬁliated with the
national Democratic Party founded by Representative Barney
Frank (D-MA) in 1998. The organization’s name is taken from
the famous Stonewall riots of 1969 that mark the beginning of
the modern gay and lesbian rights movement. A number of inde-
pendent gay and lesbian Democratic groups existed throughout
the United States prior to 1998, but Frank saw the potential of uni-
fying the efforts of all those groups in a national organization. To-
day there are nearly one hundred afﬁliates in virtually every state
of the union and the District of Columbia. Members of these local
clubs are involved in a variety of activities typical of traditional
political organizations, including envelope stufﬁng, door-to-door
solicitations, telephone calling, get-out-the-vote campaigns, and
running for ofﬁce. Stonewall Democrats are involved in essen-
tially all political issues of interest to gay men and lesbians,
including the U.S. military “don’t ask, don’t tell” discharge pol-
icy; equality in housing and employment; the 2009–10 health care
bill; and the advancement of same-sex marriage, civil unions, and
domestic partnerships in the United States.
Publications: Press releases at “Newsroom” page of Web site.
Organizations in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
213

Unid@s, the National Latina/o Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual &
Transgender Human Rights Organization
URL: http://www.unidoslgbt.org/
Unid@s, the National Latina/o Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual & Trans-
gender Human Rights Organization, was founded in 2007 as a
replacement for an earlier Latino organization, National Latina/
o Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Organization, often
known as LLEGO´ , which disbanded in 2004. At the time of its
founding, Unid@s also consolidated with the National Latino/a
Coalition for Justice, an organization working for marriage equal-
ity among people of all sexual orientations. In its early phases,
Unid@s is developing plans to become a multi-issue organization
with strong emphasis on local activism on issues of concern to
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered Latina/os.
Publications: Online news at Web site.
Williams Institute at the University of California at Los
Angeles School of Law
URL: http://www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute/home.html
The Williams Institute is a national think tank concerned with
legal aspects of issues of interest to lesbians, gay men, bisexuals,
and transgendered persons. The institute carries out its objectives
by conducting research; authoring public policy studies and law
review articles; providing amicus curiae briefs for important court
cases; offering expert testimony at legislative hearings; and train-
ing lawyers, judges, and other members of the legal protection as
well as the general public. In 2006, the institute absorbed the Insti-
tute for Gay and Lesbian Strategic Studies, another think tank
with objectives similar to those of the Williams Institute. Same-
sex marriage and similar unions are among the primary topics of
interest for researchers at the Williams Institute. Some reports they
have produced include Same-Sex Couples and the Gay, Lesbian,
Bisexual Population: New Estimates from the American Community
Survey; Federal Estate Tax Disadvantages for Same-Sex Couples;
Same-Sex Spouses and Unmarried Partners in the American Commu-
nity Survey, 2008; and The Impact of Inequalities for Same-Sex Partners
in Employer-Sponsored Retirement Plans.
Publications: The Dukeminier Awards Best Sexual Orientation and
Gender Identity Law Review Articles of 2008 (monthly journal; date
214
Organizations

changes annually); Adoption and Foster Care by Gay and Lesbian
Parents in the United States (report); The Impact of Extending Marriage
to Same-Sex Couples on the New Jersey Budget (report; similar reports
available for California, Iowa, Oregon, New Mexico, Maryland,
and other states); Unequal Taxes on Equal Beneﬁts: The Taxation of
Domestic Partner Beneﬁts (report).
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex
Marriage
Alliance Defense Fund (ADF)
URL: http://www.alliancedefensefund.org/main/default.aspx
The Alliance Defense Fund was formed in 1994 by a group of
35 ministers who were concerned about the loss of religious
freedom in the United States. The organization’s work is currently
organized under three major issues topics: sanctity of life (right-to-
life issues), traditional family (same-sex marriage issues), and reli-
gious freedom (actions against expression of religious beliefs). The
organization has been active in providing funding, legal advice,
and leadership training in campaigns against same-sex marriage,
civil unions, and domestic partnerships in many states. Some of
the Fund’s work is carried out through subsidiary and afﬁliate
organizations, such as the Community Defense Council (formerly
the National Family Legal Foundation), the Corporate Research
Council, and DOMA Watch, described as “your legal source for
Defense of Marriage Act information.”
Publications: Videos and audio clips available online at Web site.
Alliance for Marriage (AFM)
URL: http://www.allianceformarriage.org/
Alliance for Marriage is a 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organization working
to promote the traditional marriage pattern between one man and
one woman. It focuses on efforts to educate the general public, the
media, elected ofﬁcials, and civil society leaders with regard to the
beneﬁts of traditional marriage for adults, children, and the society
at large. Its current ﬁelds of interest are promotion of adoption
among heterosexual families, reducing the number of fatherless
families, encouragement of stay-at-home parents, improving tax
beneﬁts for traditional families, and welfare reform.
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
215

Publications: Not Married to the Job (report); numerous news clip-
pings, articles, and articles online at Web site.
American Center for Law and Justice (ACLJ)
URL: http://www.aclj.org/
The American Center for Law and Justice was founded in 1990 to
work for the constitutional and religious freedom of all Americans.
Today, ACLJ has extended its interests to other parts of the world
and provides expertise in American Constitutional law, European
Union law, and human rights law. It has been active in opposing
the extension of marriage and marriage rights to same-sex couples.
Attorneys for ACLJ have worked on a number of state cases
involving same-sex marriage, have testiﬁed before the U.S.
Congress on the Federal Marriage Amendment, and have issued
a number of press releases and fact sheets on the subject of
same-sex marriage.
Publications: Numerous online resources at Web site, including
sections on “ACLJ Commentaries”; “ACLJ Spotlight”; “In the
Courts”; “In the News”; “On the Issues”; “Trial Notebook”;
“Washington Report”; and “Litigation Report.”
American Family Association (AFA)
URL: http://action.afa.net/
The American Family Association is a nonproﬁt 501(c3) organiza-
tion founded in 1977 by Donald E. Wildmon, a minister at the
First United Methodist Church in Southaven, Mississippi. The
organization was originally called the National Federation for
Decency, but was given its new name in 1988. The purpose of
the organization is to promote an agenda that is based on a literal
reading of the Bible as a guide to all social and political action in
the United States. Its work focuses on preservation of marriage
and the family, promotion of decency and morality, working for
the sanctity of human life, and ensuring the integrity of the public
media. One of its major campaigns is the effort to ensure that
same-sex marriage is not legalized. Over the past few years, it
has made available online a petition to be delivered to the U.S.
Congress listing the names of individuals who support their posi-
tion in this regard (NoGayMarriage.com).
216
Organizations

Publications: American Family Association Journal; AFA Action Alert
(newsletter); books, pamphlets, audio programs, video programs,
electronic resources, such as “It’s Not Gay” (DVD); “How to Take
Back America Conference” (DVDs); and “The Lost and Found
Family” (DVD).
Christian Coalition of America (CC)
URL: http://www.cc.org/
The Christian Coalition of America was founded in 1989 in order to
provide a stronger voice for conservative Christians in the
American political system. For many years, it was a powerful voice
in shaping the policies of the Republican Party, although its
inﬂuence appears to have waned considerably in the last decade.
Although it claims to speak for more than two million Americans,
some evidence suggests that its current active membership is closer
to about thirty thousand individuals. Among the issues in which
CC is currently most interested are the election and appointment
of more conservative judges; ensuring the accessibility of the Inter-
net for groups of all political persuasions, including the Christian
Coalition; protecting religious programming on television; pre-
venting approval of the federal government for stem cell research;
and advancement of the Federal Marriage Amendment, which
prohibits same-sex marriage.
Publications: Washington Weekly Review (newsletter); numerous
press releases; OneNewsNow.com (online news releases).
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormon Church)
URL: http://www.lds.org/ldsorg/
Although almost all Christian denominations are opposed to
same-sex marriage and to many other features of the lesbian and
gay rights movement, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (LDS) has been especially active politically in working
against these issues. During the November 2008 initiative on
Proposition 8, for example, the church was the largest single
ﬁnancial donor to the “Yes on 8” (supporting a constitutional
ban on same-sex marriage in the state of California) campaign,
donating more than $5 million for the campaign. According to
one proponent of the ban, the church also provided between 80
and 90 percent of the volunteers who walked door-to-door during
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
217

the campaign. The church’s Web site contains much more infor-
mation on its stand on same-sex marriage and related issues.
Publications: Avery large selection of books, booklets, pamphlets,
and other reading materials, as well as electronic publications on
a variety of topics; a number of regular magazines, including
Ensign, a general publication for adults; New Era, a similar publi-
cation for youth; Friend, a magazine for children; Liahona, a publi-
cation intended for international readers; and Church News, a
weekly publication.
Concerned Women for America (CWA)
URL: http://www.cwfa.org/
Concerned Women for America was founded in 1979 by Beverly
LaHaye, whose husband, Timothy, was one of the founders of
the Christian Coalition. Mrs. LaHaye established the organization
in response to pronouncements and activities of the National
Organization for Women that, she felt, did not reﬂect the views
of many women in America. Today, CWA’s activities focus on
six major areas: family (one-man, one-woman marriages), sanc-
tity of life (antiabortion), education (support of private school-
ing), pornography, religious liberty, and national sovereignty.
Publications: “What Your Teacher Didn’t Tell You about Absti-
nence”; “How to Lobby From Your Home”; “Political Guidelines
for Churches and Pastors”; “Pro-Life Action Guide”; “A Painful
Choice: Abortion’s Link to Breast Cancer”; “Why Children Need
Fathers: Five Critical Trends”; “The Grab for Power: A Chronology
of the National Education Association” (pamphlets and brochures;
available online at Web site).
Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission (ERLC) of the
Southern Baptist Convention
URL: http://erlc.com/
The Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission is the public policy arm
of the Southern Baptist Convention. Its mission is to address social
and ethical issues of interest to Southern Baptists and to consider
their implications on public policy at all levels of government, from
local city halls to the U.S. Congress. The overarching topics in
which ERLC is interested are faith, family, life, citizenship, and
science, with emphasis on a number of more speciﬁc issues, such
218
Organizations

as apologetics, pastoral integrity, children, marriage, pop culture,
abortion, bioethics, birth control, stem cell research, capital punish-
ment, immigration, race relations, war, cloning, and homosexuality.
The commission has taken strong stands against same-sex marriage
and related legal institutions. In May 2005, it published the Nash-
ville Declaration on “Same-Sex Marriage,” which states that the
“Baptist Faith and Mission” states unequivocally that “[m]arriage
is the uniting of one man and one woman in covenant commitment
for a lifetime.” The commission has organized and promoted a
number of speciﬁc actions in opposition to the approval of same-
sex unions. In May 2006, for example, the ERLC asked Baptist
churches across the nation to observe Marriage Protection Sunday
on June 4 of that year, suggesting that pastors preach on the topic
and that church members write their senators asking them to sup-
port the Marriage Protection Amendment then being considered.
Publications: Articles on a number of topics of interest to ERLC, as
well as feeds and podcasts of the commission’s regular radio
broadcasts.
Family Research Council (FRC)
URL: http://www.frc.org/
The Family Research Council was founded in 1983 to promote the
traditional family and traditional marriage. It pursues its work
through a number of venues, including books, pamphlets, and
other kinds of publications; testimony before a variety of legisla-
tive bodies; analysis and review of legal and policy documents
with the potential for impacting marriage and the family; and
appearances in public debates and discussions.
Publications: Press releases, op-eds, and blog available online at
Web site.
Focus on the Family
URL: http://www.focusonthefamily.com/
Focus on the Family is a Christian organization that attempts to
follow biblical principles in nurturing and defending the (hetero-
sexual) family. It generally tends to oppose any deﬁnition of the
family other than one consisting of one man, one woman, and
one or more children. The guiding principles under which the
organization operates is the preeminence of an evangelical
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
219

interpretation of the Bible, the importance of a permanent mar-
riage between one man and one woman, the value of children to a
family, the sanctity of human life, the importance of social respon-
sibility, and the conﬁrmation of clearly deﬁned male and female
roles in a family.
Publications: Citizen magazine; the organization’s primary news
and issue analysis outlet is the Web site CitizenLink at http://
www.citizenlink.org/citizenmag/.
Heritage Foundation
URL: http://www.heritage.org/
The Heritage Foundation is a conservative think tank founded in
1973 to work for a strong national defense, individual freedom,
limited government, traditional American values, and the
advancement of free enterprise. The organization does research
on and takes positions on a vast number of issues on both the
domestic and international level. Some of the domestic issues
with which it is currently concerned are American political
thought, crime, the economy, education, energy and the environ-
ment, family and marriage, the federal budget and spending,
government reform of health care, immigration, labor, and regu-
lation. It has taken a strong stance against same-sex marriage,
arguing that it leads to the breakdown of traditional families and
that “when marriages break down, communities break down.”
In November 2009, the foundation issued a report suggesting that
same-sex marriage was one of the nation’s current “dirty dozen”
policies that was undermining civil society in the United States.
Publications: Commentaries, news releases, and updates on “hot”
topics available online at Web site.
Institute for Marriage and Public Policy (IMAPP)
URL: http://www.marriagedebate.com/
The Institute for Marriage and Public Policy is a nonproﬁt, non-
partisan organization that works to promote discussion on impor-
tant issues relating to marriage, with the overall goal of
strengthening that institution in American society. IMAPP
focuses on issues such as adoption, divorce reform, same-sex
marriage, tax policy, and unwed pregnancies.
220
Organizations

Publications: Articles, policy briefs, community brochures, and
model legislation available online at Web site.
Liberty Counsel
URL: http://www.lc.org/
Liberty Counsel was founded in 1989 to provide free legal assis-
tance to individuals and organizations in defense of Christian
religious liberty, the sanctity of human life, and the protection of
traditional (i.e., opposite-sex) marriage. The organization is
closely afﬁliated with Liberty University, in Lynchburg, Virginia,
founded by Jerry Falwell to promote Christian values in the pro-
cess of providing opportunities in higher education. Some notable
cases in which the organization has been involved include repre-
senting the placement of a Ten Commandments monument on
public grounds in Tennessee, the limits of protests permitted at
public abortion clinics, and the use of public facilities to conduct
Bible study classes in a public school. Liberty Counsel has
assisted organizations in efforts to prevent same-sex marriage
from becoming law and in promoting so-called “defense of
marriage” legislation and constitutional amendments.
Publications: “The Liberator” (monthly newsletter); frequent
news releases on special topics, such as “Game Over for ACLU’s
War Against Santa Rosa County Students,” “Pediatricians Set
the Facts Straight about Sexual Orientation and Gender Confu-
sion,” “Personhood Amendment Qualiﬁed for Mississippi’s
November 2011 Ballot,” “Homeland Security Raid of Religious
Tracts Violates Fourth Amendment,” and “Liberty University
Files Lawsuit Against the Government Takeover of Healthcare.”
Marriage Law Project (MLP)
URL: http://www.marriagewatch.org/
The Marriage Law Project is a program of the Interdisciplinary
Program in Law and Religion of Columbus School of Law at the
Catholic University of America in Washington, DC. It works to
reafﬁrm the traditional view of marriage as being between one
man and one woman by carrying out research, publishing helpful
information, sponsoring conferences, offering pro bono legal
advice, taking part in important legal cases, and advising policy
makers.
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
221

Publications: Headline news; “hot topics”; and background infor-
mation on many topics available online at Web site.
National Organization for Marriage (NOM)
URL: http://www.nationformarriage.org/
The National Organization for Marriage is a 501(c)(4) nonproﬁt
organization founded in 2007 for the purpose of working against
the legalization of same-sex marriage and comparable relationships
and for the protection of religious organizations that oppose such
arrangements. The president of NOM is also president of the
Institute for Marriage and Public Policy (see above). NOM works
to provide a national resource for the many groups working against
same-sex marriage throughout the nation by developing political
messages, building a database of supporters, providing political
intelligence for state and local groups, and building a ﬁnancial in-
frastructure for the support of anti-gay-marriage activities. Its
online Advocacy Center provides an opportunity for supporters to
become actively involved in state issues, which, as of early 2010,
included campaigns in Delaware, Iowa, New Jersey, New York,
Rhode Island, the District of Columbia, and the 23rd New York
House of Representatives district, as well as ongoing support for
the Defense of Marriage Act.
Publications: Online press releases.
Renew America
URL: http://www.renewamerica.com
Renew America is an organization founded in 2002 by Alan
Keyes to promote the concept that Americans must return to the
principles enunciated by the Founding Fathers in the Declaration
of Independence and the Constitution if it is to survive as a
nation. The organization claims to be nonpartisan and nonde-
nominational, although its Web site takes a very strong
evangelical Christian stand in support of its efforts. Its Web page
on “Positions and Policies” talks at length about the impor-
tance and meaning of being converted to Jesus Christ. Although
the organization has apparently taken no ofﬁcial stance on same-
sex marriage, it has published a number of articles opposing the
legalization of such marriages on its “Columns” page at http://
www.renewamerica.com/columns.php.
Publications: None.
222
Organizations

Stand4Marriage
URL: http://www.stand4marriagedc.com/
Stand4Marriage is a coalition of organizations and private citizens
in the District of Colombia who are opposed to the District
council’s decision to grant same-sex marriage rights to citizens of
the District. The organization was founded by a group of mostly
religious leaders, including Bishop Harry Jackson; Robert King,
an Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner; Reverend Dale Wafer;
Bishop James Silver; Reverend Anthony Evans; Reverend Melvin
Dupree; Elder Howard Butler; and Reverend Walter Fauntroy. In
September 2009, the group ﬁled an initiative petition with the
District Board of Elections, requesting that a public vote be held on
the District council’s actions in approving same-sex marriage. In its
statement of principles, the group explains that it is committed to
“the good of marriage as the union of one husband with one wife.”
Publications: None.
Traditional Values Coalition
URL: http://www.traditionalvalues.org/
The Traditional Values Coalition was founded in 1980 by Louis P.
Sheldon to “empower people of faith through knowledge.” The
organization currently claims to speak for more than forty-three
thousand churches from virtually every Christian denomination
and every racial and socioeconomic status. Among the issues of
primary concern to the Coalition are same-sex marriage, abortion
rights, rights of transgendered persons, abstinence in sex educa-
tion, and anti-Christian bigotry.
Publications: 50-State Survey of Marriage Protection Amendments; A
Gender Identity Disorder Goes Mainstream; A Report on the San Diego
‘Gay Pride’ Parade and Festival in San Diego, July 29, 2006; Abstinence
and Fidelity in Marriage Are Keys to Global AIDS Battle (special
reports); press releases, action alerts, editorials, church bulletin
inserts available online at Website.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
URL: http://www.usccb.org/
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops traces its history
to 1917 when the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic church in the
Organizations Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
223

United States established the National Catholic War Council to
provide a mechanism by which Catholics could provide funds for
the war and offer personnel services for men and women serving
in the military. That effort evolved over time into other types of
agencies that allowed Catholics to pursue lay activities consistent
with their religious beliefs, including the National Welfare Council
in 1919 and the National Welfare Conference in 1922. The current
organization was established in 1966 as two separate organiza-
tions, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and the United
States Catholic Conference, which were merged into the USCCB in
2001. The conference has consistently been one of the strongest
opponents of same-sex marriages in the United States. It bases its
position on the belief that marriage is not a civil institution, but a
religious tradition created by God that cannot be changed by
human actions. The organization has been at the forefront of state
campaigns over same-sex marriage and is generally credited with
being primarily responsible for the defeat of the same-sex initia-
tives in Maine and New York State in 2009. It has also stated its
opposition to any form of immigration reform legislation that
includes equal protection for lesbians and gay men.
Publications: Many books, brochures, pamphlets, prayer cards,
DVDs, and videos dealing with topics such as leadership, life and
human dignity, liturgy and prayer, marriage and family, migration
and refuge services, ofﬁcial teachings, religious education, and
social justice issues. Examples include Marriage: Love and Life in the
Divine Plan; Between Man and Woman: Questions and Answers about
Marriage and Same-Sex Unions; Ministry to Persons with a Homosexual
Inclination: Guidelines for Pastoral Care; and Putting Children and Fam-
ilies First: A Challenge for Our Church, Nation, and World.
Organizations with an Interest in Marriage,
but Who Are Neutral about Same-Sex
Marriage
Alternatives to Marriage Project (AMP)
URL: http://www.unmarried.org/
The Alternatives to Marriage Project is a 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organi-
zation formed to meet the needs of individuals, couples, and groups
224
Organizations

who are not in opposite-sex marriages. Its target audience includes
people who are single, who choose not to marry, who are not
allowed legally to marry, or who choose to live together before
marriage. The organization was founded in 1998 by Marshall Miller
and Dorian Solot, a couple who have been in a committed, long-
term, unmarried relationship. AMP works not only to provide
information and support for unmarried individuals, but also to
educate the general public about the nature of unmarried relation-
ships and the validation that people in such circumstances deserve.
Among the speciﬁc issues with which the organization is currently
concerned are health care, housing, adoption, federal income tax
policy, immigration, welfare issues, and voting opportunities.
Publications: “Alternatives to Marriage Project Update”
(newsletter).
American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy
(AAMFT)
URL: http://www.aamft.org/
The American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy was
founded in 1942 as the professional organization of marriage and
family therapists. The association currently claims to have twenty-
four thousand members worldwide. Its purpose is to promote
scholarly research in the ﬁeld of marriage and family therapy, to edu-
cate the general public about important issues in these ﬁelds, and to
ensure that an adequate number of well-trained practitioners is avail-
able to meet the public’s need for aid and assistance. The organiza-
tion sponsors a national training conference, publishes material
dealing with issues in the ﬁeld, and produces a variety of multimedia
products for practitioners in marriage and family therapy.
Publications: Journal of Marital and Family Therapy; Family Therapy
Magazine; Clinical Updates for Family Therapists: Research and Treat-
ment Approaches for Issues Affecting Today’s Families (reports); Family
Therapy Effectiveness (book); and numerous other books, brochures,
reports, monographs, and DVDs.
National Marriage Project (NMP)
URL: http://www.virginia.edu/marriageproject/
The National Marriage Project was founded at Rutgers University
in 1997. In the summer of 2009, the program was moved to the
Organizations with an Interest in Marriage
225

University of Virginia, which now serves as its sponsor. The
project is a nonpartisan, nonsectarian, interdisciplinary program
whose purpose it is to conduct research and analysis on the status
of marriage in the United States. It also focuses on the social and
cultural forces that act on marriage and strategies for improving
the stability and quality of marriage in this country. The three
primary areas of research at NMP currently are organized under
the rubrics of “The Foundations of Marital Quality and Stability,”
“The State of Our Unions,” and “Religion and Marriage among
African Americans and Latinos.”
Publications: A variety of books, monographs, journal articles,
and annual and special reports, such as “Life without Children,”
“Cohabitation, Marriage, and Child Wellbeing,” “The State of
Our Unions,” and “Making a Love Connection: Teen Relation-
ships, Pregnancy, and Marriage.”
226
Organizations

8
Resources
T
he issues of same-sex marriage are relatively new topics of
debate in the United States and a number of countries around
the world. Still, these debates have inspired a ﬂood of books,
articles, reports, commentaries, editorials, and other expressions
of opinion. This chapter provides annotated reviews of some of
the most important of those documents. The resources listed
here are divided into two major sections, print and nonprint items,
the latter primarily Web sites on the Internet. Within each of these
major sections, items are further subdivided according to the
primary subject with which an book, article, or Web site deals: his-
tory, gay and lesbian rights issues in general, arguments in favor of
same-sex marriage, arguments in opposition to same-sex mar-
riage, and general articles dealing with the topic of same-sex mar-
riage. Finally, resources are subdivided further by format, books
or articles in the case of print materials, and Internet sources in
the case of nonprint sources.
Print
History
Books
Boswell, John. Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe. New York:
Vintage Books, 1995.
Boswell’s exhaustive study of the literature of medieval Europe
provides convincing evidence that same-sex unions, especially
227

within religious communities, were widespread and widely
accepted by both the church and the lay public.
Coontz, Stephanie. Marriage, a History: From Obedience to Intimacy,
or How Love Conquered Marriage. New York: Viking Adult, 2005.
Discussions of same-sex marriage today are almost universally
framed within a meaning of traditional marriage that is not, in
fact, traditional at all. Coontz reviews the history of the evolution
of marriage, showing how it has changed in form and meaning
over the centuries so that it is difﬁcult to talk with any speciﬁcity
at all about a concept such as “traditional marriage.”
Gozemba, Patricia A., and Karen Kahn. Courting Equality: A
Documentary History of America’s First Legal Same-Sex Marriages.
Boston: Beacon Press, 2007.
This richly illustrated volume provides a superb historical back-
ground of the history behind the ﬁrst legalization of same-sex
marriages in the United States.
Herdt, Gilbert H. Ritualized Homosexuality in Melanesia. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1993.
The eight essays in this book present a strikingly original view of
the role of homosexual behavior in Melanesia, with substantial
evidence of the practice of unions between two individuals of
the same sex.
Hinsch, Bret. Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition
in China. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
This book reviews the evidence available about the long tradition
of same-sex relationships in China, with some discussion of for-
malized relationships between two individuals of the same sex.
Jordan, Mark D. Blessing Same-Sex Unions: The Perils of Queer
Romance and the Confusions of Christian Marriage. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2005.
The author provides an exhaustive review of Christian doctrine
and tradition with regard to same-sex relationships and con-
cludes that marriage of any kind was strongly opposed by the
early church, so that same-sex marriage was not that much of an
228
Resources

issue. He considers the signiﬁcance of this history and theological
background for the modern-day debate over same-sex marriage.
Merin, Yuval. Equality for Same-Sex Couples: The Legal Recognition of
Gay Partnerships in Europe and the United States. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2002.
The author provides one of the very few detailed descriptions and
analysis of the evolution of legalized same-sex relationships in
nations around the world. The information is now somewhat
dated because of the rapid rate at which this situation has changed,
but the historical perspective provided by the book is valuable.
Neill, James. The Origins and Role of Same-Sex Relations in Human
Societies. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 2009.
The author suggests that the dominant traditional idea that all
unions between individuals is heterosexual may be incomplete
or false in many instances. He reviews the evidence for various
types of same-sex unions in ancient Greece, Rome, early Christian
societies, Japan, China, and Islam.
Vanita, Ruth. Love’s Rite: Same-Sex Marriage in India and the West.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
The author provides an extensive review not only of the current
status of same-sex relationships in India today, but also of the
long traditions with respect to same-sex relationships in the
Indian subcontinent.
Vanita, Ruth, and Saleem Kidwai, eds. Same-Sex Love in India:
Readings from Literature and History. New York: Palgrave Macmil-
lan, 2001.
The book provides a rich and extensive collection of articles about
same-sex love and same-sex relationships going back to classic
Indian history.
Articles
Eskridge, William N. “A History of Same-Sex Marriage.” Virginia
Law Review 79 (7, October 1993): 1419–1513.
The author provides an extensive review of the history of various
types of same-sex unions in a variety of cultures throughout
Print
229

human history. This article is one of the most valuable resources
on the topic.
Forbes, Jack D. “What Is Marriage? A Native American View.”
Wind Speaker 22 (2, May 1, 2004): 27. Also available online at
http://westgatehouse.com/art161.html.
The author is professor emeritus of Native American Studies at
the University of California at Davis. He takes note of the fact that
the current debate over same-sex marriage often refers to the
“American tradition” about legal relationships, but that this term
is a misnomer, since the real “American tradition” is that which
comes from Native American culture. In that regard, “marriage”
has traditionally had a much more complex and inclusive
meaning than that currently used by opponents of same-sex
marriage.
Goldberg, Suzanne B. “A Historical Guide to the Future of
Marriage for Same-Sex Couples.” Columbia Journal of Gender and
Law 15 (1, January 2006): 249–54.
The author notes that opponents of same-sex marriage today
commonly call upon the precedent of the long history of “tradi-
tional marriage.” She argues that these “superﬁcial references”
will “not sufﬁce” to deal with the complex question as to the his-
torical nature of legal relationships between two individuals,
whether of the same or opposite sex.
Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Issues
Books
Adam, Barry D. The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, revised
edition. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1995.
Adam’s book is especially strong in its coverage of the
international gay and lesbian rights movement. He does a
thorough job of reviewing the early movements in Germany and
the United States, along with the reactions that developed to those
movements. But he also provides sketches of changes taking place
in Canada, Mexico, Europe, and other parts of the world.
Alsenas, Linas. Gay America: Struggle for Equality. New York:
Amulet Books, 2008.
230
Resources

The author provides a review of some of the most important
events in the history of the gay and lesbian rights movement in
the United States from the Colonial period to the present day.
Bullough, Vern, ed. Before Stonewall: Activists for Gay and Lesbian
Rights in Historical Context. New York: Harrington Park Press, 2002.
This collection of articles tells the story of the gay and lesbian
movement in the United States and other countries from its ear-
liest beginnings through biographical sketches of some of the
most important individuals involved in the movement.
D’Emilio, John. Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Making of a
Homosexual Minority in the United States, 1940–1970. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1983.
Many people think that the modern gay and lesbian civil rights
movement began with the Stonewall riots of 1969. D’Emilio shows,
however, that a small but vigorous movement existed at least two
decades before Stonewall. He presents an interesting and thor-
oughly researched review of the origins of the Mattachine Society,
the Daughters of Bilitis, and other early gay and lesbian groups.
Duberman, Martin. About Time: Exploring the Gay Past, revised
and expanded edition, 1991.
Distinguished Professor of History Emeritus at Lehman College
and the Graduate School of the City University of New York,
Duberman is one of the ﬁnest writers on gay topics in the world.
This volume collects a number of his own essays with a selection
of historical writings dating to 1826. See especially Part Two of
the book, containing essays dealing with the gay liberation and
gay rights movement.
Duberman, Martin. Stonewall. New York: Dutton, 1993.
In this book, Duberman describes and analyzes the events that
occurred on June 27 and 28, 1969, during the Stonewall riots in
New York City. He uses stories of the lives of four gay men and
two lesbians to tell his tale.
Duberman, Martin, Martha Vincus, and George Chauncey Jr., eds.
Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past. New
York: New American Library, 1989.
Print
231

This collection of essays surveys the history of homosexual
behavior from the ancient world to the late twentieth century.
Major sections of the book deal with preindustrial societies, the
nineteenth century, the early twentieth century, and World War
II and the postwar era. The book provides an excellent back-
ground for the modern gay liberation gay rights movements.
Dugan, Kimberly B. The Struggle over Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual
Rights: Facing Off in Cincinnati. New York: Routledge, 2005.
Dugan offers a detailed analysis of the 1993 vote in Cincinnati,
Ohio, over the legal status of gay men and lesbians as a protected
minority. In that election, voters overwhelmingly adopted an ordi-
nance prohibiting the city from extending protection in housing,
employment, and public accommodation to gays and lesbians.
Eisenbach, David. Gay Power: An American Revolution. Cambridge,
MA: De Capo Books, 2006.
Eisenbach discusses changes that took place in New York City
over the past half century to illustrate the growth and develop-
ment of the gay and lesbian rights movement. He bases his book
on a number of interviews with men and women involved in that
movement as well as on archival materials from the period.
Endean, Steve. Bringing Lesbian and Gay Rights into the Mainstream:
Twenty Years of Progress. Edited by Vicki L. Eaklor. New York: Har-
rington Park Press, 2006.
Endean was involved in the gay and lesbian rights movement for
more than two decades. His memoir provides a comprehensive
and powerful review of changes that have taken place in the
movement during that period of time.
Eskridge, William N., Jr. Dishonorable Passions: Sodomy Laws in
America, 1861–2003. New York: Viking Press, 2008.
The debate over gay and lesbian rights has a long history in the
United States, dating back to Colonial days. In this book, Eskridge
focuses on the issue of antisodomy laws, ﬁnally resolved by the
U.S. Supreme Court in its 2003 decision in Lawrence v. Texas.
Fejes, Fred. Gay Rights and Moral Panic: The Origins of America’s
Debate on Homosexuality. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
232
Resources

Some of the seminal battles over gay and lesbian rights took place
in the late 1970s, especially in Dade County and Miami, Florida;
St. Paul, Minnesota; Eugene, Oregon; and Wichita, Kansas. This
book discusses and analyzes these battles and considers their in-
ﬂuence on the national discussion about legal issues related to
homosexual behavior.
Fetner, Tina. How the Religious Right Shaped Lesbian and Gay Activism.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008.
Most people probably think of religious groups and gay and lesbian
civil rights groups as political adversaries and, to a very consider-
able extent, they are. At the same time, the actions and positions
taken by both groups also shape the philosophies and strategies
of the other group. Fetner’s book provides a fascinating analysis
of the symbiotic relationship between these two political forces.
Gallo, Marcia M. Different Daughters: A History of the Daughters of
Bilitis and the Rise of the Lesbian Rights Movement. Berkeley, CA:
Seal Press, 2006.
The author discusses the formation and activities of the earliest
lesbian rights movement in the United States, the Daughters of
Bilitis.
Marcus, Eric. Making Gay History: The Half-Century Fight for
Lesbian and Gay Equal Rights. New York: Harper Perennial, 2002.
This review of the history of the gay and lesbian rights move-
ments is divided into seven chronological periods, pre-1950,
1950–61, 1961–68, 1986–73, 1973–81, 1981–92, and 1992–2001. The
author relies on a large number of interviews with gay men,
lesbians, and nongay and nonlesbians who had a part in the
movement during each period.
Mucciaroni, Gary. Same Sex, Different Politics: Success and Failure in
the Struggles over Gay Rights. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2008.
The battle over equal rights for lesbians and gay men has taken
place in a number of different ﬁelds: military service, civil rights,
hate crimes, marriage, and adoption, to mention some of the most
important. The gay and lesbian rights movement has had
different degrees of success in each of these ﬁelds. The author
Print
233

attempts to analyze the reason for these differing levels of
accomplishment.
Smith, Miriam. Political Institutions and Lesbian and Gay Rights in
the United States and Canada. New York: Routledge, 2009.
This book is part of the Routledge Studies in North American
Politics. It examines the ways in which political institutions in
the United States and Canada have responded to the calls for civil
rights for gay men and lesbians in quite different ways. She
extends her analysis to a discussion of the varying ways in which
Canadian and U.S. institutions are dealing with the issues of
same-sex marriage and adoption.
Weeks, Jeffrey. Coming Out: Homosexual Politics in Britain, from the
Nineteenth Century to the Present. London: Quartet Books, 1977.
Although somewhat dated, no better history of the gay political
movement in Great Britain exists than this work. Weeks is one of
the ﬁnest thinkers about gay issues in the world. His book pro-
vides not only factual information, but a thoughtful analysis of
the changes that occurred from the beginning of the nineteenth
century to the late 1970s.
Williams, Walter L., and Yolanda Retter, eds. Gay and Lesbian
Rights in the United States: A Documentary History. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 2003.
This invaluable reference book contains a variety of documents
dealing with all aspects of the gay and lesbian rights movement
dating from the Colonial period to the present day. Among the doc-
uments cited are court cases, personal opinion pieces, and laws.
Articles
Bond, Julian, et al. “Is Gay Rights a Civil Rights Issue?” Ebony 59
(9, July 2004): 142–46.
Representatives of the black community from politics, religion,
and the arts explain their reasons for replying to this question in
the afﬁrmative, in the negative, and, in one case, with both a
“yes” and a “no.”
Carter, David. “What Made Stonewall Different.” The Gay & Lesbian
Review 16 (4, July–August 2009): 11–14.
234
Resources

The author writes about the series of riots in New York City in
1969 that in some ways marked the beginning of the modern
gay and lesbian civil rights movement. He sets the scene as to
the status of gay men and lesbians at the time, and explains the
signiﬁcance of the cultural revolution that began as a result of
the riots.
Feldblum, Chai. “Gay Rights and the Rehnquist Court.” Gay and
Lesbian Review Worldwide 8 (1, January–February 2001): 11–14.
The author reviews in some detail the treatment of cases involv-
ing gay and lesbian rights decided by the U.S. Supreme Court
during the tenure of Chief Justice William Rehnquist. These deci-
sions reﬂect attitudes toward demands by gay men and lesbians
for equal rights by the nation’s highest court and some prevailing
social and moral attitudes on the subject in the larger population.
Freeman, Susan Kathleen. “Forging Gay Identities: Organizing
Sexuality in San Francisco, 1950–1994.” Journal of the History of
Sexuality 12 (4, October 2003): 637–41.
Freeman outlines the transformation of the gay and lesbian civil
rights movements in the second half of the twentieth century,
from an effort to gain personal recognition, to a “liberation”
movement designed to allow individuals to pursue their own sex-
uality, to a political movement striving for civil rights.
Leland, John. “Shades of Gay: With AIDS No Longer an All-
Consuming Crisis, the Battle for Tolerance Has Moved to Schools,
Churches, Ofﬁces and the Frontiers of Family Life.” Newsweek 135
(March 20, 2000): 46–49.
The movement for gay and lesbian civil rights was largely stalled
during the worst years of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Now that the
epidemic is coming under control, lesbians and gay men are once
more turning to their demands for equal treatment under the law,
a trend that Leland reviews in this article.
Raimondo, Justin. “A Gay Man Decries ‘Gay Rights.’ ” American
Enterprise 11 (2, March 2000): 44–45.
The author provides a brief review of the origin and evolution of
the gay and lesbian civil rights movement and notes how the
objectives of that movement have changed signiﬁcantly.
Print
235

He explains why he is troubled by the movement’s move toward
a more authoritarian bent, especially with the push for same-sex
marriage and similar “rights.”
Reports
Egan, Patrick J., Murray S. Edelman, and Kenneth Sherrill. Findings
from the Hunter College Poll of Lesbians, Gays and Bisexuals: New
Discoveries about Identity, Political Attitudes, and Civic Engagement.
New York: Hunter College, 2008.
The study reported here consists of ﬁndings from 25-minute
interviews with 768 lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals (LGBs).
Among the study’s ﬁndings are that LGBs tend to be more liberal
and more politically active than non-LGBs. Political issues of
highest priority tend to be elimination of workplace discrimina-
tion, provision for federal partner beneﬁts, and laws against hate
crimes. Same-sex marriage is an issue of greater concern among
younger LBGs than it is among the older colleagues.
Human Rights Campaign Foundation. Equality from State to State:
Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Americans and State Legisla-
tion. Washington, DC: Human Rights Campaign Foundation,
December 2007.
This annual report summarizes the status of state legislation on
topics such as same-sex marriage, child adoption, hate crimes,
and nondiscrimination in housing and employment.
Human Rights Watch. Family, Unvalued Discrimination, Denial, and
the Fate of Binational Same-Sex Couples under U.S. Law. URL: http://
hrw.org/reports/2006/us0506/. Posted May 2006.
This report describes the legal status of same-sex couples in
the United States in which one member of the couple is not an
American citizen. The study ﬁnds that such couples have essen-
tially no rights under existing laws.
Human Rights Watch. Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Dis-
crimination Against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students
in U.S. Schools. URL: http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/uslgbt/
toc.htm. Posted May 2001.
Researchers conclude from their extensive study of American
schools that gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered children
236
Resources

face constant physical and emotional threats in their daily lives
from their peers. They say that the U.S. government has demon-
strated an “abject failure” to deal with this problem.
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
Books
Babst, Gordon A., Emily R. Bill, and Jason Pierceson, eds. Moral
Argument, Religion, and Same-Sex Marriage: Advancing the Public
Good. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 2009.
The papers that make up this book argue, in general, that the tide
has shifted in the moral debate over same-sex marriage, and that
supporters of that institution have begun to have the stronger
position. As one of the editors has written on the Internet, “[I]t is
unlikely that supporters of same-sex marriage will ever again be
on the defensive.”
Gerstmann, Evan. Same-Sex Marriage and the Constitution, 2nd
edition. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Gerstmann argues that the U.S. Constitution provides a funda-
mental right of marriage in the United States, a right that includes
marriage between two people of the same sex. He asks why that
right, which now extends to almost all classes of people who are
otherwise marginalized in our society, has still not been expanded
to include gay men and lesbians.
Greenwood, David Valdes. Homo Domesticus: Notes from a Same-
Sex Marriage. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 2007.
The author discusses the process of meeting his future husband,
falling in love, getting married, adopting children, and living a
reasonably normal married life together, except that the couple
described is a same-sex couple. The book presents a very different
view of same-sex marriage from the carefully reasoned argu-
ments and polemics more commonly found on bookstore shelves.
Kotulski, Davina. Why You Should Give a Damn about Gay Marriage.
Los Angeles: Advocate Books, 2004.
This book is directed in a signiﬁcant sense to members of the gay
and lesbian community who may themselves not be very con-
vinced about the importance of legalizing same-sex marriage.
Print
237

The author discuses the more than one thousand ways in which
opposite-sex married couples enjoy civil beneﬁts that are not avail-
able to their same-sex counterparts. She argues that achieving civil
equality will come about only when members of the gay and
lesbian community become more aggressive in their efforts to
achieve marriage rights currently available only to the heterosexuals.
Myers, David G., and Letha Dawson Scanzoni. What God Has
Joined Together?: A Christian Case for Gay Marriage. New York: Har-
perSanFrancisco, 2005.
The authors present an analysis from the standpoint of Christian
theology in support of same-sex marriage, pointing out the Jesus
had nothing to say about same-sex relationships, and the Bible
also has no comment on long-term, committed relationships
between two people of the same sex. They also present arguments
that same-sex marriages can be in the best interest of families and
of children in such relationships.
Polikoff, Nancy D. Beyond (Straight and Gay) Marriage: Valuing All
Families under the Law. Boston: Beacon Press, 2009.
Polikoff argues that events have overtaken the traditional mean-
ing of marriage, and that society now must ﬁnd ways to adjust
to new types of relationships between men and women including
same-sex marriages and unmarried partnerships. She points out a
number of areas in which the validation of such relationships is
needed, such as workers’ compensation death beneﬁts, Social
Security, probate, adoption and health care issues.
Rauch, Jonathan. Gay Marriage: Why It Is Good for Gays, Good for
Straights, and Good for America. New York: Times Books/Henry
Holt and Company, 2004.
Rauch argues that current efforts to provide “separate-but-equal”
arrangements for same-sex couples (such as domestic partner-
ships) can only harm the traditional institution of heterosexual
marriage itself as well as the best interests of same-sex couples.
Wolfson, Evan. Why Marriage Matters: America, Equality, and Gay
People’s Right to Marry. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005.
Attorney Wolfson defends the right of same-sex couples to marry as
a matter of civil rights, one that he calls “one of the ﬁrst important
238
Resources

civil rights campaigns of the 21st century.” The book has been dis-
cussed widely and is one of the most important works on same-
sex marriage in the United States.
Articles
Becker, Mary. “Family Law in the Secular State and Restrictions
on Same-Sex Marriage: Two Are Better Than One.” University of
Illinois Law Review 2001: 1 (Winter 2001): 1–56.
Becker acknowledges that marriage has been regarded as a one-
man, one-woman institution for thousands of years. She then
examines the aspects of marriage that are so essential to society
and decides that those beneﬁts can also be achieved by any loving
relationship between two individuals, whether they are of the
same or opposite sex.
Brown, Stephen. “Naturalized Virtue Ethics and Same-Sex Love.”
Philosophy in the Contemporary World 13 (2006): 41–47.
The author, assistant professor of philosophy at Briar Cliff
University, argues that any action or institution that helps hu-
mans achieve their fullest potential is a good and worthy action or
institution. Since same-sex marriage achieves that objective for
gay men and lesbian, he asserts, same-sex marriage is a moral
good.
Brunk, Doug. “Delegates Endorse Same-Sex Adoption.” Family
Practice News 32 (21, November 2002): 1–2.
At its annual meeting, the Congress of Delegates of the American
Academy of Family Physicians voted to endorse a policy support-
ing legislation that promotes adoption by same-sex parents. This
article provides a brief summary of that action.
Burt, Robert A. “Overruling Dred Scott: The Case for Same-Sex
Marriage.” Widener Law Journal 17 (2007): 73–95.
Burt reviews in some detail the famous case of Dred Scott v. San-
ford of 1857, when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that African
Americans had no rights as American citizens and, in fact, could
not even be citizens. He compares the judicial mentality behind
that decision with that of courts that today deny the right of
same-sex couples to legally marry and asserts that such action is
as dehumanizing as was the Dred Scott decision.
Print
239

Chartier, Gary. “Natural Law, Same-Sex Marriage, and the Politics
of Virtue.” UCLA Law Review 48 (2001): 1593–1632.
The author reviews efforts by philosophers who espouse a new
and somewhat modiﬁed version of the philosophical view known
as “natural law” (“new natural law”) and the ways that philoso-
phy is used to justify opposition to same-sex marriage. He
attempts to show that their arguments are not convincing and
that, in fact, “new natural law” can be used to support the concept
of same-sex marriage. For comparison, also see Eric Reid, below.
Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health.
American Academy of Pediatrics. “Coparent or Second-Parent
Adoption by Same-Sex Parents.” Pediatrics 109 (2, February 2002):
339–40.
A special committee of the American Academy of Pediatrics ap-
pointed to study same-sex adoptions recommends that pediatricians
support legislative and legal efforts to recognize such adoptions.
Gay Parent Magazine.
This magazine was established in 1998. It carries articles and
advertisements of interest to same-sex parents. Contact informa-
tion is as follows:
P.O. Box 750852
Forest Hills, NY 11375-0852
(718) 380-1780
e-mail: gayparentmag@gmail.com
ISSN 1545-6714
Katz, Pamela S. “The Case for Legal Recognition of Same-Sex
Marriage.” Journal of Law & Policy 8 (1999):61–106.
Katz argues for same-sex marriage on the basis of two legal prin-
ciples: due process law and discrimination based on gender and/
or sexual orientation. She says that there is no legitimate reason
for suspecting that the existence of same-sex marriages will re-
present a threat to the stability of society.
Silverman, Jennifer. “Chapter Forum Retains Policy: Adoption by
Same-Sex Parents.” Pediatric News 36 (10, October 2002): 2.
240
Resources

Chapter representatives of the American Academy of Pediatrics
voted to retain a previously adopted policy in support of adoption
by same-sex couples, with a new proviso that the issue be reas-
sessed in the light of any new scientiﬁc evidence that becomes
available.
Volokh, Eugene. “Same-Sex Marriage and Slippery Slopes.”
Hofstra Law Review 33 (2005): 1155–1201.
Critics of same-sex marriage often offer the “slippery-slope” argu-
ment: such relationships may be without harm at the moment, but
they may lead to serious problems at some time in the future.
Volokh analyzes the logic of this argument and concludes that it
is inappropriately used to argue against same-sex marriages. He
also reviews a number of reasons that same-sex marriages are
good not only for the individuals involved, but also for society as
a whole.
Arguments Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
Books
Dobson, James. Marriage Under Fire: Why We Must Win This Battle.
Sisters, OR: Multnomah Books, 2004.
Dobson suggests that gay men and lesbian have been working for
years to “utterly destroy the family.” In this book, he explains why
same-sex marriages will destroy conventional marriages, lead to a
large increase in divorces, and cause irreparable harm to children.
Kennedy, D. James, and Jerry Newcombe. What’s Wrong with
Same-Sex Marriage? Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 2004.
The authors review the recent spread of same-sex marriage in the
United States and point out the threat this trend poses to tradi-
tional marriage. They explain that marriage was established by
God, and that no human institution has the right to change the
way in which marriage is established or how it functions.
Lutzer, Erwin W. The Truth about Same Sex Marriage: 6 Things You
Need to Know about What’s Really at Stake. Chicago: Moody Pub-
lishers, 2004.
Lutzer, the pastor of the Moody Church in Chicago, Illinois,
argues that same-sex marriage is a “deep and dangerous threat”
Print
241

to modern society, and the church has an obligation to speak out,
“in love and in truth,” against the spread of this practice. He
refers extensively to and bases his arguments on biblical pro-
nouncements about the nature of marriage that are fundamental
to Christian doctrine.
Sprigg, Peter. Outrage: How Gay Activists and Liberal Judges Are
Trashing Democracy to Redeﬁne Marriage. Washington, DC: Regnery
Press, 2004.
The author suggests that the American public is not aware of the
fact that homosexuals are attempting to redeﬁne one of the oldest
traditions in human society, opposite-sex marriage. In this book,
he takes on a number of tasks related to this frightening possibility,
explaining why same-sex marriage is not a civil right, the “shock-
ing medical and scientiﬁc data” about homosexual behavior, the
threat that same-sex marriage poses to children, and why a
constitutional amendment is necessary to prevent liberal judges
and the homosexual community from overthrowing the
traditional deﬁnition of marriage.
Stanton, Glenn T., and Bill Maier. Marriage on Trial: The Case
Against Same-Sex Marriage and Parenting. Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2004.
The authors suggest that “nature is very narrow in its deﬁnition
of marriage,” and that same-sex marriages are a serious threat to
the community as a whole and to the next generation. They argue
that no society that has permitted arrangements other than
opposite-sex marriage have ever been able to survive.
Staver, Mathew D. Same-Sex Marriage: Putting Every Household at
Risk. Nashville, TN: B&H Publishing Group, 2004.
The author argues that the institution of marriage was established
by God and that it is intended only for opposite-sex couples. In
this book, he explains how same-sex marriages are a threat to all
heterosexual marriages and to the children of those marriages,
and he explains “what parents need to know” about same-sex
attraction and the development of gender identity.
TFP Committee on American Issues. Defending a Higher Law: Why
We Must Resist Same-Sex “Marriage” and the Homosexual Movement.
242
Resources

Spring Grove, PA: American Society for the Defense of Tradition,
Family and Property, 2004.
The TFP Committee on American Issues explains that it is writing
this book to defeat the homosexual community in a battle for the
nation’s soul. Its goal in the book is to refute doctrinal and factual
errors advanced by the homosexual minority, to explore its
agenda, and to reveal its tactics in the battle to defeat those who
believe in morality in the nation.
Articles
Coolidge, David Orgon, and William C. Duncan. “Reafﬁrming
Marriage: A Presidential Priority.” Harvard Journal of Law & Public
Policy 24 (Spring 2001): 623–51.
The authors present arguments for maintaining the deﬁnition of a
marriage as a union between one man and one woman, explain
how some activists are trying to break down that traditional deﬁ-
nition through civil unions and same-sex marriages, and propose
actions by the incoming administration of George W. Bush to
retain and enforce the traditional deﬁnition of marriage.
Duncan, William C. “Avoidance Strategy: Same-Sex Marriage
Litigation and the Federal Courts.” Campbell Law Review 29
(2006): 29–46.
The author points out that advocates for same-sex marriage
nearly always bring suit in state, and not federal, courts. He sug-
gests that the reason for this pattern is that the U.S. Constitution
provides no basis for endorsing same-sex marriage, and he cites
a number of past rulings to conﬁrm this view. He argues that the
adoption of same-sex marriages nationwide through actions by
individual state courts will have a “sorry legacy,” not only for
traditional marriage, but also for the law.
Jurand, Sara Hoffman. “Pennsylvania Nixes Second-Parent
Adoptions for Same-Sex Couples.” Trial 37 (108, February 1,
2001): 108–9.
In two separate rulings, both decided by a six-to-three vote, the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled that individuals in a
same-sex relationship cannot adopt the biological children of
their partners. This article brieﬂy reviews the facts and reasoning
in the cases.
Print
243

Kurtz, Stanley. “Beyond Gay Marriage.” The Weekly Standard 8
(August 4–11, 2003): 26–33.
Kurtz argues that legalization of same-sex marriage raises some
serious questions about the nature of marriage itself that need to
be discussed on a broad and open front in American society. He
suggests that approval of the practice will lead to a variety of
other kinds of nontraditional relationships, such as polygamy
and three-person marriages.
MacLeod, Adam J. “The Search for Moral Neutrality in Same-Sex
Marriage Decisions.” BYU Journal of Public Law 23 (2008): 1–59.
The author considers decisions made by three state courts in
California, Connecticut, and Massachusetts about same-sex
marriage and noted that each claimed to have a moral-neutral
basis for their decisions. In fact, he says, “all three courts commit-
ted themselves to morally partisan conceptions of marriage.” In
conclusion, he offers some “morally neutral rational bases” for
upholding existing state laws that limit marriage to opposite-sex
couples.
Reid, Eric. “Assessing and Responding to Same-Sex ‘Marriage’ in
Light of Natural Law.” Georgetown Journal of Law & Public Policy 3
(2005): 523–39.
Reid bases his objection to same-sex marriage on one of the funda-
mental principles of Roman Catholic philosophy, that of natural
law. He attempts to show that same-sex marriage represents a
profound rejection of that principle and, therefore, must be
prevented. For comparison, see Gary Chartier, above.
Republican Policy Committee. “The Threat to Marriage from the
Courts.” URL: http://rpc.senate.gov/releases/2003/jd072903
.pdf. Accessed on April 14, 2010.
In this press release, the Republican Policy Committee argues that
courts cannot be trusted to make fair and rational decisions about
the same-sex issue and that an amendment to the U.S. Constitution
is the only certain way to preserve traditional marriage in the
United States.
Sommerville, Margaret. “Children’s Human Rights and Unlinking
Child-Parent Biological Bonds with Adoption, Same-Sex Marriage
244
Resources

and New Reproductive Technologies.” Journal of Family Studies 13
(2, November 2007): 179–201.
The author argues that “the most fundamental human right of
every person is the right to be born from natural human origins
that have not been tampered with by anyone else,” and that new
policies and technologies, including same-sex adoption, violate
that right. She sees these policies and technologies as having some
of the worst consequences for children that can be imagined and
suggests that, should same-sex marriage continue to become
more popular, legislation be adopted to prevent children from
losing this most basic of human rights.
Wilkins, Richard G. “The Constitutionality of Legal Preferences
for Heterosexual Marriage.” Regent University Law Review 16
(2003–4):121–37.
Wilkins suggests that the traditional deﬁnition of marriage as
being between one man and one woman is under attack from a
number of forces, same-sex unions being one. He asks if “the vari-
ous legal preferences conferred on traditional marriage [must] be
extended to alternative partnership arrangements?” and decides
that the answer is “no.” He offers both constitutional and social
reasons for reaching this decision.
General Reviews of Same-Sex Marriage and Adoption
Books
Andryszewski, Tricia. Same-Sex Marriage: Moral Wrong or Civil
Right? Breckenridge, CO: Twenty First Century Books, 2007.
The author attempts to present a balanced view of same-sex
marriage for young adult readers. She opens with a review of
the gay and lesbian rights movement in the United States, and
then talks about political developments in the 1990s, the adoption
of same-sex marriage in Massachusetts, and some features of gay
and lesbian family life.
Badgett, M. V. Lee. When Gay People Get Married: What Happens
When Societies Legalize Same-Sex Marriage. New York: New York
University Press, 2009.
The vast majority of the books and articles written about same-sex
marriage express philosophical or theological positions on the
Print
245

topic. One important question worthy of consideration is what the
scientiﬁc evidence is about locations where same-sex marriage has
been legalized. Such data are difﬁcult to come by because few such
nations or states exist. Badgett chooses the Netherlands, where
same-sex marriage has been legal since 2001, to carry out her socio-
logical study of the effects of the practice on the society as a whole.
Her analysis is very important for the ongoing debate over legali-
zation of same-sex unions in the United States.
Baird, Robert M., and Stuart E. Rosenbaum, eds. Same-Sex
Marriage: The Moral And Legal Debate. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 2004.
The articles in this book are divided into three sections. The ﬁrst
section deals speciﬁcally with the decision by the Massachusetts
Supreme Judicial Court requiring the state to issue marriage
licenses to same-sex couples. The second section deals with
emotional issues raised by the possibility of same-sex marriages.
The third section offers philosophical arguments for and against
same-sex marriage.
Brewer, Paul R. Value War: Public Opinion and the Politics of Gay
Rights. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 2007.
The author argues that surveys of public opinion about same-sex
marriage and those who are actually involved in the battle over
this issue have a reciprocal relationship with each other, each side
inﬂuencing the thoughts and actions of the others. He provides
data and analysis to support this view and shows how it affects
the long-term development of the debate over civil rights for gay
men and lesbians, including same-sex marriage and adoption.
Chauncey, George. Why Marriage?: The History Shaping Today’s
Debate over Gay Equality. New York: Basic Books, 2005.
The author places the current controversy over same-sex marriage
within the context of the historical development of antigay attitudes
in the United States (beginning primarily in the mid-twentieth
century) and pressures brought to bear on the gay and lesbian
communities as a result of the HIV/AIDS crisis in the United States.
Hertz, Frederick, and Emily Doskow. Making It Legal: A Guide to
Same-Sex Marriage, Domestic Partnership and Civil Unions. Berkeley,
CA: NOLO, 2009.
246
Resources

This book avoids a discussion of the dispute as to the advisability
of same-sex relationship and simply lays out legal principles
involved in consummating a legal same-sex marriage, civil union,
or domestic partnership. Some of the issues included are prenup-
tial agreements, wills and trusts, tax consequences, special issues
for couples with children, and relationships with stepparents
and former partners.
Jordan, Mark D., ed. Authorizing Marriage?: Canon, Tradition, and
Critique in the Blessing of Same-Sex Unions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2006.
This collection of essays considers the historical and theological
literature dealing with same-sex unions and analyzes the relevance
of that literature for the modern debate over same-sex marriage.
Laycock, Douglas, ed. Same-Sex Marriage and Religious Liberty:
Emerging Conﬂicts. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2008.
The ﬁve chapters in this book provide overviews of speciﬁc issues
that are likely to arise as the result of the dispute between
religious organizations and groups who support the right of
same-sex couples to marry and adopt children.
Mezey, Susan. Gay Families and the Courts: The Quest for Equal
Rights. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 2009.
This book provides a comprehensive and useful overview of the
legal status of same-sex marriage and same-sex families.
Pinello, Daniel R. America’s Struggle for Same-Sex Marriage. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
The author presents an overview of the history of the battle over
same-sex marriage from a quite different perspective, that of ordi-
nary people who have been caught up in that struggle, individuals
such as county clerks, legislators, judges, activists on both sides of
the debates, and same-sex couples who are eager to obtain legal
validation of their relationships.
Polikoff, Nancy D. Beyond (Straight and Gay) Marriage: Valuing All
Families under the Law. Boston: Beacon Press, 2008.
The author argues that the meanings of marriage and family
have, for a number of years, been changing, in both the United
Print
247

States and other parts of the world. She reviews this history and
examines the social, economic, political, and legal signiﬁcance of
these changes for many types of families, including those of gay
men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered individuals.
Shanley, Mary L. Making Babies, Making Families: What Matters
Most in an Age of Reproductive Technologies, Surrogacy, Adoption,
and Same-Sex and Unwed Parents’ Rights. Boston: Beacon Press,
2002.
The author explores all aspects of adoption by other-than-
traditional opposite-sex married couples. She devotes chapters
to adoption by transracial couples, fathers’ rights, surrogate
motherhood, lesbian comothers, and other related topics.
Sullivan, Andrew. Same-Sex Marriage: Pro and Con, revised and
updated edition. New York: Vintage Books, 2004.
The more than six dozen essays that make up this anthology have
been taken from a wide variety of sources, from the Bible and
other ancient literature to modern-day court decisions, laws, and
polemics on both sides of the same-sex marriage debate.
Articles
Allen, Douglas W. “An Economic Assessment of Same-Sex
Marriage Laws.” Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 29
(2006): 949–80.
The author argues that the debate over same-sex marriage often
omits consideration of the economic issues involved. He points
out that such costs could be enormous and, for that reason,
society might consider the possibility of having two types of
marriage, homosexual marriage and heterosexual marriage.
Although not an ideal solution, he believes that the two-
marriage model would have fewer harmful economic effects than
a one-marriage-for-all model.
Blankenhorn, David, and Jonathan Rauch. “A Reconciliation on
Gay Marriage.” New York Times, February 22, 2009, “Week in
Review,” 11.
This very interesting op-ed article was written by one opponent
and one supporter of same-sex marriage, suggesting a compromise
248
Resources

position: civil unions that provide nearly all of the same rights as
opposite-sex marriage, which religious organizations can choose
to opt out of recognizing in their own functions.
Brooks Devon, and Sheryl Goldberg. “Gay and Lesbian Adoptive
and Foster Care Placements: Can They Meet the Needs of Waiting
Children?” Social Work 46 (2, April 2001): 147–57.
The authors review the demographics of the adoption problem in
the United States today, ﬁnd that there are far more children
waiting for adoption than potential adoptive parents, and suggest
that laws and regulations be eased to permit same-sex couples to
adopt more easily. They review policy implications and changes
in practice necessitated by this recommendation.
“Can Anyone Show Just Cause Why These Two Should Not Be
Lawfully Joined Together?” New England Law Review 38 (2003–4):
487–688.
The 15 articles in this issue deal with a variety of issues relating to
same-sex marriage, such as constitutional issues, evolving
patterns in the United States and other countries of the world,
estate planning for same-sex couples, adoption by same-sex
couples, issues for grandparents, and religious issues involved
in the approval of same-sex marriages.
“Editors’ Symposium: The Meaning of Marriage.” San Diego Law
Review 42 (2005): 821–1149.
This issue consists of 22 articles dealing with almost every
conceivable aspect of the so-called Federal Marriage Amendment,
a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution deﬁning
marriage as the union of one man and one woman. Some issues
discussed include the meaning of marriage, the effects of same-
sex marriage on children, the amendment and polygamy, and
lessons from natural law and tradition.
Franke, Katherine M. “The Politics of Same-Sex Marriage Politics.”
Columbia Journal of Gender and Law 15 (2006): 236–48.
After the decriminalization of same-sex sex practices by the U.S.
Supreme Court in Lawrence v. Texas, many members of the lesbian
and gay community chose to raise the political ante by pushing
for same-sex marriage. The author explores the history of this
Print
249

evolution of political goals and some problems that it raises for
both the gay and lesbian community and the society at large.
Goldberg, Suzanne B. “A Historical Guide to the Future of
Marriage for Same-Sex Couples.” Columbia Journal of Gender and
Law 15 (2006): 249–72.
The author notes that most decisions about same-sex marriage
include reference to the history of such relationships, but that
those references are ﬂawed for two reasons. First, historical prec-
edence is an insufﬁcient basis on which to make such decisions,
and, second, the historical analyses that are made are typically
based on inaccurate readings of historical documents.
Hitchings, Emma, and Tracey Sagar. “The Adoption and Children
Act 2002: A Level Playing Field for Same-Sex Adopters?” Child
and Family Law Quarterly 19 (1, June 2007): 60–80.
The United Kingdom’s Adoption and Children Act of 2002
permits couples to adopt children whether they are of the same
or opposite sex. The authors of this article consider the potential
effects of this act on adoptees. They report the results of inter-
views with a very small sample (ﬁve individuals) of social workers
with experience in this area, who report that the playing ﬁeld
will probably still not be level for same-sex couples seeking to
adopt.
Knauer, Nancy J. “Same-Sex Marriage and Federalism.” Temple
Political & Civil Rights Law Review 17 (2, 2008): 101–22.
The author explores the implications of same-sex marriage for the
U.S. tradition of federalism, in which individual states are
allowed to carry out experiments on new social, economic, and
political systems. Her essay consists of three major parts, the ﬁrst
of which deals with the current status of same-sex marriage in the
nation. The second part outlines some of the problems involved
with the federalist system in ensuring that the rights of minorities
are preserved. The third part explores the human costs to same-
sex couples for whom legal recognition is not available.
Koppelman, Andrew. “Interstate Recognition of Same-Sex Mar-
riages and Civil Unions: A Handbook for Judges.” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 153 (2005): 2143–94.
250
Resources

As legal same-sex arrangements (marriages, civil unions, domes-
tic partnerships, etc.) become more common, the legal question
as to whether states must recognize such arrangements from
other states becomes more important. Koppelman reviews four
kinds of same-sex arrangements, “evasive,” “migratory,” “visi-
tor,” and “extraterritorial” marriages (depending on the relation-
ship of the couple to the state in which they are married), and
the legal consequences of each for the question of recognition.
Lipkin, Robert Justin. “The Harm of Same-Sex Marriage: Real or
Imagined?” Widener Law Review 11 (2005): 277–308.
Conservatives argue that permitting same-sex marriage will harm
society, and liberals suggest they cannot imagine how such harm
can occur. Lipkin says that conservatives are right, but that the
real question is how any harm that may occur is balanced by
providing a segment of the population (gay men and lesbians)
with a legitimate civil right.
Ryan, Patrick J. “Here’s Your ‘Traditional Marriage.’ ” Gay and
Lesbian Review 16 (6, November–December 2009): 25–27.
The author notes that critics of same-sex marriage often base their
appeal on the precedence of “traditional marriage,” although the
form of marriage practiced in the United States and many other
countries today is anything but “traditional.” He reviews what
the more common forms of relationships among men and women
have been throughout human history.
Samar, Vincent J. “Throwing down the International Gauntlet:
Same-Sex Marriage as a Human Right.” Cardozo Public Law Policy
& Ethics Journal 6 (2007): 1–55.
The author points out that the spread of same-sex marriage in
some European countries, Canada, and South Africa raises a
new issue in international law, the obligation of nations to recog-
nize same-sex marriages conducted in other nations, even if they
are not conducted in the host nation. He says this issue is only a
relatively modest part of a larger issue of the relationship between
domestic and international human rights.
“Same-Sex Couples: Deﬁning Marriage in the Twenty-ﬁrst
Century.” Stanford Law and Policy Review 16 (2005): 1–232.
Print
251

The eight articles in this special symposium issue deal with legal,
religious, economic, and moral issues related to the increasing
popularity of same-sex marriages.
Schuman, Ben. “Gods and Gays: Analyzing the Same-Sex Mar-
riage Debate from a Religious Perspective.” Georgetown Law Journal
98 (1, August 2008): 2103–41.
As the title of this article suggests, the author explores the reli-
gious implications of the growing demand for same-sex marriage
rights in the United States and analyzes the role of religion versus
legal considerations in the debate.
Stewart, Monte Neil. “Judicial Redeﬁnition of Marriage.” Canadian
Journal of Family Law 21 (2004): 11–132.
The author examines four judicial decisions dealing with
same-sex marriage, two in the United States and two in Canada,
from the standpoint of their judicial quality. He ﬁnds that all four
decisions were “materially defective” in that they failed to deal
adequately with basic issues raised by opponents of same-sex
marriage, such as the importance of a couple’s being able to
reproduce. He concludes that “courts did an unacceptable job
with their performance of the very tasks that lie at the heart of
judicial responsibility in virtually every case.”
Wardle, Lynn D. “A Critical Analysis of Constitutional Claims for
Same-Sex Marriage,” Brigham Young University Law Review 1
(1996): 96–100.
A listing of law review articles dealing with same-sex marriage
dating from 1970 to 1975 and from 1990 to 1995. The articles are
categorized as in favor of or opposed to same-sex marriage.
Weiser, Jay. “Foreword: The Next Normal: Developments Since
Marriage Rights for Same-Sex Couples in New York.” Columbia
Journal of Gender and Law 13 (2004): 48–69.
The author provides a comprehensive and exhaustive introduc-
tion to the subject of same-sex marriage, with special focus on
circumstances in the state of New York. The article is an introduc-
tion to a 2000 report issued by a number of committees of the
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, “A Report on
252
Resources

Marriage Rights for Same-Sex Couples in New York,” reprinted
on pages 70–99 of the same issue of the journal.
Wright, Wade K. “The Tide in Favour of Equality: Same-Sex Mar-
riage in Canada and England and Wales.” International Journal of
Law, Policy & the Family 20 (2006): 249–85.
Wright reviews the trend in favor of same-sex marriage and civil
unions on both sides of the Atlantic, some common themes, and
some differences between developments in Canada and in the
United Kingdom. He considers the possibility that courts in the
United Kingdom will follow a path similar to that laid out by
Canadian courts in legalizing same-sex marriage.
Reports
The Beckett Fund for Religious Liberty. “Scholars’ Conference on
Same-Sex Marriage and Religious Liberty.” URL: http://www
.becketfund.org/index.php/article/494.html. Posted on May 4,
2006.
This report summarizes the proceedings of a conference spon-
sored by the Beckett Fund on the consequences of the legalization
of same-sex marriages on religious freedom. The Web site has
links to seven papers presented at that conference, along with
the text of three amicus curiae briefs based on the presentations
made and ﬁled by the fund in related cases heard by courts in
Connecticut, Iowa, and Maryland.
Brodzinsky, David M., and the staff of the Evan B. Donaldson
Adoption Institute. Adoption by Lesbians and Gays: A National
Survey of Adoption Agency Policies, Practices, and Attitudes. New
York: Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute. URL: http://www
.adoptioninstitute.org/whowe/Lesbian%20and%20Gay%20
Adoption%20Report_ﬁnal.doc (October 29, 2003).
Researchers report on a study of policies and practices of 307 pri-
vate and public adoption agencies in all 50 states and the District
of Columbia. The study shows that, in general, adoption agencies
are increasingly willing to place children with same-sex couples.
About two of ﬁve responding agencies have already placed
children with couples known to be gay or lesbian, and 60 percent
of respondents indicate a willingness to accept applications for
adoptions from same-sex couples.
Print
253

Gates, Gary J., M. V. Lee Badgett, Jennifer Ehrle Macomber, and
Kate Chambers. Adoption and Foster Care by Gay and Lesbian Parents
in the United States. URL: http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/
411437_Adoption_Foster_Care.pdf. Posted March 2007.
The four researchers from the Williams Institute at the University
of California at Los Angeles School of Law and the Urban Insti-
tute in Washington, DC, summarize demographic data about an
estimated 65,500 children living in families headed by a same-
sex couple or a single gay or lesbian parent in the United States,
and they compare those data with information about comparable
heterosexual families. They point out ways in which same-sex
and opposite-sex families are alike and different and conclude
that, in general, bans on adoptions by same-sex couples are likely
to have more negative than positive results for children, adoptive
parents, and the general community.
Nonprint
History
Internet
elephantjournal.com. http://www.elephantjournal.com/2009/
02/gregory-hinton-for-daily-camera-march-26-1975-the-ﬁrst
-same-sex-marriage-licenses-in-the-united-states-were-heroically
-issued-in-boulder-by-county-clerk-clela-rorex/. Accessed on
January 5, 2010.
This article provides a fascinating historical view of one of the
earliest events in the history of gay marriage in the United States,
when county clerk Clela Rorex issued marriage licenses to a
same-sex couple because she could ﬁnd nothing in state law that
prohibited her from doing so.
Frakes, Robert. “Why the Romans Are Important in the Debate
about Gay Marriage.” http://hnn.us/articles/21319.html.
Accessed on February 14, 2010.
The author, professor of history at Clarion University, explains
why knowing the history of Roman attitudes about same-sex
behavior is relevant to the modern-day debate over same-sex
marriage.
254
Resources

Hay, Bob. “A World History of Homosexuality.” http://bobhay
.org/u3a/homo_index.html. Accessed on April 12, 2010.
Hay offered this course through the United Kingdom’s University
of the Third Age (U3A) in 2006, 2007, and 2008. It is an amazing
collection of lectures on the early and more recent history of
same-sex relationships, including same-sex marriage, in a number
of cultures.
“History of Chinese Homosexuality.” http://www.chinadaily
.com.cn/english/doc/2004-04/01/content_319807.htm.
Accessed on January 12, 2010.
This article provides a brief, but very interesting, history of same-
sex relationships, including same-sex marriages, in Chinese
culture.
Igwe, Leo. “Tradition of Same Gender Marriage in Igboland.”
Nigerian Tribune. http://revrowlandjidemacaulay.blogspot.com/
2009/06/tradition-of-same-gender-marriage-in.html. Accessed
on March 24, 2010.
The writer discusses a form of same-sex marriage that has existed
in a region of Nigeria in which he was born and raised.
“Love, Marriage, Romance & Women. . . . In Medieval & Celtic
Culture.” http://www.dfwx.com/medieval_cult.html. Accessed
on February 17, 2010.
This article provides a very extensive, scholarly, informative, and
sometimes surprising review of the nature of marriage and
relationships during the medieval period.
Religious Tolerance. “Bible Passages Describing Eight Family/
Marriage Types.” http://www.religioustolerance.org/mar
_bibl0.htm. Accessed on February 14, 2010.
This Web page offers an antidote to the concept that traditional
marriage is and always has been an arrangement between one
man and one woman.
[United Church of Christ]. “Same-Sex Marriage: ATimeline.” http://
www.ucc.org/assets/pdfs/emr9.pdf. Accessed on January 17,
2010.
Nonprint
255

This resource is of limited value because it covers only a limited
period of time (1970–88), but it is still useful because of the detail
it provides about events in the ﬁrst years of the same-sex
marriage debate.
Vanita, Rith. “Homosexuality in India: Past and Present.” IIAS
Newsletter, no. 29. http://www.iias.nl/iiasn/29/IIASNL29_10
_Vanita.pdf. Accessed on March 25, 2010.
This article is of considerable importance because it is one of the
ﬁrst scholarly studies of same-sex relationships in historical
Indian culture.
Walker, Jonathan P. “Reconsidering Homosexuality and the
Bible.” http://www.gsafe.org/jonathan_walker.htm. Accessed
on February 14, 2010.
The author reviews the evidence that biblical passages cited as
condemning same-sex relationships may not be as clear on that
point as proponents suggest that they are.
Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Issues
Internet
About.com. “Gay Life.” URL: http://gaylife.about.com/od/
samesexmarriage/Marriage.htm. Accessed on December 13, 2009.
This Internet resource includes articles on a number of issues
related to gay and lesbian rights, such as civil unions, domestic
partnerships, same-sex marriage, tax issues for same-sex couples,
estate planning, a review of gay and lesbian rights in other
nations, beneﬁts of legalized marriage, arguments against same-
sex marriage, and the Federal Marriage Amendment.
“Afﬁdavit of William Eskridge, Jr.” URL: http://www.same
sexmarriage.ca/docs/Afﬁdavit%20of%20William%20N%5B1
%5D.%20Eskridge,%20JR.pdf. Accessed on December 11,
2009.
This document summarizes the author’s research on the ap-
pearance of formal, ritualized, same-sex relationships in a
number of societies in various part of the world throughout
history.
256
Resources

Dunne, Bruce. “Power and Sexuality in the Middle East.” URL:
http://www.merip.org/mer/mer206/bruce.htm. Accessed on
January 12, 2010.
This article provides a fascinating overview of attitudes toward
heterosexual and homosexual relationships in the Islamic nations
of the Middle East.
FindLaw. “Gay and Lesbian Rights/Sexual Orientation Dis-
crimination.” URL: http://public.ﬁndlaw.com/civil-rights/
more-civil-rights-topics/gay-lesbian-civil-rights-more/. Acces-
sed on December 13, 2009.
An extraordinary resource on the legal rights of gay men and
lesbians, with information on federal, state, and local legislation,
corporate policies, hate crimes, civil rights, and many other
important topics.
Fitzpatrick, Brian. “Media Ignore Impending Collision: Gay
Rights vs. Religious Liberty.” URL: http://www.cultureand
mediainstitute.org/articles/2008/20080610145004.aspx. Posted
on June 10, 2008.
The author presents a somewhat different take on the gay and les-
bian rights movement, arguing that it is not really a civil rights
movement at all, but, instead, “a war against Western civiliza-
tion’s Judeo-Christian moral order.” He discusses the evolution
of attitudes toward same-sex relationships in Canada as evidence
for this position.
National Center for Lesbian Rights. URL: http://www.nclrights
.org/. Accessed on December 13, 2009.
This Web site provides a great deal of information on lesbian civil
rights issues in particular, and on gay and lesbian issues in
general. Some topics for which information is available are elder
law, employment, families and parenting, federal legislation,
health care, immigration, marriage, sports, and youth.
[Pinello, Daniel R.] [“Casebook on Sexual Orientation and the
Law.”] URL: http://www.danpinello.com/Family2.htm. Acces-
sed on July 5, 2008.
Nonprint
257

This Web site contains information extracted from the author’s
book Gay Rights and American Law. It contains links to about three
dozen important appellate cases dealing with same-sex issues
such as marriage, property disputes, wills and estates, domestic
violence, and legal rights of same-sex partners.
Public Agenda. “Issue Guide: Gay Rights.” URL: http://www
.publicagenda.org/citizen/issueguides/gay-rights. Accessed on
December 13, 2009.
Public Agenda is a highly regarded, impartial source for informa-
tion on a variety of important political, economic, and social issues.
Its Web site provides relevant facts on an issue, a discussion
guides, additional resources, existing and proposed legislation,
public opinion summaries, and additional resources for under-
standing the issue.
“Queer Resources Directory.” URL: http://www.qrd.org/qrd/.
Last updated on April 29, 2009.
This invaluable Web site has links to 25,488 ﬁles on virtually every
aspect of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered topics, includ-
ing same-sex marriage and parenting; gay and lesbian youths;
religion; health and safety issues; electronic resources; gay media,
culture, and events; international information; business and
workplace issues; organizations; and politics and activism.
Robinson, Bruce A. “Homosexuality and Bisexuality: All View-
points.” Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance. URL: http://
www.religioustolerance.org/homosexu.htm. Accessed on
December 13, 2009.
This Web site provides a great deal of unbiased information
about homosexual and bisexual behavior, with detailed discus-
sions on topics such as the impact of religion on beliefs and
attitudes about homosexuality and bisexuality; same-sex unions
and civil unions; challenges faces by gay men, lesbians, and
bisexuals; hate crimes; reparative therapies; laws affecting gay
men, lesbians, and bisexuals; and essays, comments, sermons,
and other resources.
SpeakOut.com. “Gay Rights.” URL: http://www.speakout.com/
activism/gayrights/. Accessed on December 13, 2009.
258
Resources

This Web site provides basic information on a number of
gay-related issues, such as gays and lesbians, in the military, antidis-
crimination laws, hate crimes, same-sex marriage, civil unions, and
social issues. It also offers links to a number of related Internet sites.
Arguments in Favor of Same-Sex Marriage
Internet
Bidstrup, Scott. “Gay Marriage: The Arguments and the
Motives.” URL: http://www.bidstrup.com/marriage.htm. Last
updated on June 3, 2009.
The author reviews the reasons that people give for opposing
same-sex marriage, what he believes are the real reason for their
opposition, the agenda that anti-same-sex marriage individuals
and organizations are pursuing, and the reasons that same-sex
marriage is a civil rights issue.
Cline, Austin. “Arguments for Gay Marriage: Moral and Social
Arguments for Gay Marriage.” URL: http://atheism.about.com/
od/gaymarriage/p/ProGayMarriage.htm. Accessed on April 14,
2010.
Cline starts by acknowledging that most arguments in favor of
same-sex marriage focus on the beneﬁts to couples who would
beneﬁt from such an arrangement. In this article, however, he points
out how same-sex marriage can also beneﬁt many other groups of
people, including the children of gay men and lesbians, parents
and other relatives of lesbians and gay men, and society in general.
Cyberhiway.com. “The Gay Adoption Mailing List.” URL: http://
www.cyberhiway.com/aparent/faq.html.AccessedonDecember15,
2009.
This Web site is designed to provide information and support for
same-sex couples who are considering adoption, are in the
process of adopting a child, or who have already adopted a child.
Weekly archives of posted messages are available back as far as
August 1998.
Deason, Claire B. “An Argument for Same-Sex Marriage.” URL:
http://digitalcommons.macalester.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article
=1003&context=poli_honors. Accessed on April 14, 2010.
Nonprint
259

In this honors project at Macalester College, the author attempts
to answer the question, “What might a sound legal argument for
same sex marriage look like?” In order to do so, she draws on
constitutional law, legislative actions, and court cases dealing
with same-sex marriage.
Faucette, Judith. “The Constitutional Same Sex Marriage Debate.”
URL: http://marital-gender-equality.suite101.com/article.cfm/
the_constitutional_same_sex_marriage_debate. Accessed on
April 14, 2010.
This article summarizes two of the crucial legal issues related to
the legalization of same-sex marriage, the right to liberty under
the due process clause, and the right to equality under the equal
protection clause.
The Gay Christian Network. “What I Believe.” URL: http://
gaychristian.net/justins_view.php. Accessed on February 14,
2010.
This article, written by a very conservative gay Christian, explains
why he thinks that same-sex marriage does not violate the scrip-
tures and, in fact, is probably blessed by God.
Head, Tom. “10 Really Bad Arguments against Same-Sex Mar-
riage.” URL: http://civilliberty.about.com/od/gendersexuality/
tp/Arguments-Against-Gay-Marriage.htm. Accessed on April 14,
2010.
Head responds, point by point, to 10 arguments offered by James
Dobson in his book Marriage Under Fire against same-sex
marriage.
Head, Tom. “Four Reasons to Support Gay Marriage and Oppose
the Federal Marriage Amendment.” URL: http://civilliberty
.about.com/od/gendersexuality/a/marriageamend.htm. Acces-
sed on December 13, 2009.
The author focuses on the proposed constitutional amendment
deﬁning marriage as a contract between two individuals of the
opposite sex. He argues that (1) the amendment would not
protect heterosexual marriages, (2) the amendment is contrary
to the basic principles of American democracy, (3) legalizing
same–sex marriage causes no harm to opposite-sex marriage, and
260
Resources

(4) legalizing same-sex marriage acknowledges the legitimacy of
same-sex relationships.
Joe.My.God. “New York’s Heroes.” URL: http://joemygod
.blogspot.com/2009/12/new-yorks-heroes.html. Accessed on
December 13, 2009.
This Web site contains four videos originally posted on YouTube
of speeches made in the New York Senate debate over a bill to
grant same-sex couples the right to marry in New York State, a
vote held in December 2009. The four speeches were all given by
members of the senate, explaining the reasons that they were
going to vote in favor of the bill. The bill that was the subject of
these speeches failed in the senate.
Liberated Christians. “Serious Study of Leviticus: Has Nothing to
Do with Today’s Homosexuality.” http://www.libchrist.com/
other/homosexual/leviticus.html. Accessed on February 14,
2010.
The author offers a scholarly analysis of the texts in Leviticus that
contemporary Christians use to condemn same-sex behaviors and
concludes that they do not say what they appear to say about
same-sex relationships.
Olson, Theodore B. “The Conservative Case for Gay Marriage.”
Newsweek. http://www.newsweek.com/id/229957. Posted on
January 18, 2010.
One of the lead attorneys for the plaintiffs in the case of Perry
v. Schwarzenegger before the U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of California, Olson argues that allowing same-sex cou-
ples to marry in the United States is purely a matter of equality
and fundamental rights.
Roste, Vaughn. “Ten Reasons Why Christians Should Support
Same-Sex Marriage.” http://www.samesexmarriage.ca/equality/
ten_reasons.htm. Accessed on April 14, 2010.
The writer, the son of two Lutheran pastors, with a degree in
theology, outlines 10 reasons that Christians ought to support
same-sex marriage. His reasons tend to emphasize changes that
have taken place in the political scene in Canada, as well as in
the Christian church itself over recent decades.
Nonprint
261

Arguments Opposed to Same-Sex Marriage
Internet
Alliance Defense Fund. “The Truth about Same-Sex ‘Marriage.’ ”
URL: http://www.alliancedefensefund.org/userdocs/SameSex
Marriage.pdf. Accessed on December 13, 2009.
This pamphlet outlines the major objections to same-sex marriage
from a group that has been involved in virtually all state and local
campaigns surrounding the right of same-sex couples to marry. It
argues, among other things, that civil unions and domestic part-
nerships are as much of a risk to traditional marriage as is same-
sex marriage itself, that churches may be required to perform
same-sex marriages if they are legalized, that same-sex marriage
is only a ﬁrst step in a more comprehensive “homosexual agenda,”
and that legalization of same-sex marriage will mean that children
will have to be taught about homosexuality in public schools.
Blankenhorn, David. “Protecting Marriage to Protect Children.”
Los Angeles Times, September 19, 2008. http://articles.latimes
.com/2008/sep/19/opinion/oe-blankenhorn19. Accessed on
April 14, 2010.
The author describes himself as a “liberal Democrat” who is
opposed to same-sex marriage. The basis for his position is that
he believes that children would be harmed by same-sex marriage,
that they should all grow up in a family with one father and one
mother.
Camenker, Brian. “What Same-Sex ‘Marriage’ Has Done to Mas-
sachusetts. It’s Far Worse than Most People Realize.” http://
www.massresistance.org/docs/marriage/effects_of_ssm.html.
Accessed on January 17, 2010.
Camenker argues that approval of same-sex marriage in Massa-
chusetts has wrecked havoc in many areas, including public
education, public health, domestic violence, business, the legal
profession, government mandates, the media, public demonstra-
tions, and adoption by same-sex couples. He concludes the article
with a consideration of the question as to whether same-sex mar-
riage is really legal in the Commonwealth.
Concerned Women for America. “Top 10 Reasons to Support the
Marriage Afﬁrmation and Protection Amendment.” URL: http://
262
Resources

www.cwfa.org/articledisplay.asp?id=5351&department=CFI
&categoryid=family. Posted on March 10, 2004.
Concerned Women for America is an evangelical Christian group
that works for the introduction of religious principles into politi-
cal life in the United States. It has taken strong stands against
the legalization of same-sex marriage, a position that is explained
and defended in this document.
Crouse, Janice Shaw. “Five Myths about Same Sex Marriage.” http://
townhall.com/columnists/JaniceShawCrouse/2010/03/09/five
_myths_about_same_sex_marriage. Posted on March 9, 2010.
Crouse responds to ﬁve traditional arguments in favor of same-
sex marriage, such as same-sex marriage does no harm to other
individuals, same-sex marriage is a matter of civil rights, and
same-sex marriages are just like opposite-sex marriages. As of
April 12, 2010, the article had produced over a thousand
responses from bloggers to the Web site both in support of and
opposed to the article.
Dobson, James. “Marriage Under Fire: Arguments Against Same-
Sex Marriage.” URL: http://www.citizenlink.org/focusaction/
fofafeatures/A000006871.cfm. Posted in June 2004.
Dobson is founder of the evangelical organization, Focus on the
Family, and was its president, when he wrote this article in 2004.
It outlines the fundamental argument as to why evangelical
Christians object to the legalization of same-sex marriages.
Family Research Council. “InFocus.” http://www.frc.org/get.cfm
?i=if03h01. Accessed on April 14, 2010.
The anonymous writer of this Web page offers an extended
response to the many reasons that are often suggested for sup-
porting the legalization of same-sex marriage. He concludes that
amending the U.S. Constitution may be the only way to be certain
that same-sex marriage is not eventually adopted in this country.
Somerville, Margaret A. “The Case against ‘Same-Sex Marriage.’ ”
A Brief Submitted to the Standing Committee on Justice and
Human Rights [of the Canadian Parliament]. http://www
.catholiceducation.org/articles/homosexuality/ho0063.html.
Accessed on April 15, 2010.
Nonprint
263

The author, Samuel Gale Professor of Law and professor in the
Faculty of Medicine at McGill University’s Centre for Medicine,
Ethics, and Law, lays out the arguments for not legalizing same-
sex marriage in Canada. The argument proved to be unsuccessful
as same-sex marriage was eventually authorized by the
parliament in July 2005.
“Testimony of Jay Alan Sekulow, Chief Counsel, the American
Center for Law and Justice Before the Judiciary Subcommittee on
the Constitution May 13, 2004.” http://www.aclj.org/media/pdf/
040513_FMAHearingTestimony.pdf. Accessed on February 22,
2010.
In this document, Sekulow very aptly lays out the case against
same-sex marriage, presenting arguments against the practice
and offering rebuttals to arguments made in favor of same-sex
unions.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. “How Does Legal-
izing ‘Same-Sex Marriage’ Deny the True Nature of Marriage?”
http://www.usccb.org/laity/marriage/samesexeng.shtml.
Accessed on March 14, 2010.
This document examines three speciﬁc claims made in support of
legalizing same-sex marriage, arguments that can be made
against those positions, and church teachings on each of the three
claims. The document concludes that demands for same-sex
marriage have arisen out of an increasing tendency to focus on
“adult fulﬁllment,” rather than the needs of children.
Ventrella, Jeffrey J. “An Evaluation of Professor Michael Seidman’s
October 20, 2005 Testimony Regarding the Proposed Federal Mar-
riage Amendment.” URL: http://www.alliancedefensefund.org/
UserDocs/Testimony_JefferyVentrella.pdf.AccessedonDecember13,
2009.
Ventrella is senior vice president of the Alliance Defense Fund, an
organization whose purpose it is to defend religious freedom in
the United States, and which has taken a leading role in the battle
against same-sex marriage. This document is a record of Ventrella’s
testimony before the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on the Constitution,
Civil Rights, and Property Rights of the Judiciary Committee, which
was holding hearings on a proposed constitutional amendment to
264
Resources

deﬁne marriage as being between two members of the opposite
sex only.
General Reviews of Same-Sex Marriage
Internet
Axel-Lute, Paul. “Same-Sex Marriage: A Selective Bibliography of
the Legal Literature.” http://law-library.rutgers.edu/SSM.html.
Accessed on April 12, 2010.
This bibliography is an extraordinary achievement, providing a
host of useful references on all aspects of same-sex marriage,
including articles both supporting and opposing same-sex
marriage, polygamy, parenting and children, taxation, defense of
marriage legislation, the federal marriage amendment, and
international aspects of the topic.
Dvorak, Petula. “Reality Makes Gay Marriage Debate Obsolete.”
The Washington Post. URL: http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2009/09/03/AR2009090303585.html
?hpid=topnews. Posted on September 4. 2009.
The columnist makes the interesting observation that the District
of Columbia council’s then-current debate over legalizing same-
sex marriage in the District is largely irrelevant since same-sex
couples have been a real and essential part of the District’s life
now for many years. (The District council eventually approved
the bill legalizing same-sex marriage, by a vote of 11 to 2, on
December 1, 2009.)
Eskridge, William N., Darren R. Spedale, and Hans Ytterberg. “Nor-
dic Bliss? Scandinavian Registered Partnerships and the Same-Sex
Marriage Debate.” Issues in Legal Scholarship. http://asemus
.asef.org/go/subsite/ccd/documents/nordicbliss-ytterberg.pdf.
Accessed on February 23, 2010.
The authors analyze in considerable detail the information availa-
ble as to the effects of same-sex marriage in three Scandinavian
countries—Denmark, Norway, and Sweden—where it has been
legal for at least a few years. They conclude that the institution
has so far had no harmful effects on opposite-sex marriage or
divorce rates.
Nonprint
265

FindLaw. Same-Sex Marriage Pros and Cons. http://family.
ﬁndlaw.com/same-sex-couples/legal-same-sex-marriage.html.
Accessed on April 14, 2010.
This Web site provides a number of legal issues with which the
same-sex marriage is concerned, including having children, prop-
erty rights, inheritance and death taxes, immigration, and
government beneﬁts.
Forbes, Jack D. “What Is Marriage? A Native American View.”
http://nas.ucdavis.edu/Forbes/what_is%20Marriage.pdf.
Accessed on January 13, 2010.
Forbes suggests that people who speak about “traditional mar-
riage” probably know little or nothing about the topic from the
perspective of Native Americans. He outlines some traditions
about marriage in the Native American culture.
La Pook, Jon. “Debate: Should Same Sex Marriage Be Legal?” CBS
News.com. Posted on March 11, 2010. http://www.cbsnews.com/
video/watch/?id=6288663n.
La Pook, CBS News medical correspondent, hosts a debate
between Cathy Marino-Thomas, of Marriage Equality New York,
and Janice Crouse, of Concerned Women for America, on the pros
and cons of legalizing same-sex marriage in the United States.
O’Grair, Scot. “Effects of Same-Sex Unions.” http://isocrat.org/
science/demog/mar_stats.php#ymde. Accessed on February 23,
2010.
This Web page summarizes the evidence on the effects of same-
sex marriage on opposite-sex marriage and divorce patterns in
(primarily) Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden.
The author concludes that there are no identiﬁable harmful effects
and, perhaps, some positive effects of same-sex marriage in these
countries.
PollingReport.com. “Law and Civil Rights.” http://www.polling
report.com/civil.htm. Accessed on February 13, 2010.
This Web site summarizes the results of dozens of public opinion
polls about same-sex marriage and same-sex unions in the United
States over the past decade or more.
266
Resources

“Same Sex Marriage, Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships.”
http://www.ncsl.org/IssuesResearch/HumanServices/Same
SexMarriage/tabid/16430/Default.aspx. Accessed on January 6,
2010.
The National Conference of State Legislatures provides accu-
rate and up-to-date information on the status of same-sex mar-
riage laws and so-called defense of marriage acts adopted by
legislative bodies in all 50 states.
Silver, Nate. “Divorce Rates Higher in States with Gay Marriage
Bans.” FiveThirtyEight. http://www.ﬁvethirtyeight.com/2010/
01/divorce-rates-appear-higher-in-states.html. Accessed on
April 12, 2010.
This article provides a very interesting summary of divorce rates
in states that have and have not passed bans on same-sex mar-
riage, with the results indicated by the title of the article. The ﬁnd-
ings produced an extended and extensive series of comments
from bloggers to the Web site.
Statistics Canada. “Family Portrait: Continuity and Change in
Canadian Families and Households in 2006, 2006 Census.”
http://www.samesexmarriage.ca/docs/FamilyCensus2006.pdf.
Accessed on March 29, 2010.
The Canadian government provides its ﬁrst extended review of
the demographics of same-sex couples in the country since
same-sex marriage was legalized in 2005.
United States General Accounting Ofﬁce. “Defense of Marriage
Act: Update to Prior Report.” http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d04353r.pdf. Accessed on March 15, 2010.
In 1997, the General Accounting Ofﬁce prepared a report listing
provisions in the U.S. Code that gave legally married couples cer-
tain beneﬁts that are not available to nonmarried couples. This
report updates the 1997 report, resulting in a ﬁnding that, as of
2004, there were “a total of 1,138 federal statutory provisions clas-
siﬁed to the United States Code in which marital status is a factor
in determining or receiving beneﬁts, rights, and privileges.”
Nonprint
267

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary
adelphopoiesis
A ceremony practiced by a number of early Christian
sects in which two individuals, usually men, were joined in marriage-like
relationships.
amicus curiae
A person or organization that offers information and
advice to a court about a legal issue in which the person or organization
is not directly involved.
antimiscegenation law
A law that prohibits the marriage of two people
of different races. Antimiscegnation laws in the United States were
considered to be constitutional until 1967.
artiﬁcial insemination
The introduction of a man’s semen into a
woman’s uterus by some method other than sexual intercourse.
bisexual
A term that refers to acts, fantasies, or feelings that involve
individuals of either sex. People who call themselves bisexual experience
an erotic interest in both men and women, although not necessarily to an
equal extent.
civil rights
Personal rights guaranteed to all citizens, usually as the
result of some deﬁning document, such as the U.S. Constitution.
civil union
A legally sanctioned relationship between two individuals
of the same or opposite sex who are not otherwise allowed to marry
under laws of the state. See also domestic partnership; registered
partnership.
domestic partners
Two individuals who are not legally married to each
other but who do live together and share their lives together, sometimes
in a legally sanctioned relationship known as a civil union, domestic
partnership, or registered partnership.
domestic partnership
A legally sanctioned relationship between two
individuals of the same or opposite sex who are not otherwise allowed
to marry under laws of the state. The term is used most commonly in
the United States. See also civil union; registered partnership.
269

foster care
Placement of a child or young adult in the care of person or
family because of some type of disruption in that child or young adult’s
own personal life, such as the loss of both parents or the inability of
parents to properly care for the child or young adult.
full faith and credit clause
Section 1 of the Fourth Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution says that all states must accept and honor all legal deci-
sions made by another state. One of the very few situations in which that
clause has been ignored in U.S. history has been same-sex marriage, in
which nearly all states have decided not to honor same-sex marriages
conducted in another state.
gay
A term that has come to be associated with individuals, organiza-
tions, acts, events, or other phenomena involving two individuals of the
same gender, most commonly, two men.
gay liberation
A movement whose goals it was to free lesbians and gay
men from long-standing prejudices, fears, and hatreds of nongays and, in
many cases, to make issues of sexuality more open and free for all people
whatever their sexual orientation.
gay marriage
A term sometimes used as a synonym for same-sex
marriage, especially for purposes of saving space in print publications
(as per the current Associated Press Stylebook).
gay rights legislation
Any law, executive order, administrative rule, or
other legal action that speciﬁcally provides for the protection of some
civil liberty (such as employment or housing) for lesbians and gay men.
gender
A term that refers to a person’s social identity as a man or a
women. The concept of gender includes not only one’s biological sex
(male or female), but also the social constructs created by a culture that
tend to be associated with one or the other sex.
heterosexual
Any feeling, fantasy, or act that involves two people of the
opposite sex.
homophobia
The irrational fear of gay men and lesbians.
homosexual
A term that should probably best be used as an adjective,
referring to any feeling, fantasy, or act that involves two people of the
same sex. Historically, the word has also been used to an individual or
group of individuals. It is less successful in that context because it tends
to deﬁne individuals and groups of individuals solely on the basis of
their erotic interests.
lesbian
A women whose primary erotic interest involves other women.
marriage
A relationship between two individuals legally recognized by
a state or nation that generally includes a number of beneﬁts not available
to single individuals or to individuals in a relationship not recognized by
the government. Although the term generally refers to an opposite-sex
couple, alternative types of marriages have existed throughout history
270
Glossary

and are available in some nations and states within nations today. (The
Oxford English Dictionary has accepted the more inclusive deﬁnition of
the term since 2000.)
mutual adoption
The process by which each member of a couple
legally adopts the children of his or her partner. The term usually, but
not inevitably, applies to same-sex couples.
next-of-kin
A person who is legally recognized as the closest relative to
a person, such as a husband, wife, child, sibling, or same-sex partner
(where same-sex relationships are legally recognized).
partner
A term that has become increasingly popular in describing one
member of a same-sex couple.
queer
A derogatory word used to describe gay men and lesbians. The
term has now been adopted by many gay men and lesbians as an act of
deﬁance against those who would use the term in a disparaging manner.
registered partnership
A legally sanctioned relationship between two
individuals of the same or opposite sex who are not otherwise allowed
to marry under laws of the state. The term is used most commonly in
Europe. See also civil union; domestic partnership.
second-parent adoption
A process by which the partner of a child’s
parent legally adopts the child, as in stepparent adoption.
sex
The genetic and biological characteristic of maleness or femaleness,
usually characterized by the presence or absence of certain sex organs,
such as a penis and a vagina.
sexual orientation
The tendency of a person to be erotically attracted to
someone of the same gender, the opposite gender, or both genders. The
term orientation usually suggests that this tendency is not consciously
chosen by a person, but is determined by some genetic or biological
factor. See also sexual preference.
sexual preference
The tendency of a person to be erotically attracted to
someone of the same gender, the opposite gender, or both genders. The
term preference usually suggests that this tendency is consciously
selected by a person rather than being the result of a genetic or biological
factor.
slippery slope argument
An argument that claims that taking one
action inevitably leads to other actions that, in turn, lead to even more
actions, so that the signiﬁcance of the ﬁrst action is much greater than it
might otherwise seem. For example, some people believe that allowing
two people of the same sex to become legally married will eventually
lead to (1) three-person marriages, (2) marriages between a human and
an animal, and/or (3) marriages between nonhuman animals.
spouse
One of the two members of a close relationship, most com-
monly a legal marriage between a man and a woman, but also applicable
Glossary
271

to an individual in a long-term opposite-sex or same-sex relationship
recognized by a legal entity or not.
spousal beneﬁt
Values that may be passed from one member of a
couple to the other member upon the ﬁrst person’s death or incapacity,
such as pension income, Social Security payments, or Medicare beneﬁts.
surrogate mother
A woman who agrees to be inseminated with the
sperm of a man and carry the fetus thus produced to term, after which
the baby is given to some other couple.
traditional marriage
A term commonly used by opponents of same-sex
marriage to mean marriage between one man and one woman, although
the term is historically inaccurate.
272
Glossary

Index
AAMFT. See American Association for
Marriage and Family Therapy
(AAMFT)
About Time: Exploring the Gay Past
(Duberman), 231
Achilles, 8
Achtenberg, Roberta, 209
ACLJ. See American Center for Law
and Justice (ACLJ)
ACLU. See American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU)
An Act to End Discrimination in Civil
Marriage and Afﬁrm Religious
Freedom, 166–67
Adam, Barry D., 230
Adams, Richard, 113
Adams v. Howerton, 113
Adelphopoiesis, 41
ADF. See Alliance Defense Fund (ADF)
Adoption
adult, 135
mutual, 271
second-parent, 115, 243, 271. See also
Same-sex adoption
“Adoption 101: A Family Guide,” 202
“The Adoption and Children Act 2002”
(Hitchings & Sagar), 250
Adoption and Foster Care by Gay and
Lesbian Parents in the United States
(Gates et al.), 254
Adoption by Lesbians and Gays
(Brodzinsky), 253
Adult adoption, 135
AFA. See American Family Association
(AFA)
“Afﬁdavit of William Eskridge, Jr.,” 256
Afﬂect, Annie, 114
Afghanistan, 85
AFM. See Alliance for Marriage (AFM)
Africa
laws against same-sex
relationships, 85
same-sex marriage in, 82–84
After the Ball: How America Will Conquer
Its Fear and Hatred of Gays in the
’90s (Kirk & Madsen), 52
Alabama, divorce rate in, 53
Alabama Marriage Protection Act,
158–59
Alarcn, Hernando de, 6
Alaska
employment beneﬁts for same-sex
couple, 126
restriction of marriage to man and
woman, 118
same-sex adoption and, 114
Alberta (Canada), 94
Albin, Barry T., 133–34
Alcuin, 38–39
Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic
Club, 147, 149
Allen, Douglas W., 248
Alliance Defense Fund (ADF), 215, 262
Alliance for Marriage (AFM), 215–16
Alsenas, Linas, 230–31
Alternatives to Marriage Project
(AMP), 224–25
American Association for
Marriage and Family Therapy
(AAMFT), 225
American Center for Law and Justice
(ACLJ), 49, 216
273

American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 55, 199–200
American Family Association (AFA),
216–17
American Indians
marriage traditions, 266
same-sex marriage and, 48–49
same-sex relationships and, 6–7
American Law Institute, 15
American Pediatric Association, 60
American Psychiatric Association, 20
America’s Struggle for Same-Sex Marriage
(Pinello), 247
AMP. See Alternatives to Marriage
Project (AMP)
Andalusia (Spain), 98
Anderson, Rocky, 203
Andorra, 89, 123
Andryszewski, Tricia, 245
Ann Arbor (Michigan), 20
Antidiscrimination laws, 20–22
Antimiscegenation laws, 51, 112
Antinous, 9
Antisodomy laws, 14–16, 232
APACE. See Asian Paciﬁc
American Coalition for Equality
(APACE)
API Equality, 200
Apostolic United Brethren, 48
Aragon (Spain), 88, 98
Argentina
civil unions in, 98–99, 121
inheritance rights for same-sex
couples, 127
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
same-sex marriage in, 102, 130,
131, 132
“An Argument for Same-Sex
Marriage” (Deason), 259–60
“Arguments for Gay Marriage”
(Cline), 259
Arizona, restriction of marriage to man
and woman, 125, 128
Arkansas, divorce rate in, 53
Arkansas Family Council, 163
Arkansas Same-Sex Adoption Law,
162–64
Arkes, Hadley, 55
Arranged marriages, 43
Articles
arguments in favor of same-sex
marriage, 239–41
arguments opposed to same-sex
marriage, 243–45
gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
234–36
general reviews of same-sex
marriage and adoption, 248–53
history of same-sex unions, 229–30
Aruba, 99
Asian Paciﬁc American Coalition for
Equality (APACE), 200
“Assessing and Responding to Same-
Sex ‘Marriage’ in Light of
Natural Law” (Reid), 244
Asturias (Spain), 88, 98
Australia
de facto relationships in, 97
Domestic Relationship Act, 116
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 102
restriction of marriage to man
and woman, 122
same-sex marriage in, 131
Australian Capital Territory (ACT), 97
Austria, 89, 130
Authorizing Marriage? (Jordan), 247
“Avoidance Strategy” (Duncan), 243
Axel-Lute, Paul, 265
Babst, Gordon A., 237
Badgett, M. V. Lee, 245–46, 254
Baehr, Ninia, 23
Baehr v. Miike, 23–24
BAGLY. See Boston Alliance of Gay,
Lesbian, Bisexual and
Transgendered Youth (BAGLY)
Bahati, David, 85
Baird, Robert M., 246
Baker, Jack (Richard John), 1–2, 22, 112,
149–50
biographical sketch, 134–35
Baker v. Nelson, 1–2, 36, 112, 134
Baldacci, John, 68, 129, 142
Balearic Islands, 98
Barnsley, William, 114
Barr, Bob, 135–36
Barwick, Paul, 113
Basque Country (Spain), 98
274
Index

Battered Wives (Martin), 149
Bazile, Leon, 51
Beach, Frank A., 3
Becker, Mary, 239
Bedouins, 6
Before Stonewall (Bullough), 231
Belgium
common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples in, 118
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
registered partnerships in, 119
same-sex adoption in, 125
same-sex and opposite-sex marriage
data, 196, 197
same-sex marriage in, 88, 121
Beneﬁts
available to married couples, 63,
168–69, 267
employment, for same-sex couples,
116, 123, 126, 127
Benson, Ezra Taft, 151
Berdache, 7, 48
Berkeley (California), domestic
partnerships in, 114
“Beyond Gay Marriage” (Kurtz), 244
Beyond (Straight and Gay) Marriage
(Polikoff), 238, 247–48
Bible
references against same-sex
relationships, 11, 13, 15, 33–35, 261
same-sex relationships portrayed in,
11, 12–13, 256
types of marriage mentioned, 35
“Bible Passages Describing Eight
Family/Marriage Types,” 255
Bidstrup, Scott, 259
Bill, Emily R., 237
Bishop of Urgell, 123
Blackstone, William, 43, 49, 90
Blake, Paul M., Jr., 191
Blankenhorn, David, 248–49, 262
Blessing Same-Sex Unions (Jordan),
228–29
Bloomberg, Michael, 123
Blue Earth County (Minnesota), 1, 112
Body of Civil Law (Corpus Jurus
Civilis), 37
Body of Laws and Liberties, 15
Bogues, Leon, 155
Boies, David, 136–37, 153
Bolivia, 87
Bonauto, Mary, 137–38
Bond, Julian, 234
Books
arguments in favor of same-sex
marriage, 237–39
arguments opposed to same-sex
marriage, 241–43
gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
230–34
general reviews of same-sex
marriage and adoption, 245–48
history of same-sex unions, 227–29
Boston Alliance of Gay, Lesbian,
Bisexual and Transgendered
Youth (BAGLY), 146
Boston marriage, 44
Boston Women’s Fund, 146
Boswell, John E., 9, 38–39, 41, 138–39,
227–28
Bottoms, Pamela, 117
Bottoms, Sharon, 117
Bottoms, Tyler, 117
Bottoms v. Bottoms, 117
Boulder County (Colorado), 2
Bourassa, Kevin, 120
Bowers v. Hardwick, 16, 114, 121
Bracher, Barbara Kay, 154
Bradley, Vincent, 155
Brewer, Paul R., 246
Bride sale, 42
Bringing Lesbian and Gay Rights into the
Mainstream (Endean), 232
British Columbia, same-sex marriage
ruling, 121
Brodzinsky, David M., 253
Brooks, Devon, 249
Brother-making, 40
Brown, Stephen, 239
Brunk, Doug, 239
Bryant, Anita, 56, 185
Bryant, Chris, 139–40
Buenos Aires (Argentina), 130, 132
Buggery Law, 14
Bulgaria, 116
Bull, Benjamin, 53
Bullough, Vern, 231
Burt, Robert A., 239
Bush, George W., 122, 153
Index
275

Bush v. Gore, 137, 153
Butler, Howard, 223
Buturo, James Nsaba, 86
Byron, Lord, 6
Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar Nun˜ez, 6
California
antidiscrimination law, 21
domestic partnership laws, 70, 114
In re: Marriage Cases, 127. See also
Proposition 8
California Supreme Court
on procreation and marriage, 57–58
on same-sex marriage, 62
Callahan, Tena, 192–94
Cambodia, 116
Camenker, Brian, 262
Canada
court rulings on same-sex unions,
100, 121
number of same-sex couples in
legally recognized relationships,
94–95, 195
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101–102
same-sex marriage in, 58, 93, 94–95,
120, 123, 124
Canadian Psychological Association, 59
“Can Anyone Show Just Cause Why
These Two Should Not Be
Lawfully Joined Together?,” 249
Canary Islands, 88, 98
Canon law, prohibition of same-sex
relationships in, 14, 37
Carter, David, 234–35
“The Case against ‘Same-Sex
Marriage’ ” (Somerville), 263–64
“Casebook on Sexual Orientation and
the Law” (Pinello), 257–58
“The Case for Legal Recognition of
Same-Sex Marriage” (Katz), 240
The Case for Same-Sex Marriage
(Eskridge), 144
Catalonia (Spain), 88, 98, 118
Catholic Education Resource
Center, 59
The Catholic Encyclopedia, 38
Catholic University of America,
Marriage Law Project, 221
Cayman Islands, 87
CC. See Christian Coalition
of America (CC)
Celibacy, 45
Centennial Park group, 48
Center for the Study of Equality, 205
Chambers, Kate, 254
Chang, Kevin S. C., 23–24
“Chapter Forum Retains Policy”
(Silverman), 240–41
Chartier, Gary, 240
Chauncey, George, Jr., 231, 246
Chavez, Christine, 203
Cherokee Nation, ban on same-sex
marriage, 49
Chico Enterprise-Record, 147
Child custody, lesbian mothers
and, 112, 113
Child rearing, marriage and, 58–60
Children of Lesbians and Gays
Everywhere (COLAGE), 201
“Children’s Human Rights and
Unlinking Child-Parent
Biological Bonds with
Adoptions, Same-Sex Marriage
and New Reproductive
Technologies” (Sommerville),
244–45
Chile, 102
China, same-sex relationships in
ancient, 5, 83, 112, 255
Christian Coalition of America (CC),
217
Christianity
attitude toward same-sex
relationships, 13
Christian model of marriage, 35–36
same-sex marriage in Judeo-
Christian history, 33–36. See also
Bible
Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality (Boswell), 38–39
Church of Jesus Christ in Zion, 48
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (Mormons), 217–18
polygamy and, 46–48
Proposition 8 and, 150–51, 217–18
Church of the Firstborn in the Fullness
of Time, 48
CitizenLink, 52
Civil pact of solidarity, 89, 99, 119, 126
276
Index

“Civil Partnership: A Framework for
the Legal Recognition of Same-
Sex Couples,” 92
Civil Partnership Act, 124
Civil partnerships
in Europe, 89, 91–93
in Jersey, 99
in UK, 122
Civil Partnerships Bill, 91–92
Civil rights. See Gay and lesbian civil
rights issues
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 18, 20
Civil unions, 70–71, 88, 89, 90
in Argentina, 98–99
bans against, 70–71
chronology of, 119, 122, 123, 125,
126, 127, 128
constitutional amendments to ban, 87
in New Zealand, 95
public opinion on, 71. See also
Domestic partnerships;
Registered partnerships
Claudius, 9
Clergy, same-sex relationships among
Roman Catholic, 38–40
Cline, Austin, 259
Clinton, Bill, 3, 25, 65, 117, 152, 157
Coahuila (Mexico), 99, 126
Code of Hammurabi, 4
Coexistence partnerships, 99
Cohabitation unions, 96, 127
COLAGE. See Children of Lesbians
and Gays Everywhere
(COLAGE)
Colombia
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
rights for same-sex couples, 128
same-sex unions in, 96, 103, 127
Colonizing nations, transfer of
attitudes toward same-sex
relationships, 85
Colorado
custody rights of lesbian mothers, 113
law deﬁning marriage as between
man and woman, 2
Colorado Springs (Colorado), 2
Coming Out (Weeks), 234
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(Blackstone), 43
Common-law marriage, refusal of
divorce for two men involved
in, 114
Common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples, 88, 113–14, 115,
117, 118, 119
Community Defense Council, 215
Complex marriage, 46
Concerned Women for America
(CWA), 44–45, 218, 262–63, 266
Connecticut
antidiscrimination law, 21
civil unions in, 70, 123
same-sex marriage in, 67, 69, 128
sodomy law, 15
Connecticut Supreme Court, 69
“The Conservative Case for Gay
Marriage” (Olson), 261
Constans, 37, 111
Constantine, 37
Constantius II, 37, 111
Constitutional amendments
banning civil unions/domestic
partnerships, 87
banning same-sex adoption, 86–87
limiting marriage to opposite-sex
couples, 3, 24, 25, 31, 55, 57, 65,
86–87, 117, 118, 119, 122, 129,
135–36, 157–58, 168, 208
“The Constitutionality of Legal
Preferences for Heterosexual
Marriage” (Wilkins), 245
“The Constitutional Same Sex
Marriage Debate” (Faucette), 260
Coolidge, David Orgon, 243
Coontz, Stephanie, 228
Cooper, Charles J., 31, 140–41
“Coparent or Second-Parent Adoption
by Same-Sex Parents”
(Committee on Psychosocial
Aspects of Child and Family
Health), 240
Coquille tribe, recognition of same-sex
marriage, 49, 67
Cordy, Robert J., 178
Cornish, Richard, 15
Corporate Research Council, 215
Corpus Jurus Civilis, 37
Corzine, Jon, 134
Costa Rica, 100
Index
277

Cotler, Irwin, 141
Council of Florence, 36
Council on Religion and the
Homosexual, 147, 149
Court cases, 174–94
E. B. v. France, 174–76
Goodridge v. Department of Public
Health, 121–22, 137, 145, 146,
176–80
Kutil and Hess v. Blake, 190–92
Lewis v. Harris, 180–85
Order on Intervenor’s Plea to the
Jurisdiction, 192–94
In re: Gill, 185–87
on same-sex adoption, 174–76,
185–87, 190–92
on same-sex marriage, 119, 121, 123,
176–85, 188–90, 246
on same-sex unions, 100, 125
Varnum v. Brien, 188–90
Courting Equality: A Documentary
History of America’s First Legal
Same-Sex Marriages (Gozemba &
Kahn), 228
Craig, Larry, 65
Cranney, Jared, 139, 140
Cripps, Stafford, 140
“A Critical Analysis of Constitutional
Claims for Same-Sex Marriage”
(Wardle), 252
Croatia, 121
Cross-generational marriage, 48
Crouse, Janice Shaw, 263, 266
Cuba, 113
Custody rights, of gay father, 115
CWA. See Concerned Women for
America (CWA)
Cyprus, 101
Czech Republic, 89, 118, 119, 120, 124
Damon, Dennis, 142
Dancel, Genora, 23
Darden, Buddy, 136
Dare to Discipline (Dobson), 143
Data and statistics
divorce rates by U.S. state, 197–98
marriage and divorce rates in
Denmark, 196
same-sex and opposite-sex marriage
data from Belgium, 196, 197
same-sex and opposite-sex marriage
data from Netherlands, 195–96
same-sex couples in legally
recognized relationships, 195
same-sex marriages in
Massachusetts, 194
Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), 17, 146–47,
149, 231, 233
David (Biblical), 12
D.C. Madam, 66
Deason, Claire B., 259–60
Death, as punishment for same-sex
relationships, 85
“Debate: Should Same Sex Marriage
Be Legal?” (La Pook), 266
De facto couples, 98
De facto relationship, 97
De facto unions, 98
Defending a Higher Law (TFP
Committee on American Issues),
242–43
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), 3,
55, 65, 117, 157–58, 168, 208
Barr and, 135–36
IRS and, 135
“Defense of Marriage Act” (GAO), 267
Defense of marriage acts, in states, 25,
57, 117
Defoe, Daniel, 43
“Delegates Endorse Same-Sex
Adoption” (Brunk), 239
D’Emilio, John, 147, 231
Democracy Project, 204
Democratic Republic of Congo, 87
Denmark
number of same-sex couples in
legally recognized relationships,
195, 196
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
registered partnerships in,
87–88, 115
same-sex couple rights, 114
De Santa v. Barnsley, 114
DeSanto, John, 114
Deseret News, 151
Di Bello, Jose´ Marı´a, 130, 131, 132
Different Daughters: A History of the
Daughters of Bilitis . . . (Gallo), 233
Dishonorable Passions (Eskridge), 232
278
Index

District of Columbia
antidiscrimination law, 21
domestic partnership law, 70
same-sex marriage in, 68–69, 131
sodomy law, 15
Divorce
recognition of same-sex marriage
and right to, 192–94
trends, 53–54
Divorce rate
correlation to same-sex/opposite-
sex marriage laws, 53–54, 267
Denmark, 196
U.S., by state, 197–98
“Divorce Rates Higher in States with
Gay Marriage Bans” (Silver), 267
DOB. See Daughters of Bilitis (DOB)
Dobson, James, 142–43, 241, 260, 263
Documents and data, 157–98
court cases, 174–94
data and statistics, 195–98
legislation, 157–68
reports, 168–73
DOMA. See Defense of Marriage Act
(DOMA)
DOMA Section 3 Challenge program,
204
DOMA Watch, 215
Domestic partnerships
in Australia, 97–98
Berkeley and, 114
chronology of, 127, 130
constitutional amendments
to ban, 87
public opinion on, 71
in United States, 70–71. See also Civil
unions; Registered partnerships
Domestic Relations Act (Australia), 97
Domestic Relationship Act, 116
Dominican Republic, 87
“Don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, 208, 213
Doskow, Emily, 246–47
Douglas, Jim, 68
Duberman, Martin, 231
Dugan, Kimberly B., 232
Duncan, William C., 243
Dunlap, Victoria, 122
Dunne, Bruce, 257
Dupree, Melvin, 223
Dvorak, Petula, 265
East Coast Homophile Organizations
(ECHO), 18
Eastern Orthodox Church, same-sex
unions in Middle Ages and, 37,
40–41
East Lansing (Michigan), 20
E. B. v. France, 174–76
ECHO. See East Coast Homophile
Organizations (ECHO)
“An Economic Assessment of Same-
Sex Marriage Laws” (Allen), 248
Economic beneﬁts, of marriage, 63
Ecuador
ban on same-sex marriage in, 87
same-sex marriage in, 102
same-sex unions in, 96, 128
Edelman, Murray S., 236
“Editors’ Symposium: The Meaning
of Marriage,” 249
EF. See Equality Federation (EF)
“Effects of Same-Sex Unions”
(O’Grair), 266
Egale Canada, 201
Egan, Patrick J., 236
Eisenbach, David, 232
Elizabeth I, 14
Elizabeth II, 122, 124
El Salvador, 87
Employment, antidiscrimination in, 20
Employment beneﬁts for same-sex
couples, 116, 123, 126, 127
Employment Non-Discrimination
Act (ENDA), 202
ENDA. See Employment Non-
Discrimination Act (ENDA)
Endean, Steve, 232
Enfraternization, 40
England
number of same-sex couples in legally
recognized relationships, 195
sodomy laws, 14. See also United
Kingdom
Equality Federation (EF), 201–202
Equality for Same-Sex Couples (Merin), 229
Equality from State to State (Human Rights
Campaign Foundation), 236
Equality under the law provisions, 61
ERLC. See Ethics & Religious Liberty
Commission (ERLC) of the
Southern Baptist Convention
Index
279

Eskridge, William N., Jr., 53–54, 144,
229–30, 232, 256, 265
Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission
(ERLC) of the Southern Baptist
Convention, 218–19
Ethnographic Atlas Codebook, 81
Ethnology, 81
Eurobarometer program, 101
European Commission, 101
European Convention on Human
Rights, same-sex adoption
and, 174
European Court of Human Rights,
E. B. v. France, 174–76
European Parliament, Resolution . . . on
the Situation of Fundamental
Rights in the European Union,
172–73
European Union
legal status of same-sex
relationships and, 92–93
resolution on situation of
fundamental rights in, 172–73
support for same-sex marriage, 103
“An Evaluation of Professor Michael
Seidman’s . . . Testimony
Regarding the Proposed Federal
Marriage Amendment,” 264–65
(Ventrella)
Evans, Anthony, 223
Everything-but-marriage bill, 70,
129, 130
Extremadura (Spain), 98
Falwell, Jerry, 221
Families Like Ours (FLO), 202
Family
same-sex couple deﬁned as, 115
same-sex marriage and, 51–54,
64–65
Family, Unvalued Discrimination, Denial
and the Fate of Binational Same-Sex
Couples under U.S. Law (Human
Rights Watch), 236
Family Equality Council, 201, 202–203
Family in Transition (Skolnick &
Skolnick), 82
“Family Law in the Secular State
and Restriction on Same-Sex
Marriage” (Becker), 239
“Family Portrait: Continuity and
Change in Canadian Families
and Households in 2006,” 267
Family Protection Act, 20
Family Research Council (FRC), 66,
132, 143, 219, 263
Faucette, Judith, 260
Fauntroy, Walter, 223
Fawcett, Henry, 43
Fawcett, Millicent Garrett, 43
Federal Marriage Amendment, 151,
159–60, 216, 217, 260–61, 264–65
Fejes, Fred, 232–33
Feldblum, Chai, 235
“Female husband,” 84
Fenty, Adrian, 68
Fetner, Tina, 233
Fight Repression of Erotic Expression
(FREE), 134–35
Findings from the Hunter College Poll
of Lesbians, Gays and Bisexuals
(Egan et al.), 236
Fine, Dakota, 203
Finland, 89, 120
Fitzpatrick, Brian, 257
“Five Myths about Same Sex
Marriage” (Crouse), 263
Flaubert, Gustave, 6
FLO. See Families Like Ours (FLO)
Florenskij, Pavel, 40
Florida
divorce rate, 53
In re: Gill, 185–87
restriction of marriage to man
and woman, 128
same-sex adoption ban, 113, 185–87
Focus on the Family, 52, 142–43,
219–20
Foley, Mark, 66
Forbes, Jack D., 7, 48, 230, 266
Ford, Clellan S., 3
“Foreword: The Next Normal”
(Weiser), 252–53
“Forging Gay Identities”
(Freeman), 235
“Four Reasons to Support Gay
Marriage and Oppose the Federal
Marriage Amendment” (Head),
260–61
Frakes, Robert, 254
280
Index

France
civil pact of solidarity in, 89, 119
E. B. v. France, 174–76
rights of same-sex couples in, 52
Frank, Barney, 213
Franke, Katherine M., 249–50
FRC. See Family Research Council (FRC)
FREE. See Fight Repression of Erotic
Expression (FREE)
Freedom to Marry, 203
Freeman, Susan Kathleen, 235
Freyre, Alex, 130, 131, 132
Friedan, Betty, 44, 310
Frist, Bill, 168
Fujian province, same-sex marriages
in, 5, 83, 112, 255
Full faith and credit clause, recogni-
tion of same-sex marriage
and, 25
Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter Day Saints, 48
Fundamentalist Mormonism, 48
Futuna, 95
GAA. See Gay Activists Alliance
(GAA)
Gallagher, Maggie, 144–45
Gallo, Marcia M., 233
Gandy, Kim, 203
Gates, Gary J., 254
Gay Activists Alliance (GAA), 20
“The Gay Adoption Mailing List,” 259
Gay American History (Katz), 6
Gay American: Struggle for Equality
(Alsenas), 230–31
“Gay and Lesbian Adoptive and Foster
Care Placements” (Brooks &
Goldberg)
Gay and Lesbian Advocates and
Defenders (GLAD), 204
Gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
resources on
articles, 234–36
books, 230–34
Internet sources, 256–59
reports, 236–37
Gay and lesbian civil rights movement,
16–22
antidiscrimination laws, 20–22
early organizations, 17–18
gay liberation movement, 19–20
Stonewall riots, 18–19
Gay and Lesbian Parents Coalition
International, 201, 202–203
Gay and Lesbian Rights in the United
States (Retter), 234
“Gay and Lesbian Rights/Sexual
Orientation Discrimination,” 257
Gay Christian Network, 260
Gay Families and the Courts (Mezey), 247
Gay father, custody rights of, 115
Gay Fathers Coalition, 202
Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders
(GLAD), 137, 146
Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education
Network (GLSEN), 146
Gay liberation movement, 19–20
“Gay Life,” 256
“A Gay Man Decries ‘Gay Rights’ ”
(Raimondo), 235–36
Gay Marriage: For Better or for Worse?
(Eskridge & Spedale), 53–54, 144
“Gay Marriage: The Arguments and
the Motives” (Bistrup), 259
Gay Marriage (Rauch), 238
Gay Parent Magazine, 240
Gay parents, 59–60
Gay Power (Eisenbach), 232
“Gay Rights,” 258–59
Gay Rights and American Law (Pinello),
258
Gay Rights and Moral Panic (Fejes),
232–33
“Gay Rights and the Rehnquist Court”
(Feldblum), 235
General Accounting Ofﬁce
federal beneﬁts available to married
couples, 63, 168–69, 267
Germany, 89, 119–20
Gerstmann, Evan, 237
Gibbon, Edward, 9
Gibbons, Jim, 130
Gikuyu women, same-sex marriage
and, 84
Gilgamesh, 4
Gill, Martin, 185
Gill, Tim, 204
Gill Foundation, 204–205
GLAD. See Gay & Lesbian Advocates
& Defenders (GLAD)
Index
281

GLSEN. See Gay, Lesbian & Straight
Education Network (GLSEN)
“Gods and Gays” (Schuman), 252
Goldberg, Sheryl, 249
Goldberg, Suzanne B., 230, 250
Goodridge, Hillary, 145
Goodridge, Julie, 145–46
Goodridge v. Department of Public Health,
121–22, 137, 145, 146, 176–80
Gozemba, Patricia A., 228
Greece
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
same-sex relationships in ancient, 7–9
Greenland, 88, 117
Greenwood, David Valdes, 237
Hadrian, 9
Halpern v. Canada, 58
Hanson, Robert B., 128, 129
Hara, Lloyd, 113
“The Harm of Same-Sex Marriage”
(Lipkin), 251
Haspisperch, Lord, 14
Hatred in the Hallways (Human Rights
Watch), 236–37
Hawaii
antidiscrimination law, 21
court on restriction of marriage to
opposite-sex couples, 117
domestic partnership law, 70
restriction of marriage to man and
woman, 116, 118
same-sex marriage in, 23–24
Hay, Bob, 255
Hays, Harry, 17
Head, Tom, 260
Hennepin County (Minnesota), 1–2,
112, 134
Henry VIII, 14
Herdt, Gilbert H., 228
“Here’s Your ‘Traditional Marriage’ ”
(Ryan), 251
Heritage Foundation, 220
Herskovits, Melville J., 84
Hertz, Frederick, 246–47
Hess, Cheryl, 191
Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay
and Lesbian Past (Duberman et al.),
231–32
Hide or Seek (Dobson), 143
Hinckley, Gordon B., 151
Hinsch, Bret, 5, 83, 228
“A Historical Guide to the Future of
Marriage for Same-Sex Couples”
(Goldberg), 230, 250
“History of Chinese Homosexuality,”
255
“A History of Same-Sex Marriage”
(Eskridge), 144, 229–30
History of same-sex unions, 8–11,
82–84
articles, 229–30
books, 227–29
Internet sources, 254–56
in Judeo-Christian history, 33–36
in Native American cultures, 48–49
in Rome and the Middle Ages,
36–42
in Western culture, 45–49
Hitchens, Donna, 209
Hitchings, Emma, 250
HIV/AIDS epidemic, 22–23
same-sex marriage and, 64
Homer, 8
Homo Domesticus (Greenwood), 237
Homosexual activity, Supreme Court
on legality of, 114
“Homosexuality and Bisexuality”
(Robinson), 258
“Homosexuality in India” (Vanita), 256
Honduras, ban on same-sex marriage
and adoption in, 86
Horvat, Marian Therese, 41
“How Does Legalizing ‘Same-Sex
Marriage’ Deny the True Nature
of Marriage?,” 264
Howerton, Joseph D., 113
How the Religous Right Shaped Lesbian
and Gay Activism (Fetner), 233
HRC. See Human Rights Campaign
(HRC)
HRW. See Human Rights Watch (HRW)
Hudson Valley Magazine, 156
Human Rights Campaign Founda-
tion, 236
Human Rights Campaign (HRC),
20, 205
Human Rights Watch (HRW), 205–206,
236–37
282
Index

Hungary
common-law marriage rights
for same-sex couples, 117
registered partnerships in, 89,
129, 130
Hyde, Henry, 65, 168
Iceland, registered partnerships
in, 89, 117
Idaho
divorce rate, 53
repeal of sodomy law, 15
IE. See Immigration Equality (IE)
Igarzabal, Felix Gustavo de, 132
IGLHRC. See International Gay
and Lesbian Human Rights
Commission (IGLHRC)
Igwe, Leo, 255
ILGA. See International Lesbian
and Gay Association (ILGA)
Iliad (Homer), 8
Illinois, repeal of sodomy law, 15
IMAPP. See Institute for Marriage
and Public Policy (IMAPP)
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 113
Immigration Equality (IE), 206
Immigration laws, Uniting American
Families Act, 164–66
Independent Mormon
fundamentalists, 48
India
attitude toward same-sex
relationships in, 85
homosexuality in, 256
Indian Penal Code, section 377, 85
“InFocus” Web page, 263
Inheritance rights for same-sex
couples, 115–16, 127
Initiative petition, 67–68
Innocent IV, 36
In re: Gill, 185–87
In re: Marriage Cases, 62, 127, 200
Institute for Advanced Study
of Human Sexuality, 147
Institute for Gay and Lesbian Strategic
Studies, 214
Institute for Marriage and Public
Policy (IMAPP), 145, 220–21, 222
Internal Revenue Service, 115, 135
International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission
(IGLHRC), 207
International Lesbian and Gay
Association (ILGA), 207
Internet sources
arguments in favor of same-sex
marriage, 259–61
arguments opposed to same-sex
marriage, 262–65
gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
256–59
general reviews of same-sex
marriage, 265–67
on history of same-sex unions,
254–56
“Interstate Recognition of Same-Sex
Marriages and Civil Unions”
(Koppelman), 250–51
Iowa
same-sex marriage in, 67, 69, 128, 129
Varnum v. Brien, 69, 188–190
Iowa State Supreme Court, 69, 188–90
Iran, 85
Ireland, registered partnership, 89, 130
“Is Gay Rights a Civil Rights Issue?”
(Bond), 234
Islam
homosexual relationships and, 257
opposition to same-sex
relationships, 5–6, 84–85
Israel
court ruling on beneﬁts for same-sex
couples, 116–17
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 102
recognition of same-sex marriage, 125
rights of same-sex couples in, 100
Israelites, attitudes toward same-sex
relationships among early, 11–12
“Issue Guide: Gay Rights,” 258
Italy
court ruling on rights of same-sex
couples, 100
rights and duties of stable
co-habitants, 126
same-sex unions in, 120
Jackson, Glenda, 140
Jackson, Harry, 223
Index
283

Jackson, Robert H., 188
Jamaica, 87
Jefferson County (Kentucky), 2, 112
Jersey (UK), 99
John XI, 38
Jonathan (Biblical), 12
Jones, Marjorie, 2, 22, 112
Jordan, Mark D., 228–29, 247
Juan Carlos, 89
Judeo-Christian history, same-sex
marriage in, 33–36. See also
Christianity
“Judicial Redeﬁnition of Marriage”
(Stewart), 252
Jurand, Sara Hoffman, 243
Just for Us, 201
Justinian, 37
Kahn, Karen, 228
Katz, Jonathan, 6, 16
Katz, Pamela S., 240
Kavanagh, Michael, 155
Kennedy, Anthony M., 121
Kennedy, D. James, 241
Kentucky, divorce rate, 53
Kenya, same-sex marriage guidelines,
82–83
Keyes, Alan, 222
Kidwai, Saleem, 229
King, Robert, 223
Kirk, Marshall, 52
Klaus, Va´clav, 124
Knauer, Nancy J., 250
Knight, Tracy, 2, 22, 112
Koppelman, Andrew, 250–51
Kotulski, Davina, 237–38
Krige, Eileen Jensen, 84
Kurtz, Stanley, 244
Kutil, Kathryn, 191
Kutil and Hess v. Blake, 190–92
The Ladder, 149
Laﬁtau, Joseph Franc¸ois, 6
Lagon, Pat, 23
LaHaye, Beverly, 44, 218
LaHaye, Timothy, 218
Lambda Legal, 208
La Pook, Jon, 266
Latin America, future of same-sex
marriage in, 102
Latter Day Church of Christ (Kingston
clan), 48
Latvia
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
restriction of marriage to man
and woman, 87, 124
Laudonnie`re, Rene´ Goulaine de, 6
Lavender Law conferences, 210
“Law and Civil Rights” Web site, 266
Lawrence v. Texas, 16, 232, 249–50
Laws
antidiscrimination, 20–22
antimiscegenation, 51, 112, 269
canon, 14, 37
deﬁning marriage as between man
and woman, 2–3, 68
prohibition of same-sex
relationships, 14–16
sodomy, 14–16, 20. See also
Constitutional amendments;
individual laws
Laycock, Douglas, 247
Leahy, Patrick, 164
Lederman, Cindy, 185
Legislation, 157–68
Alabama Marriage Protection Act,
158–59
An Act to End Discrimination in
Civil Marriage and Afﬁrm
Religious Freedom, 166–67
Arkansas Same-Sex Adoption Law,
162–64
banning same-sex marriage, 24–25
Federal Defense of Marriage Act,
157–58
Federal Marriage Amendment,
159–60
Oregon Family Fairness Act,
160–62
Uniting American Families Act,
164–66
Legislative Assembly of the Federal
District (Mexico), 99
Leland, John, 235
Lesbian. See Gay and lesbian civil
rights issues
Lesbian and Gay Studies Center, 139
Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender
Project, 200
284
Index

Lesbian mothers, custody rights, 112, 113
Lesbian Rights Project, 115
Lesbian/Woman (Lyon & Martin),
147, 149
Lester, Arthur, 91
Levi Strauss & Company, 116
Leviticus, passages regarding same-sex
relationships, 11, 13, 15, 33, 261
Levy, Donna, 113
Lewis, John, 203
Lewis v. Harris, 133, 180–185
Liberty Counsel, 221
Liechtenstein, 89
Liette, Pierre, 6
Life partnerships, 89
Lincoln, Abraham, 50
Lipkin, Robert Justin, 251
Livingstone, Ken, 91
Li Yinhe, 5
LLEGO. See National Latina/o Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender
Organization (LLEGO)
Log Cabin Republicans, 208
London Partnerships Register, 91
Louisiana, ban against civil unions,
70–71
Louy¨s, Pierre, 17
“Love, Marriage, Romance &
Women . . . in Medieval
and Celtic Culture,” 255
Love’s Rite: Same-Sex Marriage in India
and the West (Vanita), 229
Loving, Jeter, 51
Loving v. Virginia, 51, 112
Lutzer, Erwin W., 59, 241–42
Luxembourg, 89, 122, 126
Lynch, Jim, 68
Lynch, John, 130
Lynn, Roger, 135
Lyon, Phyllis, 146–47
MacLeod, Adam J., 244
Macomber, Jennifer Ehrle, 254
Madrid (Spain), 88, 98
Madsen, Hunter, 52
Maier, Bill, 242
Maine
An Act to End Discrimination in
Civil Marriage and Afﬁrm
Religious Freedom, 166–67
domestic partnership law, 70
same-sex marriage in, 68, 129, 130
Making Babies (Shanley), 248
Making Gay History (Marcus), 233
Making It Legal (Hertz & Doskow),
246–47
Malone, Richard, 147–48
The Manifesto, 47
Marcus, Eric, 233
Marino-Thomas, Cathy, 266
Marjorie Jones et al., Appellants v. James
Hallahan, Clerk of the Jefferson
County Court, Appellee, 2
Marquette, Jacques, 6
Marriage
Boston, 44
Christian model of, 35–36
complex, 46
DOMA deﬁnition of, 158
as economic transaction, 42
inequality of sexes in traditional,
43–44
laws deﬁning as between man
and woman, 2–3
nontraditional, in Western culture,
45–49
polygynous, 81
same-sex marriage and procreation
as goal of, 55–58
“traditional,” 42–45
trends in, 53–54. See also Same-sex
marriage
Marriage, a History (Coontz), 228
Marriage Afﬁrmation and Protection
Amendment, 262–63
Marriage Equality New York, 266
Marriage Equality USA (MEUSA),
208–209
Marriage (Gender Clariﬁcation)
Amendment Bill, 95
Marriage Law Project (MLP), 221–22
Marriage on Trial (Stanton & Maier), 242
Marriage Protection Sunday, 219
Marriage rate, Denmark, 196
Marriage Under Fire (Dobson), 241, 260
“Marriage Under Fire” (Dobson), 263
Married couples, federal beneﬁts
available to, 63, 168–69, 267
Martin, Del, 146, 148–49
Martin, James, 149
Index
285

Martin, Kendra, 149
Maryland
ban on same-sex marriage, 112, 128
domestic partnerships in, 127
recognition of same-sex marriages
from other states, 67
Maryland Supreme Court, on same-sex
marriage, 62
Mary (Queen), 14
Massachusetts
antidiscrimination law, 21
court ruling on same-sex marriage,
121–22, 137, 145, 146, 176–180, 246
divorce rate, 53, 197–98
same-sex marriage and divorce rate
in, 53
same-sex marriage in, 67, 69, 122,
123, 124–25, 126, 194
Massachusetts Bay Colony, sodomy
law, 15
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court,
69, 176–80
Mass Equality, 146
Matrimonial Causes Act, 91
Mattachine Foundation (Mattachine
Society), 17, 231
Matter of Cooper, 115–16
Mauritania, 85
McCambley, Kirk, 66
McConnell, James, 112
McConnell, Michael, 1–2, 22, 134, 135
biographical sketch, 149–50
McCord, David, 2, 22
McFarlane, J. D., 2
McGreevey, James E., 134
McLachlin, Beverly, 94
Meciar, Vladimir, 118
“Media Ignore Impending Collision”
(Fitzpatrick), 257
Melillo, Joseph, 23
Merin, Yuval, 229
Mesopotamia, same-sex relationships
in, 4
MEUSA. See Marriage Equality USA
(MEUSA)
Mexico, same-sex unions in, 99
Mexico City
civil unions in, 125
same-sex marriage and adoption
in, 131
Mezey, Susan, 247
Michalski, Peter A., 118
Michigan
civil rights granted to lesbians
and gay men, 20
custody rights of lesbian mothers, 113
employment beneﬁts for same-sex
couples, 127
Middle Ages
prohibition of same-sex
relationships in, 14
same-sex marriage in, 38–42
Miike, Lawrence, 23
Military, “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy,
20, 208, 213
Military Freedom Project, 20
Miller, Marshall, 225
Ming Dynasty, 112
Miscegenation, 51
Mitchell, Camille, 112
Mlamblo-Ngcuka, Phumzile, 93
MLP. See Marriage Law Project (MLP)
Model Penal Code, 15
Mohammed, 5
Monserrate, Hiram, 66
Monson, Thomas S., 150–51
Montana, employment beneﬁts
for same-sex couples, 123
Moody Church, 59
Moral Argument, Religion and Same-Sex
Marriage (Babst et al.), 237
Mormon church. See Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints
(Mormons)
Mormon fundamentalism, 48
Mother Ann Lee, 45
Moyne de Morgues, Jacques le, 6
Mucciaroni, Gary, 233–34
Museveni, Yoweri, 124
Musgrave, Marilyn, 151–52, 159
Myers, David G., 238
NACHO. See North American
Conference of Homophile
Organizations (NACHO)
Nadler, Jerry, 152–53, 164
Naomi (Biblical), 12
Nashville Declaration, 219
National Center for Lesbian Rights
(NCLR), 115, 209, 257
286
Index

National Conference of State
Legislatures, 267
National Defense of Marriage Act, 25
National Family Legal Foundation, 215
National Freedom to Marry Day, 208
National Front, 56
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
(NGLTF), 20, 209–10
National Gay Task Force, 20
National Latina/o Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Organization
(LLEGO), 214
National Law Journal, 141
National Lesbian and Gay Law
Association (NLGLA), 210
National Marriage Project (NMP),
225–26
National Organization for Marriage
(NOM), 145, 222
National Organization for Women
(NOW), 210–11, 218
National Planning Conference of
Homophile Organizations
(NPCHO), 18
Native Americans. See American
Indians
“Naturalized Virtue Ethics and Same-
Sex Love” (Brown), 239
Natural law, 240, 244
“Natural Law, Same-Sex Marriage,
and the Politics of Virtue”
(Chartier), 240
Navarre (Spain), 88, 98
NCLR. See National Center for Lesbian
Rights (NCLR)
Nebraska, constitutional amendment
banning legal recognition of
same-sex unions, 119
Neill, James, 229
Nelson, Gerald R., 1
Nepal
rights of same-sex couples in, 100
same-sex marriage in, 128
Nero, 8–9, 111
Netherlands
number of same-sex couples in
legally recognized relation-
ships, 195
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
registered partnerships in, 87, 118
same-sex and opposite-sex marriage
data, 195–96
same-sex common-law marriage
in, 113–14
same-sex marriage in, 120, 246
Netherlands Antilles, 99
Nevada, domestic partnerships in,
70, 130
New Caledonia, 95
Newcombe, Jerry, 241
New England Marriage Campaign, 204
New Family Social (NFS), 211
New Hampshire
civil unions in, 70, 127
same-sex adoption in, 119
same-sex marriage in, 67, 68, 130
New Jersey
antidiscrimination law, 21
civil union law, 70
court on same-sex adoption, 118
court on same-sex unions, 125
Lewis v. Harris, 180–85
same-sex marriage in, 131
New natural law, 240
Newsom, Gavin, 147
New South Wales, same-sex adoption
report, 169–72
New York
debate over same-sex marriage
in Senate, 261
recognition of same-sex marriage
by, 67
same-sex marriage in, 125, 252–53
New York City, recognition of same-sex
marriage, 123
New York Court of Appeals, 115
“New York’s Heroes,” 261
New York Supreme Court, 115
New York Times, 145
New Zealand
civil unions in, 95, 123
common-law marriage rights
for same-sex couples, 119
number of same-sex couples in
legally recognized relationships,
195
NFS. See New Family Social (NFS)
NGLTF. See National Gay and Lesbian
Task Force (NGLTF)
Index
287

Nielsen/Naylor Group, 48
Nigeria
penalty for same-sex relationships,
85, 129
restriction of marriage to opposite-
sex couples, 87, 129
same-sex marriage in, 255
Njambi, Wairimu, 84
NLGLA. See National Lesbian and Gay
Law Association (NLGLA)
NMP. See National Marriage Project
(NMP)
Nobel, Elaine, 20–21
NOM. See National Organization for
Marriage (NOM)
Nonmarital births, same-sex
partnerships and trends in, 54
“Nordic Bliss? Scandinavian
Registered Partnerships and the
Same-Sex Marriage Debate”
(Eskridge et al.), 265
North American Conference of
Homophile Organizations
(NACHO), 18
Northern Ireland
number of same-sex couples
in legally recognized
relationships, 195
same-sex marriage in, 91
Northstar Asset Management, Inc., 146
Northwest Territories (Canada), 94
Norway
common-law marriage rights
for same-sex couples, 115
marriage laws, 122
number of same-sex couples in legally
recognized relationships, 195
registered partnerships in, 116
same-sex marriage in, 88, 127
NOW. See National Organization
for Women (NOW)
Noyes, John Humphrey, 45–46
NPCHO. See National Planning
Conference of Homophile
Organizations (NPCHO)
Nullity of Marriage Act 1971, 90–91
Nunavut (Canada), 94
Obama, Barack, 208
O’Brien, William, 84
OFC. See Our Family Coalition (OFC)
Offences Against the Person Act, 14
“Ofﬁce for Same-Gender Union,”
39–40
O’Grair, Scot, 54, 266
Oklahoma, divorce rate in, 53
Olson, Theodore B., 136, 153–54, 261
Oneida community, 45–46
Order on Intervenor’s Plea to the
Jurisdiction, 192–94
Oregon, domestic partnerships in,
70, 127
Oregon Family Fairness Act, 160–62
Organizations
in favor of same-sex marriage,
199–215
with interest in marriage, who are
neutral about same-sex marriage,
224–26
opposed to same-sex marriage,
215–24
The Origins and Role of Same-Sex
Relations in Human Societies
(Neill), 229
Our Family Coalition (OFC), 211–12
OutGiving, 204
Outrage: How Gay Activists and Liberal
Judges Are Trashing Democracy to
Redeﬁne Marriage (Sprigg), 242
Outrage (ﬁlm), 67
“Overruling Dred Scott” (Burt), 239
Pakistan, 85
Palin, Sarah, 126
Pareja, Francisco de, 6
Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians
& Gays (PFLAG), 212
Passions of the Cut Sleeve (Hinsch), 5,
83, 228
Paterson, David, 154–55
Patroclus, 8
Pennsylvania, refusal of divorce for
two men in common-law
marriage, 114
“Pennsylvania Nixes Second-Parent
Adoptions for Same-Sex
Couples” (Jurand), 243
Perfectionism, 46
Perry v. Schwarzenegger, 136, 140, 261
Peterson, C. Donald, 36
288
Index

PFLAG. See Parents, Families &
Friends of Lesbians & Gays
(PFLAG)
Pierceson, Jason, 237
Pinello, Daniel R., 247, 257–58
Poland
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101, 102
Polikoff, Nancy D., 238, 247–48
Political Institutions and Lesbian and Gay
Rights in the United States and
Canada (Smith), 234
“The Politics of Same-Sex Marriage
Politics” (Franke), 249–50
Polyandry, 81
legalization of same-sex marriage
and, 54, 55
Polygamy, 81
legalization of same-sex marriage
and, 54–55
Mormons and, 46–48
Polygyny, 81–82
Poritz, Deborah T., 184
Portugal
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
registered partnerships in, 120
same-sex marriage in, 89, 90, 128,
131, 132
“Power and Sexuality in the Middle
East” (Dunne), 257
Pratt, Orson, 47
Pregil, Antoinette, 23
Prejean, Carrie, 66
Prince Edward Island, 94
Print resources, 227–54
arguments in favor of same-sex
marriage, 237–41
arguments opposed to same-sex
marriage, 241–45
gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
230–37
general reviews of same-sex
marriage and adoption, 245–54
history of same-sex unions, 227–30
Privacy Project, 20
Procreation
marriage and, 42
same-sex marriage and, 55–58
Prodi, Romano, 126
Proposition 8, 31, 128, 129, 136, 140, 153
court case on, 71–72
Mormon church and, 150–51, 217–18
“Protecting Marriage to Protect
Children” (Blankenhorn), 262
Public Agenda, 258
Public opinion
on civil unions and domestic
partnerships, 71
on same-sex marriage, 32, 71,
100–102, 266
Publisher’s Weekly, 147
Punishments, for homosexual
behavior, 3–4
Quayle, Dan, 145
“Queer Resources Directory,” 258
Raimondo, Justin, 235–36
Rational basis standard, 62–63
Rauch, Jonathan, 238, 248–49
Razu´, David, 99
“Reafﬁrming Marriage” (Coolidge &
Duncan), 243
Reagan, Ronald, 136
“Reality Makes Gay Marriage Debate
Obsolete” (Dvorak), 265
Reciprocal beneﬁciaries, 24
“A Reconciliation on Gay Marriage”
(Blankenhorn & Rauch), 248–49
“Reconsidering Homosexuality and
the Bible,” 256
Referendum, 67–68
Registered life partnerships, 119–20
Registered partnerships, 87–88, 89,
130, 265
chronology of, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119,
120, 123, 124, 129. See also Civil
unions; Domestic partnerships
Rehnquist, William H., 140, 235
Reid, Eric, 244
Rekers, George Alan, 66, 132
Religious ceremonies, marriage
and, 61, 62
Renew America, 222
Rent control, same-sex couples and, 115
Index
289

Reports, 168–73
adoption by same-sex couples,
169–72
European Parliament Resolution of
14 January 2009 on the Situation
of Fundamental Rights in the
European Union, 172–73
gay and lesbian civil rights issues,
236–37
reviews of same-sex marriage and
adoption, 253–54
U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce,
168–69
Research Fund for Lesbian and Gay
Studies, 139
Resources
nonprint, 254–67
print, 227–54
Respect for Marriage Act, 136, 152
Responsible Wealth, 146
Retter, Yolanda, 234
Reuniting Families Act, 202
Rhode Island, recognition of same-sex
marriages, 67, 126
Righteous Branch of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, 48
Rights and duties of stable
co-habitants, 126
Riley, Bob C., 154
The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement
(Adam), 230
Ritualized Homosexuality in Melanesia
(Herdt), 228
Robinson, Bruce A., 258
Robinson, Iris, 66
Rodrigues, Tammy, 23
Roman Catholic Church
marriage as sacrament in, 36
same-sex marriage guidelines in
Kenya, 82–83
same-sex relationships among
clergy, 38–40
same-sex unions in Middle Ages
and, 37–40, 41–42
sex scandal, 67
Rome, same-sex marriage in ancient,
7–9, 36–37, 111, 254
Romney, Mitt, 69
Roney, Paul, 140
Rorex, Clela, 2, 254
Rosenbaum, Stuart E., 246
Roste, Vaughn, 261
Rudolph I, 14
Russia, 100, 131
Rutgers University, 225
Ruth (Biblical), 12
Ryan, Patrick J., 251
Sagar, Tracey, 250
Saint Paul, 36
Samar, Vincent J., 251
Same Sex, Different Politics
(Mucciaroni), 233–34
Same-sex adoption, 114, 157
in Alaska, 114
in Arkansas, 162–64
ban in Florida, 113, 185–87
in Belgium, 125
Bottoms v. Bottoms, 117
constitutional amendments to ban,
86–87
E .B. v. France, 174–76
general reviews of, 245–254
Kutil and Hess v. Blake, 190–192
in Mexico City, 131
in New Hampshire, 119
New Jersey ruling on, 118
In re: Gill, 185–87
studies of, 169–72, 240
in Sweden, 120
Same-sex couples
deﬁned as family, 115
legal rights of, 100
numbers in legally recognized
relationships, 195
“Same-Sex Couples: Deﬁning Marriage
in the Twenty-ﬁrst Century,”
251–52
Same-Sex Love in India (Vanita &
Kidwai), 229
Same-sex marriage
alternatives to, 70–71, 87–88, 89–89
arguments in favor of, 61–67,
237–41, 259–61
arguments opposed to, 49–61,
241–45, 262–65
child rearing and, 58–60
chronology, 111–32
early attempts to obtain marriage
licenses in United States, 1–2
290
Index

equality under the law provisions
and, 61
future of, 102–103
future of, in United States, 71–72
general reviews of, 245–54, 265–67
in Hawaii, 23–24
historical and cross-cultural
existence of, 8–11
historical perspective on, 82–84
in Judeo-Christian history, 33–36
legalization process, 67–68
in Native American cultures, 48–49
opposition to, 84–87
organizations in favor, 199–215
organizations opposed, 215–24
organizations with interest in
marriage, but neutrality on same-
sex marriage, 224–26
proponents’ argument for, 31–32
public opinion on, 100–102
recognition of, 113
in Rome and the Middle Ages,
36–42
status in United States, 67–69
support for, 87–100
as threat to traditional family, 51–54
in United States, 22–25
“Same-Sex Marriage: A Selective
Bibliography of the Legal
Literature” (Axel-Lute), 265
“Same-Sex Marriage: A Timeline,”
255–56
“Same-Sex Marriage, Civil Unions and
Domestic Partnerships,” 267
“Same-Sex Marriage and Federalism”
(Knauer), 250
Same-Sex Marriage and Religious Liberty
(Laycock), 247
Same-Sex Marriage (Andryszewski), 245
“Same-Sex Marriage and Slippery
Slopes” (Volokh), 241
Same-Sex Marriage and the Constitution
(Gerstmann), 237
Same-Sex Marriage (Baird &
Rosenbaum), 246
Same-sex marriage data
Belgium, 196, 197
Massachusetts, 194
Netherlands, 195–96
Same-Sex Marriages Pros and Cons, 266
Same-Sex Marriage (Staver), 242
Same-Sex Marriage (Sullivan), 248
Same-sex relationships
attitudes toward in Western culture,
11–14
historical and cross-cultural
existence of, 3–11
in history, 3–4
Islam and, 84–85
Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe
(Boswell), 39, 41, 138, 227–28
San Bernardino (California), 115
Sandoval County (New Mexico), 122
Sanford, Mark, 65
Saudi Arabia, 85
Save Our Children, 56
Scanzoni, Letha Dawson, 238
“Scholars’ Conference on Same-Sex
Marriage and Religious
Liberty,” 253
School of the Prophets, 48
Schuler, Marilyn Neoma. See
Musgrave, Marilyn
Schuman, Ben, 252
Scotland
number of same-sex couples in legally
recognized relationships, 195
same-sex marriage in, 91
“The Search for Moral Neutrality in
Same-Sex Marriage Decisions”
(MacLeod), 244
Second-parent adoptions, 115, 243
Secular law, prohibition of same-sex
relationships in, 14
Sekulow, Jay Alan, 49–50, 264
Serbia, 87
Sergius III, 38
“Serious Study of Leviticus,” 261
Sexual inequality, in traditional
marriage, 43–44
Sexual Offences Act, 14
Sexual orientation, European
Parliament resolution on
fundamental rights and, 172–73
Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities
(D’Emilio), 231
“Shade of Gay” (Leland), 235
Shakers, 45
Shanley, Mary L., 248
Sheldon, Louis P., 223
Index
291

Sherrill, Kenneth, 236
Shows, Ronnie, 151
Silva, Anibal Cavaco, 90, 132
Silver, James, 223
Silver, Nate, 267
Silverman, Jennifer, 240–41
Singer, John F., 113
Singer v. Hara, 113
Sinkford, William G., 203
Skolnick, Arlene S., 82
Skolnick, Jerome H., 82
Slavery, 50–51
Slippery-slope argument, 54
Slovakia, 118
Slovenia
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
family code, 131
registered partnerships in, 89, 123
same-sex marriage in, 125
Smith, Joseph, 46–47
Smith, Miriam, 234
Smith, Rebecca, 114
Social Investment Forum, 146
Society for Human Rights, 17
Socrates, Jose, 90
Sodom and Gomorrah story, 11, 13
Sodomy laws
repeal of, 15–16, 20
in United States, 14–16, 232
Solot, Dorian, 225
Somerville, Margaret A., 56, 263–64
Sommerville, Margaret, 244–45
The Songs of Bilitis, 17
Sosman, Martha B., 179–80
Souder, Mark, 66, 132
South Africa
common-law marriage rights for
same-sex couples, 119
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
same-sex marriage in, 93, 125–26
South America, same-sex unions in,
95–96
Southern Baptist Convention, Ethics &
Religious Liberty Commission,
218–19
Spain
same-sex marriage in, 88–89, 123–24
same-sex unions in, 98
Spedale, Darren R., 53–54, 265
Spina, Francis X., 179
Spiritual brotherhood, 40
Spitzer, Eliot, 154, 155
Spontaneous Celebrations, 146
Spotlight (television program), 66
Spouse, deﬁned, 158
Sprigg, Peter, 242
Srivastav, Raman, 145
Stable union, 98
Stable union of a couple, 89
Stamper, Jacqueline, 113
Stand4Marriage, 223
Stanton, Glenn T., 242
States
antidiscrimination law, 21
defense of marriage acts, 25, 57, 117
equality under the law provisions
and same-sex marriage, 61–62
individual marriage requirements,
61–62
legalization of same-sex marriage,
67–68
legislation banning same-sex
marriage, 24–25, 68
Statute Law Amendment
(Relationships) Act 2001, 97
Statute Law Further Amendment
(Relationships) Act 2001, 97
Staver, Mathew D., 242
Stewart, Monte Neil, 252
Stonewall Democrats, 213
Stonewall (Duberman), 231
Stonewall (organization), 212–13
Stonewall riots, 18–19
Strict scrutiny standard, 62–63
The Struggle over Gay, Lesbian, and
Bisexual Rights (Dugan), 232
Subnational entities, same-sex unions
and, 96–98
Sudan, 85
Sullivan, Andrew, 248
Sullivan, Anthony, 113
Supreme Court
decline of case on same-sex
marriage, 123
on legality of homosexual activity,
16, 114
Loving v. Virginia, 112
Susan B. Anthony List, 152
292
Index

Sweden
common-law marriage rights and
same-sex couples, 115
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 101
registered partnerships, 117
same-sex adoption in, 120
same-sex marriage in, 88, 129
Swedish Lutheran Church, same-sex
marriage and, 130
Switzerland, 89, 123
Taliaferro, Dorothy L., 149
Tasmania (Australia), 97–98
Tasmanian Domestic Partnerships 2003
Act, 97
“Ten Really Bad Arguments against
Same-Sex Marriage” (Head), 260
“Ten Reasons Why Christians Should
Support Same-Sex Marriage”
(Roste), 261
“Testimony of Jay Alan Sekulow . . .,”
264
Texas, divorce and recognition of
same-sex marriage, 192–94
Their World: A Study of Homosexuality in
China (Li Yinhe), 5
Theodosian Code, 13–14, 37, 111
Theodosius II, 13
Third gender, among American
Indians, 7
“The Threat to Marriage from the
Courts” (Republican Policy
Committee), 244
“Throwing Down the International
Gauntlet” (Samar), 251
Thurmond, Strom, 65
“The Tide in Favour of Equality”
(Wright), 253
Tierra del Fuego (Argentina), 131
Time magazine, 137
“Top 10 Reasons to Support the
Marriage Afﬁrmation and
Protection Amendment,” 262–63
“Traditional” marriage, 31, 42–45
Traditional Values Coalition, 223
“Tradition of Same Gender Marriage
in Igboland” (Leo), 255
True and Living Church of Jesus Christ
of Saints of the Last Days, 48
“The Truth about Same-Sex
‘Marriage,’ ” 262
The Truth about Same-Sex Marriage
(Lutzer), 59, 241–42
Uganda
ban on same-sex marriage/
domestic partnerships, 87, 124
penalties for same-sex behavior,
85–86
Unid@s, the National Latina/o
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual &
Transgender Human Rights
Organization, 214
United Arab Emirates, 85
United for a Fair Economy, 146
United Kingdom
civil partnerships in, 89, 122, 124
court rulings and same-sex
unions, 100
legality of same-sex relationships in,
90–93
number of civil partnerships formed
in, 92–93
number of same-sex couples in
legally recognized relationships,
195
public opinion on same-sex
marriage, 102. See also England
United States
divorce rates, by state, 197–98
future of same-sex marriage in,
71–72
public opinion on same-sex
relationships/marriage, 32, 102
same-sex marriage in, 22–25, 67–69
sodomy laws, 14–16, 20
United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops (USCCB), 223–24
United States Conference of Catholics
Bishops (USCCB), 264
Uniting American Families Act, 152,
164–66, 206
University of Virginia, 226
Unregistered cohabitation, 87
Uranga, Enoe´, 99
Uruguay
civil unions in, 95–96
cohabitation union in, 127
same-sex marriage in, 102
Index
293

U.S. Civil Service Commission, 20
U.S. Constitution, equality under the
law provisions and same-sex
marriage, 61
USCCB. See United States Conference
of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
Utah, ban on same-sex marriage, 11, 25
Valencia (Spain), 88, 98
Valentinian III, 13
Vanita, Ruth, 229, 256
Varnell, Joe, 120
Varnum v. Brien, 188–90
Vautour, Anne, 120
Vautour, Elaine, 120
Venezuela, 103
Vermont
antidiscrimination law, 21
civil unions in, 70, 119
court ruling on same-sex marriage,
119
same-sex marriage in, 67, 68, 129
Vetrella, Jeffrey J., 264–65
Victoria (Australia), domestic
partnerships, 97–98
Vike-Freiberga, Vaira, 124
Vincus, Martha, 231
Virginia
ban on same-sex marriage, 113
sodomy law, 15
Vitter, David, 65
Voices of Equality program, 203
Volokh, Eugene, 55, 241
Wafer, Dale, 223
Wales, number of same-sex couples
in legally recognized relation-
ships, 195
Walker, Jonathan P., 256
Walker, Vaughn, 72
Wallace, Artie, 115
Wallace, Shawn, 115
Wallis, 95
Wardle, Lynn D., 252
Washington State
domestic partnerships in, 70, 127
everything-but-marriage bill, 129, 130
same-sex marriage in, 113
Washington State Supreme Court, on
state defense of marriage act, 57
Weekly Standard, 145
Weeks, Jeffrey, 234
Weinfeld, Edward, 144
Weiser, Jay, 252–53
West, Jason, 155–56
Western culture
attitudes toward same-sex
relationships, 11–14
nontraditional marriage in, 45–49
Western Europe, support for same-sex
marriage in, 87–93
What God Has Joined Together? (Myers &
Scanzoni), 238
“What I Believe,” 260
“What Is Marriage?” (Forbes), 230
“What Is Marriage? A Native
American View” (Forbes), 266
“What Made Stonewall Different”
(Carter), 234–35
“What Same-Sex ‘Marriage’ Has
Done to Massachusetts”
(Camenker), 262
What’s Wrong with Same-Sex Marriage?
(Kennedy & Newcombe), 241
When Gay People Get Married (Badgett),
245–46
Why Marriage? (Chauncey), 246
Why Marriage Matters (Wolfson),
238–39
“Why the Romans Are Important
in the Debate about Gay
Marriage,” 254
Why You Should Give a Damn about Gay
Marriage (Kotulski), 237–38
Wilkins, Richard G., 245
William of Adam, 6
Williams, Walter L., 234
Williams Institute at the University of
California at Los Angeles School
of Law, 214–15
Winn, Peter, 52
Wisconsin
antidiscrimination law, 21
domestic partnerships in, 70, 130
Wolfson, Evan, 203, 238–39
Women, in same-sex marriage
in Africa, 83–84
Woodruff, Wilford, 47
Woolley, Lorin C., 48
World Congress of Families IV, 52
294
Index

“A World History of Homosexuality”
(Hay), 255
Wrecking amendment, 92
Wriggins, Jennifer, 137
Wright, Wade K., 253
Yale Human Relations Files, 3
Yemen, 85
Young, Brigham, 47
Ytterberg, Hans, 265
Zambia, 87
Zamora, David, 2, 22
Zapatero, Jose´ Luis Rodrı`guez, 89
Index
295

This page intentionally left blank

About the Author
David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a BA in chemistry
(with high distinction), an MA in education from the University
of Michigan, and an EdD in science education from Harvard
University. He is the author of more than 400 textbooks, encyclo-
pedias, resource books, research manuals, laboratory manuals,
trade books, and other educational materials. He taught math-
ematics, chemistry, and physical science in Grand Rapids,
Michigan, for 13 years; was professor of chemistry and physics
at Salem State College in Massachusetts for 15 years; and
was adjunct professor in the College of Professional Studies at the
University of San Francisco for 10 years. Previous books for
ABC-CLIO include Global Warming (1993), Gay and Lesbian Rights—
A Resource Handbook (1994, 2009), The Ozone Dilemma (1995),
Violence and the Mass Media (1996), Environmental Justice (1996,
2009), Encyclopedia of Cryptology (1997), Social Issues in Science and
Technology: An Encyclopedia (1999), DNA Technology (2009), and
Sexual Health (2010). Other recent books include Physics: Oryx
Frontiers of Science Series (2000), Sick! (4 volumes; 2000), Science,
Technology, and Society: The Impact of Science in the 19th Century
(2 volumes; 2001), Encyclopedia of Fire (2002), Molecular Nanotech-
nology: Oryx Frontiers of Science Series (2002), Encyclopedia of Water
(2003), Encyclopedia of Air (2004), The New Chemistry (6 volumes;
2007), Nuclear Power (2005), Stem Cell Research (2006), Latinos in
the Sciences, Math, and Professions (2007), and DNA Evidence and
Forensic Science (2008). He has also been an updating and consult-
ing editor on a number of books and reference works for Gale/
Cengage, including Chemical Compounds (2005), Chemical Elements
(2006), Encyclopedia of Endangered Species (2006), World of Math-
ematics (2006), World of Chemistry (2006), World of Health (2006),

UXL Encyclopedia of Science (2007), Alternative Medicine (2008),
Grzimek’s Animal Life Encyclopedia (2009), Community Health
(2009), Genetic Medicine (2009), and Gale Online Science Resource
Center (2010).
298
About the Author

