Sandpapers/glasspapers - types and their uses 
grit size - backing material - backing adhesive - forms of sandpaper - types of grit - using 
sandpaper
The term 'sandpaper' is used these days to cover abrasive grit on flexible backing sheets 
used to smooth many types of material. True 'sandpaper' (i.e. backing paper covered with 
grains of sand) is no longer available commercially but has been replaced by backing sheet 
covered with glass, aluminium oxide, silicon carbide, garnet or other specialist grit. Generally 
the terms 'sandpaper' and 'glasspaper' are used generically to cover all types of grit attached 
to a backing sheet - 'Sandpaper' is used below in general terms to refer to the family of sheet 
type abrasives.  
Each type of grit has different characteristics which make each most suitable for specific 
applications, an understanding of the types of grit is essential so that the right type is chosen 
for a particular job.  
In simple terms, the abrasive grit is fixed by an adhesive to a backing sheet - the type and 
size of grit, the type of adhesive and the type of backing material all have an effect on the 
suitability of a sandpaper for a particular job.  
General characteristics:  
Grit size  
Various sizes of grit are available for all types of grit material, the size is referred to by a 
number which represents the number of holes per linear inch in a sieve screen - they range 
from 40 (very course) to over 400 (very fine). Good quality sandpaper will have universal 
sized grit. The size of grit is used to classify the sandpaper by 'grade' as follows:  
  
Grit size 
  
grade 
  
40-60 
  
course 
  
80-100 
  
medium course 
  
120-150 
  
medium 
  
180-220 
  
fine 
  
240 upwards 
  
very fine 
The individual sheets of sandpaper are normally marked on the reverse with the grit size (i.e. 
120) and/or with the grade (i.e. medium).  
Most commonly, sandpaper are available as 'closed coat' (i.e. completely covered with grit) 
however 'open coat' (where only 50 to 70 per cent of the backing is covered) is available for 
most types of sandpaper although only a specialist supplier may stock them. Closed-coat 
sandpapers cut faster, but are more likely to clog (i.e. the intergrain space become clogged 
with the waste from the material being sanded) than open-coat sandpapers.  
Backing materials  
Three types of backing materials are commonly available:  
• 
Ordinary paper - Although relatively a cheap backing, ordinary paper is an adequate 
material for most sandpapers. The quality of paper varies depending upon the 
intended method of use (and price); sandpaper supplied for use with power tools 
generally has a tougher quality of backing paper than that sold for hand use.  

• 
Waterproof paper - Water proof paper is essential where the sandpaper is to be used 
with a lubricant. The back of this type of paper usually has a darker, glossier 
appearance.  
• 
Cloth - Generally used where a high degree of flexibility is required when using the 
sandpaper.  
Backing adhesives  
Adhesives may be water soluble or waterproof. Most common sandpapers use a water-
soluble adhesive; this is quite satisfactory, as most sandpapers are not intended for use with 
a lubricant.  
Wet-and-dry sandpapers and others designed to be used with a lubricant, use a waterproof 
adhesive.  
No matter which of these types of adhesive is used, it is important that the bond between the 
grit and the backing material is strong enough to prevent excessive separation when being 
used.  
Sandpapers produced for power tools tend to have a stronger grit/paper bond than 
sandpapers made for hand use.  
Forms  
Sandpaper is available in a number of forms, each form being available in a number of 
grades:  
• 
Sheets - normally (at least in the UK) about 280 x 230 mm, often sold for the DIY 
market in packs of 4 or more sheets, either of the same or mixed grades. Usually only 
suitable for hand sanding.  
• 
Rolls - available in a number of widths (e.g. 50, 115mm), each roll is of a single grade 
and normally is sold by linear length. Although it is produced for use with power tools 
(e.g. orbital sanders), it can be used for hand sanding.  
• 
Discs - for use with rotary sanders or other power tools. The discs are used with a 
stiff but flexible backing disc. The sanding disc is fitted to the backing disc either by a 
central securing screw/dished washer or by a self-adhesive backing. Various 
diameters of disc are available, the diameter of the sandpaper should match the 
diameter of the backing disc.  
• 
Belts - for use with belt sanders. Various widths and lengths are available to suit each 
belt sander on the market.  
• 
Specials - A number of power sanding tools are now available with non-standard 'foot 
prints', these require 'special' pre-cut shapes. Generally, the sandpaper is attached to 
the tool by a self-adhesive backing.  
Sandpapers sold for power tool use are generally more robust than most types sold for hand 
sanding. While sandpapers for power tool use can be used for hand sanding, the reverse 
does not apply - hand sandpapers will not last very long if used with a power tool.  
• 
Flexible Block - Flexible abrasive blocks are normally of rectangular cube with grit on 
four faces, two faces of one grade of grit and a different grade of grit on the other two 
faces. The block tend to be less durable, but can be useful when decorating. Blocks 
are available with different types of grit and different grade.  
• 
Liquid Sander - Something which is not a true sandpaper. Ideal for the 'lazy' diy'er, 
Liquid Sander comes in a can as a liquid. It is just brushed onto a surface, it finely 
abrades and cleans the surface, leaving it ready for painting. It does not really 
'smooth' a surface, it just provides a key on a sound surface for a new application of 
paint.  

Types of grit 
Glasspaper  
Generally composed of quartz granules on a paper backing, this is an inexpensive, relatively 
soft abrasive for sanding painted or natural timber, metal, and other materials. It wears 
relatively quickly and is best suited to provide a roughish finish before a really smooth surface 
is attempted.  
Normally only available with non-waterproof adhesives/backing paper.  
Aluminium Oxide  
This man-made material is suitable for shaping, sanding and polishing hard metal such as 
iron and steel, but also effective on timber. Aluminium oxide cuts much faster and lasts longer 
than glass or garnet.  
It is available on non-waterproof, cloth or waterproof backings.  
Cloth backing offers flexibility and is suitable for heavy-duty applications, such as rust removal 
and metal shaping.  
Silicon Carbide (wet and dry) 
Silicon carbide paper, also known as 'wet and dry' paper, is suitable for both dry and wet 
sanding. It is suitable for sanding hardwood and plywood, soft metal like brass and 
aluminium, and plastic; also used for smoothing glass edges and frosting glass surfaces. It is 
fast-cutting and almost as hard as diamond, but it is brittle so the coarser grades will wear fast 
if used on hard metal.  
When used with water, it gives a very fine sanding of paint or varnish between coats. It can be 
used with mineral oil for smoothing and polishing metals. The lubricant helps to keep both the 
abrasive and the surface cool and floats away sanding waste; a additional advantage is that it 
prevents the formation of fine air-bourne dust. The wet slurry which forms will need to be 
wiped away during and after smoothing.  
'Wet and dry' is extensively used during vehicle body painting as, with water, it can give a 
very smooth surface to each coat of paint - generally we expect higher quality paint finishes 
on Automobiles than on household fitments.  
Garnet Paper 
This is a natural crushed rock and is an excellent abrasive for general wood sanding, either 
by hand or with a power tool - it is recognised by its distinctive bright green colour. It now 
seems to be being replaced by Aluminium Oxide grit.  
The natural garnet grit lasts about twice as long as the quartz chips used on glasspaper but it 
is not as long lasting as Aluminium Oxide.  
Garnet is also available with a cloth backing; in this form, it is used for work requiring more 
durability and flexibility.  
Garnet Paper is a good all round abrasive, but particularly useful for smoothing hardwoods 
and for fine finishing work.  

Steel Wool  
Although not a sandpaper, Steel Wool is used for fine 'sanding'. It is much used by the 
serious cabinetmaker as it has a much finer abrasive effect than grit materials on sandpaper. 
The fine steel strands cuts rather than abrades the surface, producing very fine finishes; as 
the wool is used, small pieces of it break off and mix in with the sanding dust.  
Steel Wool is graded starting at a very coarse 5 through to a series of noughts - 0000 being 
the finest.  
Although excellent on timber and metal, steel wool should not be used for smoothing 
plasterwork or other surfaces where the fragments of steel may become embedded and could 
rust stains.  
Steel wool can be used to 'sand' complicated shapes such as metal castings or wooden 
mouldings.  
Using Sandpaper  
For best results:  
• 
Always use the correct type and grade of sandpaper for the job in hand - do not use 
paper sold for 'hand sanding' in a power tool.  
• 
Start by using a medium or course grade paper. Change the grade of paper you are 
using as the job progresses.  
• 
Let the abrasive grit do the work, do not use undue pressure it will only clog the paper 
or cause the paper to wear out unnecessarily quickly. When power sanding, very little 
pressure is necessary, just guiding the tool is normally sufficient.  
• 
Use a sanding block when hand sanding.  
• 
Move sandpaper along the grain of bare timber, not across.  
• 
On a smooth, non-grained surface, move the sandpaper in small circular motions.  
• 
When using a lubricant, do not let the surface dry out. If excessive wet waste material 
builds up, wash it away from the work area.  
• 
Take all appropriate safety precautions, especially when power sanding - refer to the 
instructions from the sandpapers and power tool manufacturers. Only allow 
competent people to use a power sander; with the abrasive surface moving it can 
cause injury if it comes in contact with skin or damage if brought into contact with an 
unintended surface.  
• 
Store sandpapers carefully in a cool dry area. Except for papers made using 
waterproof adhesive and backing material, any dampness may cause the adhesive or 
backing to fail or weaken and grains will become detached.  
• 
If the paper becomes clogged after a short time of use, look at the surface being 
sanded - if it is timber, the timber may be damp - allow time for it to dry out. Paint 
which clogs paper may either be too new to sand or old paint applied in thick coats 
which have not gone off.  
 

