
 
A First Course in Dimensional Analysis
Simplifying Complex Phenomena Using Physical Insight
Juan G. Santiago
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

 
 
© 2019 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Santiago, Juan G., author.
Title: A first course in dimensional analysis : simplifying complex phenomena using physical insight
/ Juan Santiago.
Description: Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press, [2019] | Includes bibliographical references and
index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018060953 | ISBN 9780262537711 (pbk. : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Dimensional analysis—Textbooks. | Mathematical analysis—Textbooks.
Classification: LCC QC20.7.D55 S26 2019 | DDC 530.8—dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2018060953
d_r0

 
To Philip, my father, who loved to build, and to Philip, my son, who loves
to invent

 
Contents
Preface
1        A Brief History of Dimensional Analysis
2        Preliminary Concepts
2.1      Physical Quantities
2.2      Dimensions of Terms
2.3      Unit Conversion Factors
2.4      Notation and Manipulation of Unknown Functions
2.4.1    Notations for Unknown Functions
2.4.2    Useful Concepts Involving Unknown Functions
2.5      Principle of Dimensional Homogeneity
2.5.1    Check for Errors in a Derivation
2.5.2    Guessing a Function from the Dimensions of Its Variables: How
Much of This Martini Have I Had?
2.6      Approximations and Asymptotic Limits
2.7      Summary
Problems
3        Some Basic Physical Principles
3.1      Newton’s Second Law
3.2      Conservation of Energy in Dynamics
3.3      Basic Concepts of Fluid Flow
3.4      Summary
Problems
4        Dimensional Analysis: Motivation and Introduction
4.1      Geometric Similarity
4.2      The Drawbacks of Brute Force Experimentation: We Need a Bigger
Submarine
4.3      Comments on the Submarine Example

4.4      Drag Coefficient as a Tool to Reduce Complexity
4.4.1    Effect of Streamlining
4.4.2    Drag on a Smooth Sphere: A First Example of Data Collapse
4.4.3    Drag and Terminal Velocity of a Skydiver
4.5      Summary
Problems
5        Dimensional Analysis Techniques
5.1      Rules of Thumb for Initial Hypothesized Function: What to Include or
Exclude?
5.1.1    Rule D1: Formulate in Terms of Known Algebraic Combinations
5.1.2    Rule D2: Exclude a Variable Expressible as a Function of the
Others
5.1.3    Rule D3: Keep Dimensional Constants but Absorb
Nondimensional Constants
5.1.4    Rule D4: Exclude Any Variable That Involves a Unique Dimension
(No Blood from a Rock)
5.1.5    Rule D5: If Invoked, Consistently Leverage Geometric Similarity
5.2      Ipsen’s Method: A Step-by-Step Process
5.3      Submarine Example Revisited
5.4      An Inelegant Application of Ipsen’s Method
5.5      Time for a Stone to Drop: Experimental Closure and Collapse of Data
5.5.1    Supplementing Dimensional Analysis with Experiments
5.5.2    A Note on Guiding the Nondimensional Parameters
5.6      From Stones and Earth to Planets and Stars
5.7      Ignoring the Rule That We Exclude Determined Parameters: Including
Both G and g
5.8      Period of a Pendulum for Any Angle: Experimental Closure and Collapse
of Data
5.9      Summary
Problems
6        Combining Dimensional Analysis with Physical Intuition and Experimental
Observations
6.1      Rules of Thumb for Manipulating Functions of Nondimensional Variables
6.1.1    Rule ND1: Reorganize Expressions of Nondimensional Variables
6.1.2    Rule ND2: Isolate, Then Evaluate, Known Dependence
6.1.3    Rule ND3: Isolate a Variable with an Unknown but Weak
Dependence
6.1.4    Rule ND4: Replace a Nested Function with Its Independent
Nondimensional Parameters
6.1.5    Rule ND5: Consider Absorbing an Approximately Constant
Nondimensional Variable into Function
6.1.6    Rule ND6: Be Careful Eliminating Variables—Even If They Are
Small
6.2      Spine Patterns of Liquid Drop Impacts and Blood Drop Patterns in
Forensics
6.3      Atomic Explosions: An Example Confirmation of a Power Law

6.3.1    History of Atomic Explosion Analysis by G. I. Taylor
6.3.2    Atomic Explosion Analysis Using Dimensional Analysis
6.4      World-class Weightlifters: Lifter-to-Lifter Comparisons and Lift Data
Collapse
6.5      Running (from) Dinosaurs: An Analysis That Does Not Assume
Geometric Similarity
6.6      Summary
Problems
7        Two Examples Combining Biomechanics and Fluid Mechanics
7.1      Olympic Rowers and a Word of Caution on the Experimental Validation
of Scaling Laws
7.2      A Derivation for the Great Flight Diagram: Approximate Data Collapse
7.2.1    The Great Flight Diagram
7.3      Justification for Excluding Flier Power from the Formulation
7.4      Including Viscosity in the Flight Analysis
7.5      Summary
Problems
8        Buckingham Pi Theorem: An Alternate Method
8.1      Buckingham Pi Theorem
8.2      Pressure Drop in a Pipe Explored Using the Buckingham Pi Theorem
8.3      Use of a Large Number of Scaled Pressure Drop Measurements to
Close the Problem
8.4      Buckingham Pi Theorem versus Ipsen’s Method
8.5      Summary
Problems
9        Leveraging of Model Data to Build and Understand Prototypes
9.1      Geometric, Kinematic, and Dynamic Similarity
9.2      Experimental Design and Interpretation: To Match All Variables, Match
All but One
9.3      Examples of Model and Prototype Studies
9.3.1    Submarine Prototype Scaling
9.3.2    Boat Drag and How Scale Model Studies Are Not Always
Possible
9.4      Summary
Problems
10      Small Changes in Geometry Can Have Significant Effects: The Effect of
Roughness on Drag
10.1    Roughness and the Drag of Spheres
10.2    Pressure Drop in Smooth versus Rough Pipes
10.3    Estimating Drag from Different Shapes
10.4    Example of Incorrect Dimensional Analysis: Neglecting a Parameter
10.5    Summary
Problems

11      The Riabouchinsky–Rayleigh Paradox and the Rule of Relevance
11.1    The Riabouchinsky–Rayleigh Paradox
11.2    Resolution of the Apparent Paradox
11.3    The Rule of Relevance
11.4    Summary of Rules of Thumb for Combining Physical Insight with
Dimensional Analysis
12      Common Dimensionless Groups
12.1    Mach Number
12.2    Euler Number
12.3    Table of Dimensionless Groups
12.4    Summary
Problems
13      Scaling Using Approximate Equations
13.1    Summary
Problems
Closing Note
Appendix A: Properties of Common Fluids
References
Index
List of Figures
Figure 2.1
A martini glass filled with liquid.
Figure 3.1
A plot of an arbitrary velocity profile of a fluid moving near a solid wall (wall is at y = 0). The fluid
velocity at the wall is zero as per the no-slip condition. The velocity of the fluid varies continuously
as we get further from the wall. The gradients create stresses. The three horizontal arrows above the
abscissa are simply a visual aid showing variations in velocity.
Figure 4.1
Model and prototype of an airplane. The model and the prototype are geometrically similar, so all
angles and length ratios are the same.
Figure 4.2
A submarine of length b. We consider all geometrically similar submarines, and so we fully describe
the geometry with this length scale.
Figure 4.3
A comparison of two bodies illustrating the importance of streamlining on fluid drag. Drawing (a)
shows a cross-section of a smooth NACA 63(3)-018 airfoil at zero angle of attack. Here, the drag
coefficient is equal to 0.01 (at Re = 500,000) and quantified in terms of a projected area equal to the
product of chord length, c, and spanwise length, L. Drawing (b) shows a smooth cylinder subject
flow at the same velocity. Here the drag coefficient is equal to 1.1 and is quantified in terms of the

product of diameter and spanswise length, dL. The relative scale of the two figures is chosen such
that the ratio of the airfoil chord length to the cylinder diameter is 110. At this scale, the two bodies
would have the same absolute value of drag (e.g., measured in dimension of force) when subject to
the same fluid velocity and fluid type.
Figure 4.4
Collapse of drag values for smooth spheres. (a) Drag versus velocity for spheres of three diameters
and three fluids: water, mercury, and air. The plotted points are values calculated from an analytical
expression determined by Almedeij (2008) by fitting a wide variety of experimental data. Properties
taken at 20°C unless indicated. (b) The same values of part (a) are here plotted as a nondimensional
drag coefficient 
 versus a nondimensional Reynolds number, Re. The legend applies to both (a) and
(b) and shows wide variation of parameters. The three fluids and two temperatures represent
variations of density and dynamic viscosity. In the nondimensionalized space, the values collapse to a
single curve. This is an example of data collapse obtained by reducing the number of variables in a
problem.
Figure 4.5
The drag force on a body is sufficient to cancel out the force of gravity. My body (on the right) is
suspended in this “indoor skydiving” vertical wind tunnel in Fremont, CA (see http://sfbay.iflyworld
.com).
Figure 4.6
Free-body diagram of a skydiver in free fall at terminal velocity. We sum the forces acting about the
centroid of the body. For zero acceleration, the drag force equals weight.
Figure 5.1
Simple dynamics problem of dropping a stone of mass m over a distance 
 Neglecting drag, we
assume constant acceleration g.
Figure 5.2
Experimental data for a falling body. The model “rock” for these data was a 7.6 cm ball tracked using
automated image processing of videos obtained at 60 frames per second. (a) Each drop height was
repeated three times, and the main plot shows raw experimental data of tracked and quantified
centroids for ball images dropped from the five heights indicated by the labels. The inset shows 15
dimensional measured total drop times for the 15 experiments. (b) shows a collapse of the same
experimental data of the inset of (a). The collapse of data is achieved by plotting the measurements in
terms of the dimensionless parameter derived using dimensional analysis, 
 as a function
dimensional initial height 
 For reference, the exact theoretical value of this parameter (1/2) is
shown as a dashed gray line.
Figure 5.3
Scaling analysis for Kepler’s third law. The top figure shows dimensional plots of the semimajor axis
of the elliptical orbit versus orbital periods of planets (including dwarf planet Pluto) around the sun.
The bottom figure shows the same data plotted as the cube of the semimajor axis  versus the square
of the orbital period 
 as suggested by the scaling relation 
 The units are years
(yr) for period and astronomical unit (AU) for distance (roughly the distance between Earth and the
sun). Data point symbol diameters are proportional to planet projected area.
Figure 5.4
Typical schematic considered in the analysis of a pendulum with a small sphere of mass m, massless
rod, frictionless pivot, length s, and sweeping over angle θ. We neglect drag and assume Earth’s

downward acceleration g.
Figure 5.5
Collapse of pendulum period data (across initial angles, experimental methods, and planets). The top
plot shows dimensional periods (in seconds) versus initial angle for pendulums of various lengths L.
The circles and squares are experimental data from respectively Fulcher and Davis (1976) and Lima
and Arun (2006), and the curves are predictions based on an approximate solution of the large-angle
pendulum dynamics problem. The bottom plot shows the same experimental data and predictions but
plotted as the nondimensional parameter 
 versus initial angle 
 The prediction curves overlap
exactly and appear as a solid line. More importantly, the experimental data collapses (to within
experimental error); highlighting the universal nature of the new variables 
 and 
Figure 6.1
Fluid dynamic instabilities during splatter (onto a surface) of a liquid droplet lead to so-called spines
that radiate from the drop (left). Dimensional analysis leads to a correlation between the number of
spines and Weber number. The data collapses very well to a straight line in terms of square root of
Weber number for low We, but deviates from this line at higher values (likely due to the effects of
viscosity). The straight line shown is a scaling directly proportional to the square root of We (linear
regression between the origin and We0.5 = 30). Images were obtained by me and described in the
footnote to section 6.2. The data of (b) were here digitized from Adam (2012). The values in the
legend refers to droplet diameter (prior to impact).
Figure 6.2
Images of trinity atomic bomb explosion of 1945 published by the US Atomic Energy Commission
(Mack, 1947). Note the time stamps, scale bars, and location of ground level. The text regarding the
cloud’s “belt” and the cable are from the original Mack reference. G. I. Taylor used information from
such published images to estimate the explosive yield of the weapon.
Figure 6.3
G. I. Taylor’s data comparing blast radius and time. (a) Images from Mack (1946) of the first ~1 s of
the Trinity explosion. The comparison between such data and the current scaling result from
dimensional analysis are shown in (b). The power law fit has the form 
 The data
was digitized from Taylor (1950b). The y-intercept is 7.9.
Figure 6.4
International Powerlifting Federation (IPF) world records for deadlift and bench press. Plot (a) shows
raw data for mass lifted as a function of the mass of the lifter. Plot (b) shows the same data for lifted
mass but as a function of 
 Both plots show variations of a factor of 5 on the ordinance. The
bottom plot includes horizontal lines at arithmetic averages of 18.5 and 14.3 for deadlift and bench
press, respectively. The predicted scaling fairly well collapses the data, reducing the maximum-to-
minimum variations from 1.3 to 1.1 for deadlift and from 2.0 to 1.1 for bench press.
Figure 6.5
Schematic of a human just breaking into a run. The runner’s mass m approximately pivots on the leg
touching the ground. We roughly model the dynamics as those of an inverted, solid-rod pendulum. At
the top of the arc, his maximum centripetal acceleration is the limited by his weight. A free-body
diagram of the mass/rod system is superposed onto the sketch on the right.
Figure 6.6

(a) Experimental data for two quadrupeds and human males for dimensional stride length versus
running speed U. (b) Nondimensional stride length versus square root of Froude number. Here, data
includes humans, kangaroos, camels, dogs, and rhinos. Each animal is represented several times
(moving at different speeds). The dimensional data collapses fairly well onto a single straight line
across species. Both figures were created by digitizing the data of plots shown by Alexander (1996).
The lines in (a) are linear fits suggested by Alexander (1996).
Figure 6.7
Sketch of a reconstructed skeleton of Tyrannosaurus rex shown next to a basketball hoop 3.05 m (10
ft) from the floor. A similar comparison and sketch is presented in the book by Alexander (1989).
Figure 7.1
McMahon considered geometrically similar shells characterized by length s. He considered also the
wetted area A of the shell under the water line; and n oarsmen each of weight 
 McMahon (1971)
presents a similar schematic describing his analysis.
Figure 7.2
World record times for 2000 m rowing races for boats with n = 1, 2, 4, and 8 rowers. The top plot (a)
is a plot showing times T versus rower number. The bottom plot (b) shows a comparison between
times T and the logarithm of the number of rowers. Shown together with the data in (b) are power
laws of the form 
 with m equal to 8, 9 (McMahon), or 10. Given the limited variation
of boat rowers (8:1), it is difficult to experimentally validate the precise scaling law.
Figure 7.3
Two very roughly geometrically similar flyers characterized by a single dimension (say, wingspan s).
The shapes can perhaps be described as an elongated cylindrical body with two major symmetric
wings extending on either side. Neither commercial jet nor midge is shown to scale!
Figure 7.4
Tennekes’s great flight diagram is a plot of weight W of a wide range of fliers versus cruising speed
for horizontal flight U. The line is a power law of the form 
 where the value of the
constant is set at 47 for these axes.
Figure 8.1
Plots relating pressure drop and velocity through a pipe. Top plot (a) shows measurements of
dimensional pressure gradients along the pipe as a function of the area-averaged (aka bulk) velocity
in the pipe. All are experimental data as reported by Nikuradse (1933, 1950). These data are only
roughly half of the data reported by Nikuradse, and each series is roughly parabolic. However, the
trends among the series are complex and nonmonotonic due to the effects of changing both
viscosities and relative surface roughness. The bottom plot (b) shows the data collapse into a plot for
nondimensional friction factor (the function  of our analysis). Here, a plot of log (base 10) of 100
multiplied by friction factor f as a function of log of 
 for various values of
nondimensional roughness 
Figure 9.1
A sloop with a reefed mainsail on a starboard tack. The boat’s hull interacts with both ocean waves
and waves of its own making. Source: http://www.pexels.com.
Figure 10.1
Laminar-to-turbulent transition of the boundary layer can significantly decrease drag on a sphere.
Shown are schematics of flow around a sphere for 
 values less and greater than about 
 For
low 
 the boundary layer remains laminar and this relatively low inertia flow separates early (at

low separation angle of about 80°) from the sphere, causing a large wake (a low pressure region). For
rougher spheres and higher 
 the boundary layer transitions to turbulent. The turbulent flow
separates at a higher angle (near 120°), resulting in a smaller wake. Roughness elements can cause
early transition to turbulence, and so a small change in geometry (relative height of small roughness
elements) can have a large effect on visible behavior.
Figure 10.2
Drag coefficient of smooth and rough spheres as a function of 
 and characteristic roughness. The
smooth sphere data was digitized directly from Achenbach (1972), and the rough sphere drag data
from Achenbach (1974). The relative scale of surface roughness can have an immense effect on drag,
particularly at moderate to high 
Figure 10.3
Example of the type of ambiguity that would result from mistakenly excluding the parameter
describing surface roughness height in the dimensional analysis associated with the data of figure
10.2. Most important, one value of Re would yield many and widely different values of drag
coefficient 
 (as depicted by the vertical column of circles). Also, a wide range of Re could easily
yield the same drag coefficient (horizontal row of circles).
List of Tables
Table 1.1
Brief review of important contributions to dimensional analysis
Table 2.1
Example quantities, their primary dimensions, and corresponding (derived) SI units
Table 2.2
The dimensions of integrals and differentials
Table 6.1
Estimated speeds of dinosaurs (adapted from Alexander, 1989)
Table 11.1
Rules of thumb for dimensional analysis proposed in this book
Table 12.1
Examples of dimensionless groups (adapted from Yarin, 2012)
Table A.1
Fluid properties at 1 atm and 20°C (adapted from White, 2016)

 
Preface
Definition I: The quantity of matter [mass] is the measure of the same arising from its density and
bulk [volume] conjointly.
Definition II: The quantity of motion [momentum] is the measure of the same, arising from the
velocity and quantity of matter conjointly.
—Isaac Newton, Principia (1687)
These are the first two formal definitions in the Principia, here as translated
by Chandrasekhar (1995), and these perhaps mark the beginning of modern,
precise understanding of units and dimensions. Lord Rayleigh called the
method of dimensional analysis “the great principle of similitude”
(Rayleigh, 1915) in a now-famed article by that title. On its surface, it is a
look at the relationships between physical quantities by comparing their
“units.” In fact, it is a powerful and formalized method to analyze complex
physical phenomena and reduce complexity. The method enables engineers
and scientists to analyze problems for which they cannot pose, much less
solve, governing equations. The method serves engineers and scientist in
the formation of back-of-the-envelope estimates and the derivation of
scaling laws for the design of machines and processes. It is a quest for the
natural variables of a problem.
The principle has been applied successfully to the study of complex
phenomena in many areas of science, including biology, engineering,
physics, economics, and sports science. In this text, we will demonstrate its
use in the following fields:
Astrophysics in a derivation of Kepler’s third law

Aerodynamics in the design of airplanes and estimation of terminal velocity
Forensics in the analysis of blood splatters
Dynamics in the study of falling bodies and a finite-displacement pendulum
Sports science in the analyses of world-class rowers and weightlifters
Hydraulics in the analysis of fluid flow in pipes
Marine engineering in the design of submarines and surface boats
Atomic energy in the analysis of a fission bomb detonation
Biomechanics in the analysis of animal gait and flight
Paleontology in estimates of running and flying speeds of dinosaurs and a giant bird
We will use these examples to show how a combination of dimensional
analysis and physical intuition can identify the essential characteristics of a
physical process. My hope is that the book will inspire discovery and
innovation.

 
1
A Brief History of Dimensional Analysis
This book is an introduction to a powerful tool known as dimensional
analysis. The method is also termed “similarity analysis,” and the concept
referred to as “similitude.” Dimensional analysis can be used to find
patterns within and succinct explanations for physical phenomena. It is used
to find functional relations that are independent of whether we have a large
amount of each quantity or a small amount. It is a search for laws that are
independent of measurement systems.
The history of dimensional analysis is linked with the history of science
starting as early as the great English mathematician and physicist Sir Isaac
Newton. Histories and developments of the subject are provided by
Macagno (1971), Rott (1992), White (2016), Taylor et al. (2007), and
Gibbings (2011), and only some material is summarized here.
In 1687, Isaac Newton described some rules of dimensional relations and
analyses in the Principia. This included similarity in the trajectory shapes
of bodies in motion, and indeed his theories of motion present a precise set
of mathematical relations between the quantities of position, velocity,
acceleration, momentum, and force. In around 1736, Swiss mathematician
and physicist Leonhard Euler wrote extensive descriptions of units and
dimensional reasoning, including the dimensions associated with Newton’s
second law, and so-called unit conversion factors—concepts essential to
consistent descriptions of the physical world.

In 1822, Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier clarified greatly the concept of
physical dimensions, introduced the concept of dimensional homogeneity in
mathematical relations, pointed out that equations describing physical
phenomena are independent of the choice of system of units, and applied
similarity to describe and unify heat flow. Lord Rayleigh (b. 1842) provided
perhaps the most influential breakthroughs in dimensional analysis in
studies of hydrodynamic drag, flow stability, sound waves, and light scatter
from particles. He also strongly advocated dimensional analysis. He
demonstrated that the “principle of similitude” yields elegant scaling laws
and demonstrated the method using examples from Newton’s law of
gravitation, drag on spheres, heat flow in thin fins, vibrating drops, and the
vibration of Aeolian harp strings. Rayleigh argued in favor of the
importance and appropriate use of the method (e.g., as an initial analysis of
a problem) (Rayleigh, 1915):
I have often been impressed by the scanty attention paid even by original workers in physics to the
great principle of similitude. It happens not infrequently that results in the form of “laws” are put
forward as novelties on the basis of elaborate experiments, which might have been predicted a
priori after a few minutes’ consideration.
Rayleigh stopped short of teaching a formalized approach to dimensional
analysis, but the French mathematician Aimé Vaschy in 1892, and
independently the Russian mathematician Dimitri Riabouchinsky in 1911,
each formulated and then reported methods that we now call the Pi theorem
(named after and introduced to most of the community by Edgar
Buckingham, 1914). Since this time, dozens of texts and papers on
similarity and similitude have been written. Modern similitude has been
strongly leveraged by researchers in and for the field of fluid mechanics,
but it has been applied successfully in many other fields. White (2016)
provides references to examples in biomechanics, astrophysics, economics,
chemistry, clinical medicine, social sciences, and plant genetics, among
others.
We shall not attempt to review here all of the history of similarity
methods or applications, but instead offer a few select milestone
contributions to dimensional analysis as summarized in table 1.1. Note the
years listed in the table are approximate dates of contribution as suggested
by Rott (1992), Gibbings (2011), and White (2016).

Table 1.1
Brief review of important contributions to dimensional analysis
Individual 
and
approximate date
of contribution
Summary of Contribution
Newton, 1687
Defines basic relationships between mass, momentum, and force. Discusses
similarity in motion trajectories in the Principia.
Euler, 1765
Extensive discussions of physical units, unit conversion factors; in, e.g.,
Theoria motus corporum solidorum seu rigidorum.
Fourier, 1822
Dimensional homogeneity, physical quantities vs. units, similarity in heat
flow in his Analytical Theory of Heat.
Stokes, 1856
Identifies Reynolds number as key parameter in drag effects on a pendulum.
Maxwell, 1871
Applies dimensional analysis to electromagnetic theory and theory of gases,
introduces M, L, and T nomenclature.
Rayleigh, 1877
Application of similitude to wide range of problems, demonstrating wide
generality of approach. Extensive applications to light scatter and fluid
mechanics, and to correlating measurements of drag.
Reynolds, 1883
Turbulent transition experiments identify Reynolds number
(named/highlighted by Sommerfeld, 1908 and later reemphasized and taught
by Prandtl, 1910).
Vaschy, 1892, and
Riabouchinsky,
1911
Independently develop formalized methods now known as Buckingham Pi
theorem.
Buckingham,
1914
Publishes and teaches the Pi theorem.
Bridgman, 1922
Publishes classic book on dimensional analysis theory.
Ipsen, 1960
Ipsen’s method, publishes a book describing a step-by-step approach to
dimensional analysis.
The last entry of table 1.1 is a method for performing dimensional
analysis due to David Carl Ipsen (1960), a professor at the University of
California at Berkeley. Ipsen’s method is a formal, step-by-step approach
that we will primarily adopt in this book for the process of dimensional
analysis.
In addition to Ipsen’s method, we will discuss a set of rules of thumb that
in this text I propose as a guide to the integration of physical intuition and
experimental observations with dimensional analysis. Enabling the
combination of dimensional analysis and physical intuition is a major goal
of this book.

 
2
Preliminary Concepts
… for a stone projected is by the pressure of its own weight forced out of the rectilinear path,
which by the projection alone it should have pursued, and made to describe a curve line in the air;
and through that crooked way is at last brought down to the ground; and the greater the velocity is
with which it is projected, the farther it goes before it falls to the earth.
—Isaac Newton, Principia (1687)
We first present some preliminary concepts as a brief background to our
study of dimensional analysis. We discuss the underlying dimensions of
physical problems, the relation of these dimensions to units of
measurement, and some concepts useful in discussing unknown functions.
2.1    Physical Quantities
To determine a set of rules with which to describe physical phenomena, we
first identify the quantities of interest. In aerodynamics, interesting
quantities include velocity, wing area, weight, and power. In biomechanics,
quantities of interest might include the height of an animal’s center of mass,
running speed, and the mechanical stress exerted by muscle tissue. In
earthly dynamics, we may analyze the gravitational acceleration at Earth’s
surface, heights, velocities of moving bodies, and the lengths of pendulums.
In astrophysics, we consider vast distances, orbit periods, and large masses.
To record, communicate, and analyze information and compare
observations at different times and in different places, we create scales of

measure. For example, we agree on the value of 1 kilogram or the duration
of 1 second.
However, if we are not careful, we can easily attribute too much
importance to these scales of measure. The scales and amounts of each
observation are incidental since underlying laws governing physical
phenomena are independent of arbitrary unit definitions or specific amounts
of each quantity. Nature does not care about these absolute measures, only
the amounts relative to each other. The relations among quantities can be
found from something very mundane that we learn in principle as children
by looking at their dimensions. For example, velocity is a length per time,
and so it must be relatable to relevant lengths and relevant times.
Following the work of French mathematician and physicist Jean-Baptiste
Joseph Fourier (1822), we describe natural phenomena using relations of
physical quantities and we must make “apples to apples” type comparisons.
That is, only quantities measured along the same dimension can be
compared directly and unambiguously. The comparison should be
independent of the particular choice of units (e.g., meters or feet or
furlongs). Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1871) suggested we
quantify physical quantities in terms of universal dimensions with notation
L, T, and M in dynamics. Here, as in many texts, we will adopt Maxwell’s
notation and describe length, time, mass, absolute temperature, and electric
current as L, T, M, θ, and I, respectively. Table 2.1 provides examples of
quantities characterized in terms of these dimensions in our list. For brevity,
we neglect quantities involving luminosity (e.g., with units of candela).

Table 2.1
Example quantities, their primary dimensions, and corresponding (derived) SI
units
Quantity
Primary dimension
SI 
units
example
Mechanical quantities
Acceleration
LT−2
m·s−2
Angle (plane)
—
radian
Angle (solid)
—
steradian
Angular acceleration
T−2
rad·s−2
Angular momentum
ML2T−1
kg·m2s−1
Area
L2
m2
Curvature
L−1
m−1
Surface tension
MT−2
kg·s−2
Density
ML−3
kg·m−3
Elastic modulus
ML−1T−2
kg·m−1s−2
Energy (work)
ML2T−2
kg·m2·s−2
Force
MLT−2
kg·m·s−2
Frequency
T−1
s−1
Kinematic viscosity
L2T−1
m2·s−1
Mass
M
kg
Momentum
MLT− 1
kg·m·s−1
Power
ML2T−3
kg·m2·s−3
Pressure
ML−1T−2
kg·m−1·s−2
Time
T
s
Velocity
LT−1
m·s−1
Volume
L3
m3
Gravitational constant
L3M−1T−2
m3·kg−1s−2
Thermal properties
Enthalpy
ML2T2
kg·m2·s2
Entropy
ML2T2θ−1
kg·m2·s−2·K−1
Heat capacity per unit mass
L2 T−2θ−1
m2·s−2·K−1
Internal energy
ML2T−2
kg·m2·s−2
Latent heat of phase change
L2T−2
m2·s−2
Quantity of heat
ML2T−2
kg·m2·s−2
Temperature
θ
K
Thermal conductivity
MLT−3θ−1
kg·m·s−3·K−1
Thermal diffusivity
L2T−1
m2·s−1
Heat transfer coefficient
MT3θ−1
kg·s3·K−1
Boltzmann constant
ML2T−2θ−1
kg·m2·s−2·K−1
Electromagnetic quantities

Electric current
I
C·s−1
Electric charge
IT
C
Electric field
MLI−1T−3
kg·m·A−1·s−3
Electric resistance
ML3T−3I−2
kg·m3·s−3·A−2
Magnetic flux density
MT−2I−1
kg·s−2·A−1
Magnetic field
IL−1
A·m−1
Magnetic susceptibility
—
—
Permittivity of free space
M−1L−3I2T4
kg−1·m−3·A2·s4
Permeability of free space
MLT−2I−2
kg·m·s−2·A−2
Adapted and expanded from similar tables given by Yarin (2012) and Mills (1993).
L, T, M, θ, and I each represent a dimension associated with a physical
quantity. They are in general independent and so can be described as
orthogonal (e.g., one cannot be measured or obtained by knowing the
others). These ideas can also be applied to groups of dimensions. The
dimensions L3 and MLT−1 quantify volume and momentum, respectively.
We can plot the volume versus momentum of a ball on a two-dimensional
axis of L3 versus MLT−1 with, for example, corresponding units m3 and
kg⋅m⋅s−1. In turn, these units are derived from understood meanings of m,
kg, and s as particular measures of L, M, and T, respectively. In the case of
table 1.1, we express units using the SI standard, the French Système
internationale d’unités, or international system of units.
Note that the choice of L, T, M, θ, and I as primary dimensions is not
unique. For example, we can alternately, and self-consistently, choose L, T,
F, θ, and I as primary dimensions with F for force as a basic, primary
dimension. Mass is then a dimension derived from L, T, and F (mass is
FT2L−1).
2.2    Dimensions of Terms
An equation consists of an equal sign (=) and its terms. Terms are the items
separated by addition, and these can be positive or negative. For example,
for idealized motion in the x-direction under constant acceleration :
where 
 and 
 are the initial position and velocity and t is time. This
equation has four terms, three of them on the right-hand side, each with

dimension of length. The dimensions of terms can be determined by
dividing or multiplying the dimensions of each variable in the term. The
dimensions of integrals and derivatives follow from their definitions as
shown in table 2.2. Integrals are sums of products of the integrand and
differential, and so have the dimension of this product. Similarly,
derivatives are limits of the ratio of differences and have dimensions of the
ratio.
Table 2.2
The dimensions of integrals and differentials
Quantity
Dimension
Indefinite
Integral
Dimension of the product of f(x) and x; e.g., if f(x) has dimensions of velocity
LT−1and x dimensions of length L, then this integral will have dimensions L2T−1.
Definite
Integral
Dimension of the product of f(x) and 
Derivative
Dimension of the ratio 
 e.g., if f(x) has dimension of velocity LT−1 and x
dimension of time T, then this derivative will have dimension LT−2.
Partial
Derivative
Dimension of the ratio 
As one example, consider an integro-differential equation of a form
common in an undergraduate fluid mechanics courses (e.g., derived by
applying Newton’s second law to a control volume with fluid moving
through it):
Here, S, 
 A, m, ρ, and t represent a force, pressure, area, mass, density,
and time, respectively; u and v are fluid velocities.
2.3    Unit Conversion Factors

Introduced by Euler (circa 1765), unit conversion factors (UCFs) are a
convenient method of changing from one set of units to another. Consider a
solution to equation (2.1) for the case of 
The three variables represent physical quantities with dimensions, so for 
 and t of 2.0 s, we can write
The quantity on the right-hand side is not just “1,” but 1 ft⋅s−1 (think of the
units as determining the meaning of the 1.0). To change from English to SI
units, we use the following UCF:
The UCF is a quantity identically equal to the concept of one, which we call
unity. Hence, its reciprocal is also unity:
Importantly, we can multiply one or both sides of the “=” sign by unity,
hence:
We can multiply, say, the right-hand side of any equation multiple times
by unity and so employ multiple UCFs as follows:
2.4    Notation and Manipulation of Unknown Functions
Before introducing dimensional analysis, it is useful to gain a familiarity
with the expression and description of mathematical functions. Here we will
explore shorthand notations for functions that are (at least initially)

unknown but that are known or believed to depend on some known set of
variables.
2.4.1    Notations for Unknown Functions
In dimensional analysis, we typically deal with unknown relationships
(unknown forms of an equation) among variables. For functions involving
dimensional variables, we will write y as an unknown function of x as, for
example,
This notation stands for an infinite number of possible relations between x
and y, where y is the dependent variable and x is the independent variable.
We here use a lowercase “f” for the function when it involves dimensional
variables. Here f denotes “a function of” or “determined by.” If there is a
single value of y for each value of x, we say f is a single valued function.
Colloquially, “Give me x, and I’ll tell you y.” For the function, 
“Give me x and y, and I’ll tell you z.”
For functions of strictly nondimensional variables X and Y, we shall
employ capital letters to denote a function, as in
Consider a more complex function between a velocity u, time t, distance
x, and acceleration a of the form
There are many possibilities. One is
and another is
where  and  are specific values of x and t (two constants). Each function
is physically possible, both are represented by

Special Case: A Function of a Constant   Consider the deterministic
function
If we can conclude from additional arguments that t is a constant, say, equal
to  then we can also conclude that the function is a constant
A deterministic function of a constant is constant. Note that the constant 
is nevertheless intimately and inextricably tied to the meaning of  (it is
now baked into the definition of f).
Throughout this text we shall consider single valued functions (for the
dependent variable) of a series of independent variables. We shall invert the
functions (e.g., to solve for a new variable) only if the physics of the
problem suggest there is no ambiguity (such as from double or triple valued
functions).
2.4.2   Useful Concepts Involving Unknown Functions
This section presents a list of useful examples and operations involving
unknown functions.
Concept 1: A Nested Function   Consider some function
If we can argue (through intuition or experiment) that the variable g is itself
a function of x as in 
, then we can write simply
We shall use this idea to eliminate variables from consideration in unknown
functions.
Concept 2: A Range of Applicability   Important for physical
problems, some functions bring with them a limited range of applicability,
like baggage on a trip.
Consider, for example, two functions of x and respective ranges of
applicability:

Here, if we consider a nested function as in 
 we are restricted to
the intersection of the allowable domains for x and g, so
If the function of one variable is restricted to Tuesdays and a second
function to morning time, then a function that depends on both of these
functions is restricted to Tuesday mornings. This idea can help us avoid
mistakes of applicability, such as deriving a negative mass.
2.5    Principle of Dimensional Homogeneity
As a preliminary exercise, consider two variables x and y and a three-term
equation of the form
From a purely mathematical view, this equation looks reasonable. However,
we should note that this function can hold only if both x and y are quantities
without dimensions. Contrast this to the aforementioned equation (2.1):
This four-term equation is much more satisfying as a physical
representation, and it should sit well in your stomach. Each of the terms has
dimensions of length. In SI units, we write
More generally, we write that each term has a primary dimension of length
L such that
These ideas bring us to a general principle applicable to all equations that
aspire to represent the physical world.

The principle of dimensional homogeneity (PDH) was first described by
Fourier (1822), and can be stated as follows (cf. White, 2016):
If an equation truly expresses a proper relationship between variables in a physical process, then
each additive term will have the same dimension.
Hence, both sides of the “=” sign must have the same dimension. The
concept is simple, yet it is extremely powerful and general to all equations
that represent the physical world. We can rephrase the PDH colloquially as
“terms in equations must compare (i.e., add or equate) apples to apples.”
Consider the units of equation (2.2), given that p is pressure, S is a force,
m is mass, u is horizontal velocity, v vertical velocity, A is area, and t is
time:
You do not need to know about this equation’s derivation to know that it
must be dimensionally homogenous. Each term is “measured” in the
dimension of force (see table 2.1).
2.5.1   Check for Errors in a Derivation
Among other uses, the PDH is extremely useful in spotting errors in
derivation, such as an equation flashed on slide in a presentation. Consider
equation (2.1) for the case where 
 and 
 we might mistakenly write
something like
which has an obvious mistake. The dimensions don’t work; the left-hand
side has dimension L, and the right-hand side dimension is L2T−3, an apple
and an orange.
Inside secret:   Many university professors use this “trick” to quickly spot
an error in a long derivation, often within a few seconds after it is projected
on a slide. All that is needed is to understand (even vaguely) the variables,
know their dimensions, and then errors in multipliers, exponents, and so on
pop out. It’s especially dramatic to wait for a seemingly impressive,

complex final expression and quickly point out that there must be some
error.
2.5.2   Guessing a Function from the Dimensions of Its Variables: How Much of This
Martini Have I Had?
Sanjoy Mahajan (2008), in his nice monograph Street-Fighting
Mathematics, provides some examples of using the PDH to estimate area
and volume integrals of geometric shapes and other functions. Mahajan
highlights the importance of preserving PDH and then considering limiting
behaviors of the dependence.
Consider the relation between the free surface height and volume of the
liquid in a martini glass, as depicted in figure 2.1. We approximate the
liquid volume  as a cone with radius r and liquid level, height h. Some
guesses, including a couple of uninspired ones that nevertheless respect
PDH, may include 
Here, the ci’s are arbitrary, dimensionless constants (pure numbers without
units, such as π). Explore the limits of these relations. The first two
expressions uncomfortably predict infinite volume for limits 
 and 
 respectively. The third is clearly incorrect for either 
 or 
Our knowledge of triangles and the volumes of cylinders may help us reject
 since the answer should be proportional to h. Consider stacking
two cylinders of height 
 atop one another—the total volume should
double. The last supposition seems most likely, since 
 behaves well
for either r or h tending to zero or infinity, and for both r or h tending to
zero or infinity simultaneously. Also, the case 
 looks fine. In fact, this
guess is correct. To estimate the value of the constant 
 consider the
volume of a cylinder of height h: 
 (the area of a circle
multiplied by the height). We know the cone will be smaller than this. With
a little visualization, we might guess less than half this value, say one-third,
as in

Figure 2.1
A martini glass filled with liquid.
This is in fact the exact answer, but the exact answer does not really matter
here; one-fourth or one-half of the cylinder’s volume would be good
working estimates. Further, to explore how the fraction of liquid consumed
for some change in height, we need not know 
 Martini glasses seem to
favor interior angles of roughly 45°. So, for a martini glass we estimate that
h = r and might guess that

Now, we can make estimates which follow from PDH and are completely
independent of our guess of constant 
 How much cocktail have we
imbibed if we drink a discreet quantity halfway down from the initial
height?
Sipping the top half of the initial liquid cone’s height, we drank 88% of
the whole.
2.6    Approximations and Asymptotic Limits
In our martini example, we found it useful to determine the limiting
behavior of a function as one or more of the independent variables tended to
infinity or zero. We can think of this process as testing our function by
asking of it interesting questions.
Consider a function’s dependent variable as one or more of the
independent variables tends to a limiting value. Consider first the case of
function of a single variable. We express this as
Using analysis, experiments, and intuition, we should consider the value or
values of y as x tends to some critical value such as zero or infinity. There
four possibilities as follows (see also the discussion in Lemons, 2017):
y tends to a nonzero constant (this will likely be some inherently important value),
y tends to some power law of the form 
 where c is a constant and a is a real number
that cannot have dimensions,
y oscillates in some periodic fashion, for example, such that 
 where n is
an integer, and
y does something else (e.g., tends to zero or infinity)
The last item on the list implies a huge unexplored complexity, but it is
nevertheless useful to classify functions in this way.
For a function of two or more variables, the problem is more complicated
—for example, given

In any limit, we should consider the behavior of all of the parameters. For
example, consideration of small values of x does not necessarily imply that 
 Consider that the function may involve a product of x and y.
Consider also that the limit you impose on x may affect the limiting
behavior of y. We consider this a bit further in an example problem at the
end of this chapter.
2.7    Summary
A wide range of quantities can be decomposed into primary dimensions for length, time,
mass, temperature, and electric current: L, T, M, θ, and I.
Dimensional analysis strives to reduce the complexity of problems by determining
allowable relationships among variables based on an analysis of their basic dimensions.
In this book, we will hypothesize functions for quantities of interest and then combine
dimensional analysis and physical intuition and experimental observations to simplify
and even evaluate such unknown functions.
Concepts important to evaluating unknown functions include functional dependence on
constants and ranges of applicability.
The principle of dimensional homogeneity (PDH) requires that all terms in an equation
must have the same dimension.
The PDH is also useful in checking for errors and hypothesizing functions.
Asymptotic behavior of functions is useful in classifying them or identifying important
solutions and variables.
Problems
2.1.    Consider the increase in pressure felt by a cupped hand extended out
of car traveling at a speed of u. We shall see in the next chapter that
the maximum pressure that can be generated (near the center of the
cupped hand) can be estimated as follows:
where p is the local pressure of the air (in a frame of reference
moving with the air) and ρ is the mass density of the air. Express this
three-term equation as an unknown function with  as the dependent
variable and all other variables as independent dimensional variables.
Use similar notation to show an approximation for this function for
the limit where the velocity tends to small values.

2.2.    Pose several plausible relations (i.e., with the correct dimensions) for
the volume of an oblate spheroid as a function of its semiaxis a and
the distance c from its center to the pole (along axis of symmetry).
Check the various limits of your equations and eliminate all but one.
Check if the case of c = a correctly yields the equation for the volume
of a sphere.
2.3.    The equation for the time t response x(t) of an underdamped
harmonic oscillator with a damping coefficient γ, a natural frequency
ω, and a phase α can be written as
where  is the initial value of the response variable. This same basic
formulation is used to model a wide variety of physical phenomena
including a simple (low-angle displacement) pendulum; a mass,
linear spring, and dashpot system; and an electrical circuit composed
for a resistor, capacitor, and inductor. In such systems, we could
interpret x as the angle, position, or voltage, respectively. Using the
notation described in this chapter, we can write this functional
relationship as follows:
a.    Use a computer to plot the function using the following numerical
values: γ = 0.1, ω = 1, and 
b.    Use either your plotting software or your knowledge of
mathematics to evaluate the various limits. As we discussed in
section 2.6, be on the lookout for various forms of the asymptotic
limits of the variable x (assume 
 for all limits). For each
case, plot or consider how the x varies with time t.
α = 0 and ω to small values while γ is finite
ω = 1, α = 0, γ tending to small values.
c.    Use the notation formulation to describe (i.e., summarize) each of
these limits.

 
3
Some Basic Physical Principles
Law II: The change of motion [time derivative of momentum] is proportional to the motive force
impressed [external force], and is made in the direction of the right line in which that force is
impressed [co-linear, a vector quantity].
—Isaac Newton, Principia (1687)
In this chapter we summarize a few physical laws and principles that we
will invoke in examples. This material is readily available in undergraduate
physics texts and an introductory fluid mechanics book. The discussions
assume an introductory level understanding of Newton’s laws of motion,
conservation of energy, and definitions of basic quantities such as velocity
vectors, mass, and momentum. Some basic understanding of fluid flow
principles is useful, because fluid mechanics offers many of the examples of
dimensional analysis.
3.1    Newton’s Second Law
Newton’s second law in its basic form applies to a defined system. A
system is some predefined mass or collection of masses (e.g., an object or
objects). We will define the sum mass of the system as m. For arbitrary
density distributions within the system 
 we can express the scalar m
as a definite integral over the system volume(s)

Now, the momentum of the system is a sum of the differential momentum
of each infinitesimal part, and it is a vector quantity. For nonuniform
density and nonuniform velocities within the system 
 the system’s
momentum  can be expressed as a definite integral
For the special case where velocity (relative to some coordinate system)
is uniform throughout the system, we can write
Newton’s law is applicable to an inertial frame, and it relates the sum of
all external forces 
 acting on the system to its rate of change of
momentum:
Equations (3.1), (3.2), and (3.4) represent Newton’s second law and can
be applied to collections of deformable bodies and fluids, from planets to
dolphins and to a specific selection of a thousand raindrops. For the special
case where the velocity throughout the system is uniform (translational
motion of a rigid body) and mass constant (e.g., no relativistic effects), we
combine 3.3 and 3.4 as
where  is the acceleration of the system. Note that Newton’s second law is
a vector equation, so in three-dimensional space it implies three expressions
in 
terms 
of 
the 
components 
of 
 
and 
 
That 
is, 
 must be satisfied independently.
3.2    Conservation of Energy in Dynamics
The law of conservation of energy can be stated as follows:
In a closed system (a system isolated from the surroundings), the total energy of the system is
conserved.

This seemingly simple law has wide applications in dynamics,
thermodynamics, fluid flow, heat transfer, and so on. For our purposes, we
shall consider here only two types of energy that are applicable to simple
problems in dynamics. The scalar quantity kinetic energy (KE) of a system
of mass m moving with velocity vector  can be expressed in terms of the
square of the magnitude of this vector, 
Changes in KE can be expressed in terms of changes in 
The potential energy associated with a system is an energy associated
with its location within a conservative field. This location is measured
relative to some reference point. For a simple mass in a uniform
gravitational field, we can express the scalar potential energy PE as
where h is the height relative to the reference point. Changes in PE are
related to changes in h. For some system undergoing a change from state 1
to state 2, and where the primary form of energy conversion is between
kinetic and potential energy, we can write
or
where V is the magnitude of velocity.
3.3    Basic Concepts of Fluid Flow
A fluid is any substance that deforms continuously when subjected to a
shear stress (i.e., stress acting parallel to a substance). A fluid will deform
continuously regardless of the magnitude of the stress. Two points to
consider:
Liquids and gases are fluids.
The word “continuously” is important. A solid deforms under shear stress but, as a long
as the elastic limit of the solid is not exceeded, it does not continue to deform.

Viscosity is used to quantify the friction within a deforming fluid. In a
formal hypothesis, Newton defined it as “the resistance arising from the
want of lubricity in the parts of a fluid” (see Motte’s 1850 translation). It
provides a measure of stresses associated with gradients in the velocity of
the fluid. We here shall deal with typical fluids such as air, oil, and water,
which satisfy Newton’s law of fluids. For Newtonian fluids, the shear stress
τ (force per unit area) within a fluid (or at a fluid/solid interface) is directly
proportional to the local velocity field gradient. In a velocity field varying
in only one dimension y, we can express this physical law as follows
where ∝ indicates proportionality. The constant of proportionality is called
the dynamic viscosity μ. A Newtonian fluid is therefore defined as one that
obeys the following relationship:
Figure 3.1 helps explain this relation. To a very high degree of accuracy,
the fluid immediately touching a solid wall moves at the speed of the wall;
and this is called the “no-slip condition” (fluids do not “slip” relative to the
wall). The fluid moves near the wall by deforming. In this example, the
horizontal component of velocity u deforms only along the normal direction
y, so we write some arbitrary function u(y). The local stress is a force per
unit area in the planes parallel to the wall, and acts to resist the fluid
motion. The shear stress is analogous to friction between two solids
slipping with respect to one another (but here caused by continuous velocity
gradients). The dimensions of viscosity can be determined from the relation
above. For example,

Figure 3.1
A plot of an arbitrary velocity profile of a fluid moving near a solid wall (wall is at y = 0). The fluid
velocity at the wall is zero as per the no-slip condition. The velocity of the fluid varies continuously
as we get further from the wall. The gradients create stresses. The three horizontal arrows above the
abscissa are simply a visual aid showing variations in velocity.
The ratio of dynamic viscosity to density of a fluid often arises in
analyses, and it is called the kinematic viscosity. This ratio is given a
special symbol, ν, so that
which has dimensions of 
 (m2/s in SI units) and can be interpreted as
quantifying the diffusion of momentum (e.g., in a gas due to the thermal
motion of molecules) along the velocity gradient.
Last, although the details are beyond the scope of this book, the flux (the
flow) of momentum through some area A can be expressed in terms of two
velocities of the fluid: The local velocity relative to the area (e.g., the
velocity that determines flow rate crossing the surface), and the velocity
with respect to some inertial reference frame that determines the fluid’s
momentum and appears in Newton’s second law (see White, 2016). For a
one-dimensional flow at velocity V perpendicularly to some area A, we can
write
Indeed, changes of this quantity indicate reaction forces associated with
inertia.
In fluids, the grouping 
 is common. For example, students of fluid
mechanics use the Bernoulli equation valid for steady, incompressible fluid

flow (White, 2016) to estimate the pressure rise associated with frictionless
deceleration of a moving fluid stream. Think here of your cupped hand
catching the wind outside a speeding car. The pressure built up in your hand
is associated with a deceleration of the fluid. For an approximately
frictionless deceleration of the fluid of density ρ from velocity V to zero, the
rise in pressure can be quantified as the dynamic pressure and expressed as:
The force associated with this pressure rise (this stagnation of the fluid
upon) area A is then a force equal to the change in momentum of that
stream.
We see that it has the same dimensions of and a very similar formulation
to the flow of momentum, since these expressions are closely related.
Laminar versus turbulent fluid flow:   Last, we will distinguish between two
regimes of fluid motion. In laminar motion, the fluid moves within layers or
“laminae” and this is characterized by a steady, smooth motion of the fluid.
If driven so, the motion may be complex and even three dimensional, but it
is characterized by a low value of inertial forces (the characteristic inertia of
the flow, which has dimensions of force) compared to viscous forces. In
laminar flow the primary balance of forces is often between viscous and
pressure forces. A fluid flow is very much laminar and damped by effects of
viscosity if you remove the forcing function (e.g., applied pressure
difference or the motion of a solid body), and the fluid quickly comes to
rest due to viscous forces that dampen the motion. Laminar flows are
analogous to overdamped dynamic systems.
Turbulent fluid flow is characterized by a high ratio of inertial forces to
viscous forces. In turbulent flow, all forces can be important including
inertial forces, pressure forces, and viscous forces. For larger, low-viscosity
flows traveling at high velocity, viscous forces can become less important
relative to pressure and inertial forces. Turbulent flow is always chaotic,
fluctuating, and three-dimensional (3D). A flow is turbulent if, after sudden
removal of a forcing function, the fluid continues to deform and fluctuate in

unsteady 3D motions (e.g., shedding 3D vortices that interact with each
other).
Whether or not a certain fluid flow will be laminar or turbulent is related
to its Reynolds number, Re, where
V and L are the characteristic velocity and length scales of the flow and
Low Re implies laminar flow.
High Re implies inertial effects and, if sufficiently high, turbulent flow.
The exact value of the “transition” Re dividing laminar and turbulent
flow depends on the flow geometry. For example, a jet of fluid ejected into
an otherwise stagnant, large body of fluid has one characteristic transition
Re, while pipe flows have another.
We shall discuss Re in more detail throughout this book, and this will
help show its relation to dynamic pressure and Newton’s law of fluids.
3.4    Summary
Newton’s second law relates the external forces applied to a strictly specified system to
the rate of change of the momentum of that system:
System momentum is an instantaneous integral over each differential portion of the
system, described as
For the special cases where the velocity throughout the system is uniform (translational
motion of a rigid body) and mass constant:
Conservation of energy states that total energy is conserved for a closed system. In such
a system, changes in state describe where energy is converted from one type (or more
than one type) to another type (or more than one type).
In this book, we will restrict ourselves to simple cases of dynamics wherein we trade off
between kinetic and potential energy. For such systems undergoing a process between
states 1 and 2, we can write:

Fluids are defined in terms of the response of the material (continuous deformation) to
an applied shear stress. Liquids and gases are fluids.
Viscosity for a simple Newtonian fluid is defined as the ratio of shear stress to the shear
rate. In one-dimensional flow, shear rate is the spatial rate of change (slope) of velocity
expressed as 
To high degree of accuracy, fluid velocities at a solid surface equal the velocity of the
surface. This is known as the no-slip condition.
The rate of momentum carried by a fluid at velocity V and flowing perpendicularly
through some area A is 
 which has dimension of force.
Frictionless deceleration of an incompressible fluid results in a maximum increase of
pressure equal to 
 known as the dynamic pressure.
Reynolds number is used to quantify the relative importance of inertial forces and
viscous courses in a fluid flow problem: 
Low Re implies highly damped, laminar flows where viscous forces quickly dissipate
momentum. High Re implies underdamped flows where momentum persists.
Sufficiently high Re leads to highly chaotic, three-dimensional fluid motion known as
turbulence.
The Re separating laminar from turbulent flow is specific for each problem (each
geometry, flow angle, and so on).
Problems
3.1.    Consider the velocity at which a rock hits the ground from some
initial height 
 (and under constant acceleration g). Neglect air
resistance. Apply the first law of thermodynamics to derive an

expression for the velocity V as a function of height y. What is the
velocity when the rock hits the ground?
3.2.    Consider again the falling rock of the preceding problem. Again,
neglect air resistance.
a. Apply Newton’s second law to describe the motion of the
rock. Your description of the motion should include the
velocity versus time and the position versus time (the
functions V(t) and y(t), respectively). Hint: Apply Newton’s
second law to the rock and then integrate this expression in
time. The initial state is V(0) = 0 and 
b. Use the solution of part (a) to solve for the velocity V as a
function of position y. Check your answer by comparing it to
problem 1.
3.3.    Consider the following simple fluid flow problem. Two plates, each
with an area of 1 m2, are separated by a 1 mm gap filled with SAE 30
motor oil. The top plate is moving horizontally relative to the bottom
plate and at a constant velocity of 1 m/s. Neglect the effect of the air.
a. Given the plot of y versus velocity in plot, give the value of
the constant (and uniform) derivative 
 What are the
dimensions of this derivative?
b. Find the viscous force (in Newtons) that the top plate imposes
on the second plate. (Hint: First find the viscous stress on the
top surface of the bottom plate).

 
4
Dimensional Analysis: Motivation and Introduction
There could not be a language more universal … worthy of expressing the invariable relations of
natural objects. … It is coextensive with nature itself; it defines all the sensible relations, measures
the times, the spaces, the forces, the temperatures; this difficult science is formed slowly, but it
retains all the principles it has once acquired.
—Baron Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1822)
A system’s mass and weight are each fundamentally different from its
position. Acceleration is different from temperature. Momentum and kinetic
energy are each different from heat capacity. So we tend to think of each
variable as an independent, orthogonal quantity. We might mistakenly
believe that, to understand the system, we must take into account the
system’s dependence on each variable separately. Dimensional analysis
shows that this is a mistake that ignores the inherent ties between the
system’s variables. The variables are related in that they are derived from
common ingredients. They are created from the primordial ooze of their
primary dimensions. Consider that the dimensions of the vast majority of
physical quantities are just combinations of mass, length, time, absolute
temperature, and electric current.
The essence of dimensional analysis is this: We need not analyze the
system’s dependence on each of its salient variables, but rather on their
interaction. The primary dimensions of the problem allow us to find their
“blood ties” without further knowledge of the physics. We use these ties to

create groupings of a problem’s underlying variables, and these groupings
can offer a drastic reduction of complexity. The result is a set of natural
variables that are fewer and are independent of our choice of measurement
system.
There are many uses for dimensional analysis, but here we will
concentrate on demonstrating some of the most powerful. Our goals are to
apply dimensional analysis to
Present methodical ways of applying dimensional analysis
Explore methods of combining dimensional analysis with physical intuition and
experimental observations
Analyze new phenomena and form testable hypotheses
Design experiments to explore new phenomena
Gain insight into the essential physics of the problem
Obtain information from the fewest number of experiments, saving resources and time
Present experimental data as compactly and as usefully as possible
Demonstrate so-called collapse of experimental data
Estimate the proper scaling laws that relate a model to a prototype
Leverage results from older, similar systems to design new processes and machines
In the words of Ipsen (1960), our goal is to find the “natural variables,”
the nondimensional variables, from the “substantial variables” for physical
problems.
4.1    Geometric Similarity
We shall initially and for most examples discuss dimensional analyses as
applied to a single geometric shape at a time. That is, we will consider
variations of length, velocity, density, mass, and so on, but the variation of
length will typically be made so as to preserve the shape of the problem
(e.g., the shape of the body, flow field, and the like). Similarly, we will
preserve relative angles between velocities and objects (e.g., wind direction
relative to a wing).
The concept of fixing a problem’s shape and considering only changes to
the absolute length scales of the shape is called geometric similarity.
Idealized spheres are geometrically similar, while human beings are only
approximately geometrically similar. A scale plastic model of a Boeing 747

jet with a 1 cm wingspan is geometrically similar to the actual, full-scale jet
if it has the same shape. Once we “lock” into geometric similarity, we can
fully describe the geometry by a single length scale (e.g., the wingspan or
axial length).
Figure 4.1 shows two geometrically shaped airplanes: a 1:3 scaled-down
model and a full-scale prototype. They share the same length ratios in all
three directions (ideally including surface roughness). All angles are
preserved. If we consider them being subject to flow, then the relative flow
direction should be identical.
Figure 4.1
Model and prototype of an airplane. The model and the prototype are geometrically similar, so all
angles and length ratios are the same.
Geometric similarity is a good approach to learning about similarity.
Eventually, we will consider approximate similarity of shapes (as in our
examples of running animals or the splatter patterns of drops striking a
surface). Sometimes such deviations require some knowledge of the physics
of the problem to determine which aspects and/or lengths of the two
“approximately similar” bodies should be matched.
In subsequent chapters, we will revisit the concept of geometric
similarity together with kinematic and dynamic similarity. For now, we
shall just say that we use geometric similarity and an analysis of the
nondimensional parameters to ensure that we achieve dynamic similarity.
The latter is the condition that the nondimensional ratios of geometry,
velocities, and forces observed in the model are the same as the respective
ratios of the prototype. For example, such that the lift-to-drag ratio of the

model be the same as lift-to-drag ratio of the prototype. We will ensure
dynamic similarity by matching the nondimensional parameters of the
model with those of the prototype.
4.2    The Drawbacks of Brute Force Experimentation: We Need a Bigger Submarine
Before learning about the details, let us motivate our subject with an
example application. Imagine that you work for a small startup company
interested in designing submarines. At this point in the company’s
development, the basic shape of the submarine has been fixed (e.g., by
experience or tedious shape-optimization calculations). Before building a
full-scale prototype, however, the design and marketing folks would like to
explore how geometrically similar increases in scale (i.e., same shape, just
larger) will affect the drag. Note the drag and velocity of the submarine are
related to the power required to propel it (power dissipated by its motion is
equal to the product of drag force and velocity). So this question of size is
tied to the requirements of the mission, range, payload, required engine,
fuel source, customer satisfaction, safety, and so forth. The company might
want to find out if it should consider, for example, thrice the scale of the
submarine in order to fit three passengers versus one.
Figure 4.2 shows a drawing of the submarine shape we will consider. We
consider all geometrically similar versions of this shape, so that we can
specify all such submarines with a single length scale. We arbitrarily choose
its overall length b as shown.

Figure 4.2
A submarine of length b. We consider all geometrically similar submarines, and so we fully describe
the geometry with this length scale.
We then postulate that the key variables that determine the drag force 
of all submarines of this shape are as follows: length scale b, velocity V,
fluid density ρ, and fluid dynamic viscosity μ.
We wish to know the drag and hypothesize that the drag of this shape of
submarine when completely submerged is likely a function of four variables
as follows:
It is important to note that once we fix the shape of the submarine, the
single length scale b (here, its length) completely describes every aspect of
the geometry.
Brute Force Experimentation
First, we will describe a brute force method. We set out to find the
functional relation between 
 and the independent variables. We study 
vs. b vs. ρ vs. μ vs. V in all combinations. For simplicity, assume that the
dependence of FD on each variable for constant values of the other
variables requires at least 10 measurements. Hence, we will need on the
order of 
 measurement. Assuming 30 min per measurement and a
low estimate of $20 per experimental data point (given cost of people, water
or wind tunnel, building models, and such), we estimate

Total cost of study: $200,000.00, and
Total time: 2.5 yr at 8 h/day.
Using Dimensional Analysis
Using dimensional analysis (as described in the next chapter), we can vastly
reduce time and cost. First, dimensional analysis will point out that we have
asked the wrong questions regarding the variables. We do not need to know 
 vs. b,  vs. V, and so on. Instead, we only need to know a single, new
function F. This function describes the relationship between two new
nondimensional parameters, two new “natural” variables:
If we identified the correct variables, all of the information of the five
dimensional function 
 is compressed within the two
dimensional space described by the function F. To evaluate this new
function, we proceed as follows:
Choose any single fluid, hence a single ρ and a single μ; for example, we can choose
atmospheric air at room temperature
Build a small-scale submarine; say a 10 cm long, 3D printed plastic model
Measure 10 Vs for 10 
 (10 experiments) and plot these data in terms of the non-
dimensional variables associated with function F
Use these 10 points to estimate the shape of the function F
Our new estimate has the following cost:
Total cost of study: $200.00
Total time = 5 h
The process of getting from 
 to 
 is a simple
method we will describe in the next chapter. First, we will pause to consider
some further consequences.
4.3    Comments on the Submarine Example
First, a word of caution: If we missed an important variable in identifying
the independent variables of the originally hypothesized function f, then our
analysis fails. In dimensional analysis, an important missing variable has

dire consequences. We might find, for example, that some derived function
would have multiple values for a single “condition” (we will discuss this
further and analyze examples).
On the other hand, if we include a superfluous dependent variable in the
function f, we will find that f has little or no dependence on this variable for
our range of consideration—and this is a waste of experimental time and
cost. For example, if we consider adding the speed of sound c to function f
as follows
Dimensional analysis would yield
where 
 is known as the Mach number Ma. Ma is relevant when the
velocities approach the local speed of sound of the fluid. In analyzing a
submarine designed to operate at typical submarine conditions (e.g.,
velocities of at most a few tens of meters per second in water), we would
find that the drag term 
 is insensitive to the value of the ratio 
 if
the ratio 
 is held constant. Such an observation would require
substantially more experiments but the weak dependence on Ma would
eventually become clear. Consider that evaluation of the preceding three-
dimensional relation would require variations of 
 while holding 
constant and vice versa. However, we would eventually realize our mistake
but would have wasted time and money exploring the effect of the Mach
number on typical submarine drags.
4.4    Drag Coefficient as a Tool to Reduce Complexity
The latter submarine example helps motivate dimensional analysis and
reduction of complexity. Before we demonstrate how this is accomplished
(see chapter 5), it is worth exploring three additional applications. These
further emphasize the breadth of physics involved and the utility of
reducing the complexity of something like shape-specific drag from six to
two variables.
4.4.1   Effect of Streamlining

Recall that, in the submarine example, we derived a relation between two
nondimensional parameters. These two parameters appear so often in fluid
mechanics that they are given the following names:
The Reynolds number is a famous nondimensional parameter that we will
describe in more detail later. The “1/2” factor in the denominator of 
 is an
arbitrary, traditional tribute to Euler, who derived equations where dynamic
pressure 
 appears prominently (see section 3.3). Note also that the
function F is arbitrary, so we can just think of a modification of the function
hypothesized to include this “1/2” in the denominator. Note also that the
length squared in the drag coefficient definition is often replaced with a
specific area associated with the body in question. For example, for a
cylinder oriented with its axis perpendicular to the flow, the area is taken as
the product of diameter and cylinder length. For a wing in the shape of a
solid of extrusion (uniform cross-section in one dimension) the area is taken
as the so-called planform area of the wing. Judicious choices for the area in
the formulation of a drag coefficient will be discussed later in section 10.3.
Figure 4.3 demonstrates the degree to which drag coefficients are shape
dependent and the immense importance of streamlining to reduce drag.
Figure 4.3a shows a smooth, low-drag, symmetric airfoil (wing shape)
oriented directly into the flow (i.e., zero angle of attack). As a comparison,
Figure 4.3b shows a smooth cylinder drawn such that its diameter d is equal
to 110 times smaller than the airfoil’s chord length, c (the distance between
the leading and trailing edges of the airfoil). The airfoil shape is an accurate
rendering of a National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA)
airfoil number 63(3)-018. This symmetric shape is one of many airfoils
designed and studied by and for NACA. NACA was a U.S. agency that was
basically the predecessor of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). See the website airfoiltools.com for drag and lift
coefficient data for a large number of NACA airfoils as a function of angle
of attack (another non-dimensional parameter) and Reynolds number.

Figure 4.3
A comparison of two bodies illustrating the importance of streamlining on fluid drag. Drawing (a)
shows a cross-section of a smooth NACA 63(3)-018 airfoil at zero angle of attack. Here, the drag
coefficient is equal to 0.01 (at Re = 500,000) and quantified in terms of a projected area equal to the
product of chord length, c, and spanwise length, L. Drawing (b) shows a smooth cylinder subject
flow at the same velocity. Here the drag coefficient is equal to 1.1 and is quantified in terms of the
product of diameter and spanswise length, dL. The relative scale of the two figures is chosen such
that the ratio of the airfoil chord length to the cylinder diameter is 110. At this scale, the two bodies
would have the same absolute value of drag (e.g., measured in dimension of force) when subject to
the same fluid velocity and fluid type.
The drag coefficient of this airfoil is 0.01 at a Reynolds number of 
 As indicated in the figure, the drag coefficient is based
on the planform area defined as the product of the chord length and a span L
(into the page). Subject to the same fluid velocity and fluid type, the
characteristic Reynolds number of the cylinder would be 
since 
 At this Reynolds number, the cylinder’s drag coefficient is
about 1.1 (Schlichting and Gersten, 2000). Now the cylinder’s drag
coefficient is defined in terms of the projected area dL. Hence, the figure
was created so that each body has the same product of drag coefficient and
characteristic area, that is, 
 For the relative scale drawn,
the two bodies will exhibit the same value of drag (e.g., in Newtons) when
subjected to flows of the same fluid at equal velocities. The influence of
streamlining is profound. Consider that the airfoil has a cross-section that is
1,700 times larger than that of the cylinder.
4.4.2   Drag on a Smooth Sphere: A First Example of Data Collapse
One important reason to pursue dimensional analysis is to organize and
rationalize a large amount of experimental data. Taking experimental data
obtained by varying multiple parameters and showing how the complexity
(dimensionality) of the data is reduced when we plot on scaled coordinates
is called “data collapse.”

Consider the drag on a sphere with a smooth surface. Here, the concept
of geometric similarity is very easy to apply. All smooth spheres are
geometrically similar to each other and are characterized by a single
dimension, their diameter d. We postulate that the key variables associated
with determining the force of drag  on the sphere. We choose diameter d,
velocity V, fluid density ρ, and fluid dynamic viscosity μ. These are
basically the same variables we chose for geometrically similar submarines
earlier (with diameter of sphere d replacing length b of submarine). Again,
dimensional analysis leads to
Again, consider how much more compact is 
 than 
—two versus five variables, a significant reduction in
complexity. Figure 4.4 helps to visualize the rich and various type of
information incorporated within the more elegant function 
 Figure
4.4a shows values of dimensional drag (in Newtons) versus velocity (in
m/s) for a variety of sphere diameters and for flows in water, SAE motor
oil, mercury, and air at room temperature and water at 90°C. These values
are predictions obtained using expression given by Almedeij (2008) for
drag on smooth spheres. Almedeij (2008) obtained the expression (equation
9 of that reference) by curve fitting a large number of published
experimental data, and the data he analyzed were obtained by varying
sphere diameters, velocities, fluid density, and fluid viscosity and
measuring drag. Hence, these points are representative of experiments we
could perform and the range of variation we would observe in changing all
four of the independent parameters. Consider that we can measure drag and
velocity to within about 5% uncertainty (see Almedeij, 2008).

Figure 4.4
Collapse of drag values for smooth spheres. (a) Drag versus velocity for spheres of three diameters
and three fluids: water, mercury, and air. The plotted points are values calculated from an analytical
expression determined by Almedeij (2008) by fitting a wide variety of experimental data. Properties
taken at 20°C unless indicated. (b) The same values of part (a) are here plotted as a nondimensional
drag coefficient 
 versus a nondimensional Reynolds number, Re. The legend applies to both (a) and
(b) and shows wide variation of parameters. The three fluids and two temperatures represent
variations of density and dynamic viscosity. In the nondimensionalized space, the values collapse to a
single curve. This is an example of data collapse obtained by reducing the number of variables in a
problem.
Next, figure 4.4b shows a dramatic collapse of the exact same data when
it is plotted in coordinates of 
 vs. Re. The seemingly complex,
multidimensional behavior represented in part (a) collapses onto a single

curve. This is an important simplification of complexity, and data collapse
is a distinct benefit of dimensional analysis.
Consider the challenges with the wide variety of experiments required to
obtain such data. The data points cover a Re range of 0.2 to 2E6, or 7 orders
of magnitude. The fluid mechanics community has explored the relation 
 for over 9 orders of magnitude changes in Re. For values of Re
below about unity, Almedeij (2008) used an exact analytical solution known
as Stokes solution, given by 
 Duan (2015) shows similar data
from seven experimental studies spanning decades of research and multiple
laboratories in several countries (and a collapse of the experimental data
onto a single curve). The curve of figure 4.4b has a complex shape, and
there is no accurate theory starting from first principles for Re greater than
about 5.
This collapse of data for spheres of all sizes in various fluids and wide
ranges of velocity can also be termed a similarity in the drag with a
similarity relation expressed as 
 In other words, we can interpret
curves of figure 4.4a as representing an n = 5 variable solution in the five-
variable space of F, d, V, ρ, and μ. Dimensional analysis shows these five
variables can be projected onto only n = 2 variables: 
 and Re.
4.4.3   Drag and Terminal Velocity of a Skydiver
As a third example of the use and application of a drag coefficient, consider
the physics associated with a skydiver. An anecdotal illustration of the
relevant dynamics appears in figure 4.5, which shows my body suspended
by drag force within a vertical wind tunnel with an air velocity of about 140
mph (63 m/s).

Figure 4.5
The drag force on a body is sufficient to cancel out the force of gravity. My body (on the right) is
suspended in this “indoor skydiving” vertical wind tunnel in Fremont, CA (see http://sfbay.iflyworld
.com).
The analogous problem of a human falling through the air is shown
schematically in figure 4.6. The figure shows a free-body diagram of a
skydiver in free fall. We define a coordinate system with positive y-
direction and positive forces upward. We use Newton’s second law to relate
the net forces on the body to its acceleration, the vertical y-component of
which is

Figure 4.6
Free-body diagram of a skydiver in free fall at terminal velocity. We sum the forces acting about the
centroid of the body. For zero acceleration, the drag force equals weight.
where  is the acceleration positive acceleration and g is the positive local
value of gravitational acceleration. Before terminal velocity is achieved, 
will be a nonnegligible, negative value (acceleration downward), so
equation (4.1) becomes
In the very early stages,  is initially small and the sum 
 is nearly
zero (  is −g). To relate to a drag coefficient, we simply and compactly cast
the equation in terms of a drag coefficient. From the discussion of section
4.3, we know the drag force function can be characterized as
where
Here  is the characteristic length scale for all geometrically similar
bodies (in this spread-eagle configuration and falling belly down).

Substituting equation (4.4b) into (4.2) and substituting 
 where V is
the vertical velocity:
Since drag scales with the square of velocity, equation (4.5) is a nonlinear
ordinary differential equation (ODE) and constitutes an initial value
problem. The solution of this equation is given as a problem at the end of
this chapter. For now, consider the steady state solution of equation (4.5),
which describes the terminal velocity as
How do we estimate the drag coefficient? One way is to take typical
values of bluff bodies and then match the projected area of the two bodies
(which we will discuss in chapter 10). Here, we will leverage the data of
Colino et al. (2014), who obtained estimate measurements of drag
coefficients for Felix Baumgartner’s record-breaking free-fall jump in a
space suit from a balloon at an altitude of 40 km (very roughly halfway to
space). The first stage of Baumgartner’s initial drop was supersonic (for
which our drag analysis is not applicable, since we neglected
compressibility effects of the air flow and Mach number). For the subsonic
(lower altitude) portion of his jump, Colino estimates 
 given our
definition of drag coefficient and with Baumgartner in the typical (and
stable) belly-down, back slightly arched position of figures 4.5 and 4.6.
Interestingly, Colino’s data showed the drag coefficient varies between
about 1.0 and 1.1 during the last (low altitude) stages of the fall, helping to
validate the assumption of approximately constant drag coefficient. They
also provide a projected area estimate of about 0.25 m2 (including
Baumgarner’s spacesuit). Taking air density as 1.2 kgm−3 (for the portion
near sea level) and a skydiver of 72 kg mass, we can estimate v ≈ 68 m/s =
150 mph.
4.5    Summary

Geometric similarity considers a family of problems associated with a single specified
shape but where absolute scale is allowed to vary. Geometric similarity includes
preserving relative angles between velocities and objects (e.g., wind direction relative to
a wing).
Once we assume geometric similarity, the entire geometry can be fully described by
specifying the value of a single dimension.
In dimensional analysis, we hypothesize a functional dependence of a variable of
interest. We then seek to reduce the complexity of the problem by combining
dimensional variables into nondimensional variables.
The nondimensional variables of a problem reduce the number of variables to consider.
This reduction of variables implies a reduction in complexity. In real systems, this
reduction in complexity (without sacrificing accuracy) can result in vast savings of cost
and time.
Nondimensional variables are the “natural” variables of the problem, capturing all of the
underlying physics with a lower number of quantities (a lower dimensional space).
Fluid flow drag on an immersed smooth body (of a specific geometry) is a good example
of dimensional analysis that results in reduction of five variables into two
nondimensional variables and a functional dependence as follows:
This compact, two-dimensional function (a single curve on a single plot),
contains all of the intricate physics and underlying relationships among
the variables F, b, V, ρ, and μ.
We briefly reviewed several geometries to which we can apply (different) functions of
the form 
 and explored three examples of the ramifications and use of
reducing the complexity of the drag problem.
Problems
4.1.    Consider the nondimensional data of figure 4.4 for the drag of
smooth spheres expressed as a drag coefficient as a function of a
Reynolds number based on sphere diameter d: 
 Consider
the drag for a smooth sphere of diameter d = 1 cm and traveling at a
constant V = 2 m/s in water at room temperature. Find the value of
drag in Newtons. For these and other problems, you may find useful
the thermophysical fluid property data tabulated in appendix A. Hint:
First evaluate Reynolds number 
4.2.    Two geometrically similar submarines are tested in water. One is a
small model with a length scale b that is 1/10th of the corresponding

dimension of the full-sized prototype.
a.  The volume of the submarine of the small submarine is equal to 
 What is the volume of the large submarine?
b.  How much faster does the small submarine have to travel for it to
have the same Reynolds number as the larger one? Consider the
case where they travel through the same fluid (e.g., water) at the
same temperature.
4.3.    Consider now a more interesting use of figure 4.4b. Given ρ and μ of
water at room temperature, use only figure 4.4b to estimate the
diameter d of a smooth sphere that experiences a 100 N drag force
while traveling at 2 m/s. Hint: This estimate requires an iterative
solution, since there is no invertible function/fit to the curve in the
figure. Start by guessing a value for d, then check your answer.
4.4.    Solve for the dynamics as a skydiver accelerates and then reaches
terminal velocity. Recall from section 4.4.3, we can write an ODE for
these dynamics of the form:
Solve this equation numerically using a simple discretization as
follows. Divide the (independent variable) time into small increments
Δ t (say 0.2 s intervals). To this end, write a small computer program
to estimate the changes in velocity. Here are some notes on perhaps
the simplest algorithm to get you started:
v(0) = 0 (initial velocity)
t(0) = 0 (time = 0)
N = 800 (total time)
Δ t = 0.2 (0.2 s intervals)
for i = 1: N
end

This numerical solution method is known as Euler’s explicit time
advancement.

 
5
Dimensional Analysis Techniques
The square of the time taken by any planet to make a complete orbit is proportional to the cube of
its mean distance from the sun.
—Kepler’s third law (1619)
In this chapter, we first propose a set of rules useful in the execution of
dimensional analyses of physical processes. These rules are part of a
collection of rules that I have developed to help guide the selection of
which variables to include and which to exclude. The proposed rules help
hypothesize a function f of the dimensional variables form:
We will then use dimensional analysis to manipulate the variables of such a
function to derive a function F in terms of relevant nondimensional
variables
We shall see that the list A, B, C, … is necessarily shorter than a, b, c, …
and so this will reduce the number of variables of the problem and help us
seek elegant solutions.
In the second half of this chapter, we further describe dimensional
analysis by analyzing some example problems and applying the
aforementioned rules.

5.1    Rules of Thumb for Initial Hypothesized Function: What to Include or Exclude?
A goal of this text is to formalize the process of combining physical
intuition and experimental observations with dimensional analysis. To this
end, I have assembled a collection of useful rules of thumb that help
structure such a hybrid analysis. The first five of these rules are presented in
this section, and these deal with the most difficult and dangerous step of
dimensional analysis: the initial selection of which variables to include and
which to exclude. In chapter 6, we will propose and discuss six additional
rules around simplifications of and approximations associated with
functions of nondimensional variables. A twelfth rule will be presented in
chapter 11 (and table 11.1 summarizes the twelve rules). We shall refer to
these rules as we apply them in the examples presented in this book.
The process of selecting variables for dimensional analysis takes the
most experience. If you include too many variables, then the analysis yields
less insight and can lead to significantly wasted time on experiments. In the
next few chapters, we will present several examples of such
overspecification. More importantly, missing one or more important
variable in dimensional analysis is catastrophic. As we shall see, this can
lead to unpredictable variations in data and poor understanding of the
physics. As we shall also see, one ramification of excluding an important
variable is that data cannot be “collapsed,” as we saw in section 4.4.2. A
second ramification is that we will observe (in experiments) variations in
the value of a function even when the independent variables are held
constant.
We begin with the first five proposed rules, which concern the selection
of dimensional variables in the problem. These initial five rules are
designated rules D1, D2, and so forth, where the “D” denotes that they
apply primarily to functions of dimensional variables.
5.1.1   Rule D1: Formulate in Terms of Known Algebraic Combinations
If a variable is known to appear in the problem exclusively within a certain
algebraic combination, then you may hypothesize the combination as an
independent variable. For example, consider some function of dimensional
parameters as follows:

If, for example, y and z have the same dimension, and you have good reason
to believe they will occur only as a difference (and never independently),
then you might consider modifying the hypothesis as follows:
If you suspect that the formulation will involve both differences and
absolute value of y and z, then write
and manipulate the dimensional analysis such that the difference (y − z)
appears only in nondimensional terms where it is important and the
parameter y appears in terms where it is important.
As an example, consider a simple analysis of the static displacement on a
vertical linear spring (spring constant k with dimension of force per length).
The spring is compressed vertically by a person holding a bucket of water.
The human and bucket masses are 
 and 
 respectively. We know the
relevant dimension will be displacement x relative to the initial location of
the end of the spring 
 Given our experience with similar simple problems,
it would be overly naïve to express the hypothesized function as follows:
Instead, we might propose the following, which reduces the number of
variables by two:
If, for example, you are also certain that the variable will appear only as the
product 
 then you can start with
A common example of such simplification is steady state heat transfer
problems based on an imposed temperature difference. The heat transfer
rate in such problems often scales as a temperature difference 
 and not
as absolute temperature.
5.1.2   Rule D2: Exclude a Variable Expressible as a Function of the Others
To decide whether to exclude a variable, it is useful to apply the following
test: Exclude a variable if you can express it as a function of the others.

Consider the following hypothesized function of dependent (dimensional)
variable r:
If by analysis or experimental observations (or even intuition) we can argue
that parameter z is itself a function of only x and y 
 then we
can exclude z from our analysis and consider only
We can do this even if the form of the function is not known. Note that this
rule is equivalent to the “nested functions” concept described earlier in
section 2.4.2.
5.1.3   Rule D3: Keep Dimensional Constants but Absorb Nondimensional Constants
In hypothesizing independent variables, you must include and retain
physical constants that have units. Consider Albert Einstein’s famous
relation between energy E, mass m, and the speed of light in a vacuum c:
We can write this as
However, just because the speed of light in a vacuum is a universal constant
does not mean we can write or analyze the following:
The dimensional constant is fundamental to the relation. Energy cannot
be formulated without both length and time dimensions. This is true for all
constants with dimensions including universal constants such as Newton’s
gravitational constant, Boltzmann’s constant, the charge of an electron, the
electric permittivity of free space, Planck’s constant, and so on.
On the other hand, we are free to exclude constants that are
dimensionless, such as π or the exponent of unity. The latter dimensionless
constants can be absorbed into the definition of the function you are
exploring. Consider the equation for the area of a circle in terms of its
radius r,

We can appropriately and without loss of generality write this as simply
since both π and the squaring of r are part of the meaning of f.
5.1.4   Rule D4: Exclude Any Variable That Involves a Unique Dimension (No Blood
from a Rock)
As per section 2.1 (and table 2.1), we consider describing variables in terms
of basic dimensions; and in this book we consider L, T, M, θ, and I for
dimensions of length, time, mass, temperature, and electric current,
respectively. If one or more of these dimensions appear in just one variable
(and not in others), then you may exclude that variable. Consider the
following hypothesized function in terms of acceleration, velocity, length,
and mass density
If this list of variables is indeed sufficient to describe the phenomena, then
we can immediately strike z from the list, since it is the only variable with
dimension of mass. Consider that z cannot be made nondimensional except
by dividing by itself. Division by itself yields unity, a dimensionless
constant that can, by rule D3, be immediately be absorbed into the function
definition. Hence, we can conclude that s must be described by
5.1.5   Rule D5: If Invoked, Consistently Leverage Geometric Similarity
If you are applying geometric similarity, then all geometrical aspects of all
scales of that shape are described by a single length scale. Hence, it is not
appropriate to include other purely geometric descriptions. Consider some
variable r as a function of a shape length s, area A, and volume V, as in
We should instead write 
 
 or 
 since all aspects of the
shape are derivable from any one of s, A, or V. Consider, for example, that
any area can be expressed as 
 where c is a dimensionless constant for
the selected shape. By rules D2 and D3, we can exclude A if we include s
(and vice versa).

As a second example, including both density ρ and geometric length s
precludes including a system mass m since 
 where K is a
dimensionless constant. Consistent with rules D2 and D3, this becomes
superfluous under geometric similarity.
One important note on geometric similarity particularly relevant to many
fluid mechanics problems is the effect of surface roughness. The roughness
element length scale ε (i.e., the characteristic height of small “bumps” that
characterize a body’s surface roughness) can introduce a second important
length scale to fully characterize the geometry of the body. This
introduction then results in an additional nondimensional parameter known
as the relative surface roughness, 
 where d is the (macroscopic) length
scale used to characterize the absolute scale of the shape. This issue is
discussed in more detail in chapter 8 (relative roughness in pipe flow
problems) and chapter 10 (relative roughness in sphere drag coefficients).
5.2    Ipsen’s Method: A Step-by-Step Process
In this book, I will emphasize Ipsen’s method for dimensional analysis. The
method is due to David Carl Ipsen (1960), who proposed a step-by-step
method that is both simple and intuitive. The purpose of Ipsen’s method is
to derive a functional relationship in terms of nondimensional groups of
variables. In chapter 8, we will discuss the more commonly taught method
of the Buckingham Pi theorem and contrast it to Ipsen’s method.
Ipsen’s method is an elegant set of steps (see Ipsen, 1960, and White,
2016). In the following, I describe each step and then offers tips as to its
application. I will later explain Ipsen’s method more clearly using
examples.
As with any dimensional analysis, identify the n key variables associated with the
problem.
Comment: Again, this is the most difficult step and takes the most experience. Consider
carefully the rules at the beginning of this chapter.
Identify all fundamental/primary dimensions within the chosen n variables (e.g., M, L,
T). The number of these is p.
Hypothesize some function of interest. To do so, select a dependent variable and 
independent variables. Express the primary dimensions for each variable.
Brief example: For some drag force F of a specifically shaped body as a dependent variable, we
might choose for independent variables a length scale b, velocity V, fluid density ρ, and viscosity
μ. In this case, we write here

We here assume geometric similarity (e.g., we consider only smooth bodies of the same shape,
just different absolute scales) so we need a single length scale to describe all geometric aspects.
Including both macroscopic shape and a relative surface roughness would require two length
scales.
A good (but not always correct) guess for the number of nondimensional parameters we
will produce is n − p.
Choose a primary dimension to eliminate from the formulation. We shall call this the
current “chosen dimension.”
Choose a variable containing this primary dimension, and call this the current “chosen
variable.” This should not be a variable you have chosen in a previous step 5, nor any
variable that will reintroduce a dimension you have already eliminated (see the comment
to step 8). You can also choose a variable or group of variables that is “simple to use” or
that will arrange the terms in a manner you prefer.
Comment: For example, say you choose M (mass) in step 5, then consider density as mass
appears to the first power and is “easy to use.” Dividing by density “removes” mass from the
dimensions of the variable.
In this step, you will operate only on the remaining variables of the function, which
contain the chosen dimension from step 5. For each remaining variable, raise the chosen
variable (or group of variables) to some power m. Choose m such that multiplying or
dividing each remaining variable by the chosen variable raised to power m will eliminate
(cancel) the chosen dimension. For each of the remaining variables that contains the
chosen dimension, choose a new value of m and multiple or divide as needed so as to
cancel the chosen primary dimension. Do nothing with variables that do not contain the
dimension chosen in step 5. (Note that leaving these variables alone is equivalent to a
multiplication with the chose variable raised to the m = 0 power). When you complete
this step, the chosen dimension should not appear in the parameters of a newly derived
function.1
Comment: If the chosen variable (or group of variables) is identical to one of the remaining
variables, choose 
 then divide the variable into itself (equivalently, choose 
 and
multiply). This operation yields unity. Unity is a pure number (exactly equal to the number one),
and so this division eliminates the variable. It is now a dimensionless constant and, consistent
with the aforementioned rule D3, it can be absorbed into the definition of the new function
produced.
Choose a new primary dimension. Go to step 6 until you eliminate all primary
dimensions.
Comment: Again, once you begin, you can use newly created groups for your choice in step 6 to
eliminate primary dimensions. For example, you might choose a “group” in the form of a ratio of
length and velocity of the form b/V (which has dimension of time T) to eliminate time. Choosing
the simplest available group will save algebra and can help you guide which variables end up
grouped with others.
In some cases, a poor choice in subsequent step 6s will “revive” a dimension you had
previously eliminated. For example, say you have eliminated the dimension of time (e.g., using a
frequency) in a previous step 7. If in a subsequent step 6 you choose velocity V to eliminate
length, then division by velocity reintroduces time into the problem. You can avoid this by using
groupings with the simplest dimensions. For example, given a choice, eliminate time with a

previously identified ratio of the form b/V and not with V. Otherwise stated, choose variables for
subsequent step 6s that do not contain the dimension of previous step 5s. It may sound
confusing, but it will become clear with a little practice, and an example of this principle is
discussed in detail in section 5.4.
5.3    Submarine Example Revisited
Let us again consider again the earlier submarine example, where we listed
without derivation the nondimensional groups:
Let’s apply our eight steps of Ipsen’s method.
1. Identify key variables: F, b, V, ρ, μ.
2. List primary dimensions M, L, T.
3. Hypothesize function of interest
4. Guess 
 nondimensional parameters.
5. Choose M.
6–8. Choose ρ to eliminate M, multiply or divided chosen variable ρ as
needed to the relevant remaining variables, which include
dimension M.
a.  
b.  Choose V to eliminate T.
c.  Choose b to eliminate L.

We find two nondimensional groups. As we shall discuss when we
present rule ND1 in the next chapter, we can take the inverse of the
argument of G and absorb this mathematical operation (inversion) into the
definition of a new unknown function so that:
where
The physical interpretation of these groups are as follows. 
 is the drag
force normalized by a product of twice the dynamic pressure, 
 and some
area expressed as b2. The Reynolds number is a measure of the inertial
forces in the fluid flow divided by the viscous forces. For example, consider
From equation (3.10) and its associated discussion, we recognize also
that 
 is momentum flow through an area (changes of which imply
inertial effects). The term 
 is a linearization of a one-dimensional
viscous stress 
 (see section 3.3).
5.4    An Inelegant Application of Ipsen’s Method
Briefly, consider a less successful application of Ipsen’s method, where we
ignore the comment to step 8. Consider again steps 6–8 for the latter
problem of drag force. Say we begin with a reasonable choice of
eliminating dimension L using length b:
1–4.  Same as above.

    5.  Choose to eliminate L.
6–8.  
a.  Choose b to eliminate L.
Now, we ignore the comment in step 8 and do not choose the simplest
grouping to remove the next dimension M. Instead, we choose density
(which contains length):
b.  Choose ρ to eliminate M.
Our poor choice has brought length L back into the problem! We can
recover by thereafter adhering to our rule of using the current simplest
available variable.
c.  Choose b to eliminate L.
d.  Choose 
 to eliminate T.
Ipsen’s method can be applied skillfully to both reduce algebraic steps
and guide the result.
5.5    Time for a Stone to Drop: Experimental Closure and Collapse of Data
We begin gently with a simple problem: the time for a stone to fall from
some height, as depicted in figure 5.1. We purposely consider a case where
we know the solution to the dynamics, but then pretend that we do not

know the solution to see how far dimensional analysis will take us. We will
also use this example to demonstrate the following two principles:
Dimensional analysis can be supplemented by experiments to find
the solution of the problem without knowledge of the equations that
govern the underlying dynamics.
Dimensional analysis collapses experimental data and enables us to
present data in a simple compact form using a minimum of plots.
Figure 5.1
Simple dynamics problem of dropping a stone of mass m over a distance 
 Neglecting drag, we
assume constant acceleration g.
First, let us remind ourselves of the known, underlying solution.
Neglecting drag, the time  for the stone to accelerate from rest and drop
from initial height  above the surface of Earth can be obtained from two
integrations in time of Newton’s second law for uniform and constant
acceleration:

We leave the derivation of this equation as an exercise to the reader. We can
solve this for the time for the rock to drop to Earth’s surface by setting the
function y(t) equal to zero and inverting the expression as
Next, we pretend that we do not know the solution and turn to
dimensional analysis. First, we might hypothesize that the relevant variables
are as follows:
Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
time for a stone to fall (the dependent
variable)
T
h
initial height of the stone
L
g
acceleration of Earth’s gravity (near
surface)
LT−2
m
mass of stone
M
We here purposely include a naïve selection of mass. Not knowing enough
about the kinematics of falling bodies, we might indeed choose mass.
Following Ipsen’s method, this selection of variables yields the following
hypothesized function and primary dimensions of each variable:
Immediately, dimensional analysis provides us with a powerful insight.
Assuming the list has at least as many variables as needed, we see that only
a single variable has dimension of mass M. How can this be? We must
conclude that mass cannot be relevant to the problem. Consider the
proposition of dimensional analysis: that we should be able to reduce the
functional expression into a set of nondimensional groups. How are we to
“reduce” mass dimension M? Only by dividing mass m by itself, which
yields unity—a dimensionless constant. We conclude that the other
variables cannot be a function of mass, and mass cannot appear in the final
dimensionless groups as per rule D4.
In light of this, we revise our hypothesis as follows:

Let’s then apply Ipsen’s method. Choose to eliminate L, using h.
Choose  to eliminate T.
Now, a function that is always equal to a constant (here unity) must itself
depend on a constant. We will describe this idea specifically as part of rule
ND1, which we shall present in the next chapter. Hence, 
 must itself be
a constant, so 
 where  is an unknown (dimensionless) constant.
We note that this is clearly as far as dimensional analysis alone can take us.
Dimensional analysis can in no way help us estimate or evaluate this
constant.
5.5.1   Supplementing Dimensional Analysis with Experiments
Next, let us turn to supplementing dimensional analysis with experimental
observations. Figure 5.2 shows experimental data I obtained by repeatedly
dropping a 7.6 cm diameter ball.2 The data of figure 5.2a are raw y-location
measurements obtained by me via quantitative analysis of images of ball
drops from heights of  = 2.26, 1.68, 1.12, 0.56, and 0.28 m, as shown in
figure 5.2a. Briefly, the ball was dropped three times from each height, and
images were quantitatively analyzed using a custom Matlab (Mathworks)
script that automatically identified and tracked ball image centroids. Figure
5.2a shows raw experimental data of 365 successfully identified and tracked
ball image locations, y, as a function of time, t, for the 15 experiments. The
fairly high degree of spatial and temporal resolution obtained from 59
images per second data are a bit of overkill for our purposes, but the data
helps us visualize the parabolic dependence (on time) that was predicted by
dimensional analysis. The shapes of the curves also hint at the underlying
similarity in the data (note how the first ~0.25 s of each curve has the same
curvature and final slope).

Figure 5.2
Experimental data for a falling body. The model “rock” for these data was a 7.6 cm ball tracked using
automated image processing of videos obtained at 60 frames per second. (a) Each drop height was
repeated three times, and the main plot shows raw experimental data of tracked and quantified
centroids for ball images dropped from the five heights indicated by the labels. The inset shows 15
dimensional measured total drop times for the 15 experiments. (b) shows a collapse of the same
experimental data of the inset of (a). The collapse of data is achieved by plotting the measurements in
terms of the dimensionless parameter derived using dimensional analysis, 
 as a function
dimensional initial height 
 For reference, the exact theoretical value of this parameter (1/2) is
shown as a dashed gray line.
The type of data we need to supplement our dimensional analysis is
shown in the inset to figure 5.2a. The inset plot shows the measured total
drop time  as a function of initial height  for the 15 drops from five initial

heights. Collectively, all of the dimensional data of figure 5.2 demonstrates
the wide scatter of drop heights versus time for the problem.
Figure 5.2b helps show the utility and power of dimensional analysis.
Plotted are again the raw experimental data for total drop times and initial
heights (as per our initial analysis) but here in terms of the dimensionless
quantity that we derived from dimensional analysis, 
 Note that there is
a single value of this quantity for all such drops (i.e., for all heights). For
reference, we here plot this quantity as a function of the dimensional drop
height 
 on the abscissa. The uncertainty bars in figure 5.2b reflect an
uncertainty on the measured dimensionless quantity 
 and were
estimated using a propagation of error analysis (see footnote to section
5.5.1). The greater uncertainty in 
 for small drop heights is due to the
greater relative uncertainty associated with small-displacement, short-time
drops. Taking a simple arithmetic average of the value of 
 for the nine
drops from the three largest (most accurate) height experiments, we obtain a
measurement for the constant predicted by dimensional analysis 
The uncertainty bounds in this estimate of  were calculated using a student
t distribution for eight degrees of freedom (nine drops of the ball) and 95%
confidence intervals. Compare this approximate result obtained by
analyzing measurements of our derived nondimensional quantity 
 to
the exact solution: From equation (5.2), we see that
The estimate obtained from experiments, 
 is within 2% of the
expected solution.
The physical process we explored here is rather simple and its solution
known. However, our approach is a good example of how to combine
dimensional analysis and experimental observations to complete (i.e., close)
the analysis and, at least in this case, obtain a highly accurate solution. The
collapse of data also shows the value of dimensional analysis in presenting
data in a collapsed form comparable across bodies, realizations, observers,
absolute scales, planets, and so forth provided the accuracy of the

assumptions hold. In this case, the primary assumptions were approximately
constant and uniform acceleration and negligible effects of drag.
5.5.2   A Note on Guiding the Nondimensional Parameters
Last, we note that, if we prefer, we can avoid the slightly pesky format
derived earlier where a hypothesized function as equal to unity; namely, 
 Recall from our description of Ipsen’s method that we are free
to choose from among newly derived groupings to eliminate remaining
dimensions and can then raise these to some power m. Hence, starting from
the penultimate step in Ipsen’s method,
We can choose the ratio 
 to eliminate T, hence
where this constant is simply 
 and the result is equivalent to the one
above.
5.6    From Stones and Earth to Planets and Stars
Consider an extension of the problem of section 5.4. We wish to quantify
the time scale in terms of Newton’s gravitational constant. Here, recall the
advice presented in section 5.1 that dimensional analysis must necessarily
include universal constants that have dimensions. We hypothesize the
following:

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
time for a stone to fall (the dependent
variable)
T
h
initial height of the stone
L
r
distance between stone and Earth
center
L
m
mass of stone
M
M
mass of the Earth
M
G
Gravitational constant
L3M−1T−2
where r is now some distance between the center of the stone of mass m and
the Earth of mass M. G is Newton’s universal gravity constant, which has
derived units of
Our hypothesized function is then
By rule D2 we exclude the surface gravitational acceleration, since it is
determined from the other variables (we will expand on this further in
section 5.6). Also, from rule D3, we must keep the dimensional constant G
in the problem. Note that Newton’s law of gravitation is formulated in terms
of the masses of two bodies and the relative distance of their centers (and
not their shapes). Hence, the shapes of the bodies is not reflected in the
formulation, only the distances between “point masses.”
So, using Earth’s mass M to eliminate primary dimension M:
Using r to eliminate L

Using  to eliminate T,
This gives us three nondimensional groups. Our insight is not as simple as
in the previous section, but the analysis is now applicable to gravitational
interaction between any two bodies in space, including celestial bodies. For
example, consider the problem of the previous section but change “stone”
to “planet” (or satellite) and “Earth” to “star.” Here we can interpret time 
as a period (a cycle time, such as an orbit). In this celestial picture, the
distances are so great, and the mass difference are so large, that we can
simplify the problem with some physical insight.
Physical insight:   We consider the mass M to be so much more massive
than m (i.e., the star so much larger than the planet) that we can assume the
dimensionless parameter 
 is vanishingly small. Similarly, we assume
the center-to-center distances are vast, so that 
 As we discussed
earlier in the chapter, this does not necessarily ensure that we can discard
these variables. However, in this case, we can leverage our physical insight
to conclude that the time scale  in such a limit will indeed be governed
solely by G, the mass of the large body, and the characteristic distance
between the centers of the small and large bodies r. Note also the third
parameter 
 remains finite as the other terms vanish. Given these
insights, we hypothesize
which implies (from rule ND1; see chapter 6) that
Rearranging this, we derive a formulation of Kepler (circa 1610):
Interestingly, we derive Kepler’s third law describing the orbital period 
of a satellite around a much larger celestial body. Since our analysis has

included only a single length scale r and no other geometric description, we
might guess (correctly) that our result applies to circular orbits of bodies
around relatively heavy bodies.
In Kepler’s law, r turns out to be the semimajor axis of the elliptical orbit
(the arithmetic average of the minimum and maximum distances between
the two bodies). Dimensional analysis does not yield the latter definition of
r, but it does suggest that there is such a distance to describe the period.
Figure 5.3a shows a plot the semimajor axis of the orbits of planets in our
solar system as a function of orbital period (Earth is by definition 
The diameter of the data symbols reflects the value of the square of the
diameter of the body. Figure 5.3b shows how these values collapse nicely
into a straight line in coordinates predicted by the dimensional analysis. A
fit of this line provides the value of the constant to high accuracy.

Figure 5.3
Scaling analysis for Kepler’s third law. The top figure shows dimensional plots of the semimajor axis
of the elliptical orbit versus orbital periods of planets (including dwarf planet Pluto) around the sun.
The bottom figure shows the same data plotted as the cube of the semimajor axis  versus the square
of the orbital period 
 as suggested by the scaling relation 
 The units are years
(yr) for period and astronomical unit (AU) for distance (roughly the distance between Earth and the
sun). Data point symbol diameters are proportional to planet projected area.
5.7    Ignoring the Rule That We Exclude Determined Parameters: Including Both G
and g
Let’s look again at the dynamics of a mass from some height, but let’s
ignore rule D2, which dictates that we should include g or G but not both
(since you can derive g from G, M, and r). We consider the problem
specifically applied to motion near the Earth’s surface. We start with the
following function:

where 
 is now specifically the mass of the Earth and  is Earth’s radius.
Applying Ipsen’s method, we can derive
The result is correct but superfluously including both g and G results in four
variables. In this case, we see that we have a nondimensional parameter,
which is itself a nondimensional universal constant. Namely,
We can absorb such a dimensional constant into the function and derive
We shall discuss absorbing a nondimensional constant as part of rule
ND5, which we will describe in chapter 6. Alternately, we can multiply the
second and third variables in function 
 to eliminate G from the term
involving t0 and derive
We shall discuss reorganizations of such a function by multiplying arbitrary
powers of the (nondimensional) arguments as part of rule ND1 in chapter 6.
Again noting that last dimensionless parameter is constant, we have
Again, rewriting function  as a new function  will be discussed as part of
rule ND1 in the next chapter. In any case, this is as far as dimensional
analysis can take us.
At this point, we might apply some physical intuition for the problem of
a stone dropped a small distance near Earth’s surface. Note that h and 
remain finite as we consider 
 and 
 becoming vanishingly small.

Hence, in the limit of small 
 and 
 we can hypothesize that the time
will only depend on the height h and propose:
This is the result we derived in section 5.4.3
5.8    Period of a Pendulum for Any Angle: Experimental Closure and Collapse of Data
Consider the period of a pendulum. The analysis of this is also well
established. For example, there is a simple solution available for the case of
small displacements. We shall use dimensional analysis to explore the more
complex case of pendulums oscillating at any angle. Figure 5.4 shows some
details of the type of schematic used to relate the force components on a
pendulum and analyze its motion. Note that this is not a free body diagram
but merely a breakdown of the gravitational force components.

Figure 5.4
Typical schematic considered in the analysis of a pendulum with a small sphere of mass m, massless
rod, frictionless pivot, length s, and sweeping over angle θ. We neglect drag and assume Earth’s
downward acceleration g.
We shall not leverage Newton’s law but will immediately proceed to
dimensional analysis using Ipsen’s method. We first postulate a list of
parameters as follows:

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
period of pendulum (dependent
variable)
T
s
arm length
L
initial angle
—
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
m
mass of pendulum
M
The pendulum’s very small weight is here approximated as a point mass,
and so has no relevant length scale. We again hypothesize a function:
As with the falling stone example, we again notice that the weight’s mass is
the only parameter that contains the primary dimension M. Hence, we can
immediately conclude that the mass cannot be relevant here as per rule D2.
So
Note the angle  is a nondimensional quantity and so already forms its own
nondimensional group. Applying Ipsen’s method to remove T with g and
then to remove L with s, we have
Interestingly, this result is correct in that, for arbitrary initial angles, the
period of a pendulum indeed depends on the initial angle! Larger initial
angles yield longer periods. Only for small initial displacements does the
period become insensitive to initial displacement. See Belendez et al.
(2007) for exact solutions to the problem of large displacement pendulums
where they quantify period in terms of incomplete elliptical integrals of the
first kind.
Figure 5.5 highlights the importance of the nondimensional variables 
 and 
. The top plot shows both experimental data and accurate
predictions for the (dimensional) period of pendulums of lengths 1, 1.5, and

3.08 m. The data points are experimental data from two different sources:
Experiment 1 (circles) data were obtained by Fulcher and Davis (1976)
using a 3.08 m long piano wire and plumb bob. Experiment 2 (squares) data
were obtained by Lima and Arun (2006) using a rigid 1.5 m long pendulum
arm on a conical bearing and with electronic timing. The curves are
predictions based on gravitational accelerations consistent with the
gravitational acceleration magnitudes near the surfaces of Earth, the Moon,
and Mars. These curves are based on an approximate solution to the large-
displacement pendulum period problem, and have an error (relative to the
exact solution) of less than about 0.1% for 
 and about 0.4% error near
 (see Lima and Arun, 2006). The bottom plot shows the experimental
data (obtained decades apart on different continents and using very different
experimental setups) and the predictions plotted in the variables that we
identified using dimensional analysis: 
 and 
 In this space, the periods
of all pendulums, of all lengths, and on all planets collapse onto a single
universal curve. Hence, dimensional analysis shows that all are governed by
the same underlying physics. We can imagine using such experimental data
to “close” our dimensional analysis and obtain an empirical fit to
experimental data in the space of 
 and 

Figure 5.5
Collapse of pendulum period data (across initial angles, experimental methods, and planets). The top
plot shows dimensional periods (in seconds) versus initial angle for pendulums of various lengths L.
The circles and squares are experimental data from respectively Fulcher and Davis (1976) and Lima
and Arun (2006), and the curves are predictions based on an approximate solution of the large-angle
pendulum dynamics problem. The bottom plot shows the same experimental data and predictions but
plotted as the nondimensional parameter 
 versus initial angle 
 The prediction curves overlap
exactly and appear as a solid line. More importantly, the experimental data collapses (to within
experimental error); highlighting the universal nature of the new variables 
 and 
Note how the experimental data (and the accurate prediction) in the
bottom plot of figure 5.5 approach a constant value as the initial angle 
becomes small. The near-zero slope of the curve in this region (small values
of the abscissa) shows that the nondimensional parameter 
 is insensitive

to the values of 
 (see section 2.4.1). Hence, the experiments strongly
suggest an asymptotic approximation of 
 Given the experimental
evidence, we can be confident of an asymptotic limit for small angles of the
form
Given the experiment data, the approximate value of  is value of the
constant is about
What is the exact value? Well the exact solution for the period of a small
angle displacement, point-mass pendulum with zero friction and drag is
Solving for the nondimensional parameter, we find an irrational value
Last, note that another application of the solution for pendulums of small
displacements is as a measure of the Earth’s eccentricity. The gravitational
acceleration varies at different locations on the Earth. So, for example,
taking the same pendulum to two locations a and b on the Earth, we have
Isaac Newton used this approach to quantify Earth’s sphericity and
discusses this method in the Principia (1687 [1850]). Newton obtained and
analyzed experimental data (including his own) and wrote,
Wherefore since the lengths of pendulums vibrating in equal times are as the forces of gravity, and
in the latitude of Paris, the length of a pendulum vibrating seconds is. … Now several astronomers,
sent into remote countries to make astronomical observations, have found that pendulum clocks do
accordingly move slower near the equator than in our climates.
5.9    Summary

We began this chapter with a set of proposed rules D1–D5 applicable to the selection
and, importantly, the exclusion of (dimensional) variables with which to describe a
physical process. Identification of variables is the most difficult step of dimensional
analysis and takes the most experience. It is essential to identify a sufficiently long list of
variables while carefully also avoiding overspecification of the problem.
In chapter 6, we will propose complementary rules ND1–ND6 for the simplification and
analysis of functions of nondimensional parameters.
Ipsen’s method is an intuitive process that can be used to identify the nondimensional
parameters of a problem and can be summarized as follows:
1. Identify the n key variables associated with the problem.
2. Identify p primary dimensions (e.g., M, L, T).
3. Hypothesize a function of interest as a dependent variable and n − 1 independent
variables. Express primary dimensions for each.
4. n − p is a good guess for the number of nondimensional parameters.
5. Choose a primary dimension to eliminate.
6. Choose a variable (or group of variables) containing this primary dimension.
7. Multiply or divide the chosen variable (to the correct power) by each variable in the
current function as needed to cancel the chosen primary dimension. Do nothing with
variables that do not contain the dimension chosen in Step 5.
8. Go to step 6, choose a new dimension, continue until you eliminate all primary
dimensions.
To illustrate both the power and the limitations of dimensional analysis, we explored a
set of contrived problems (a falling stone, planet motion, and a pendulum) wherein we
know analytical solutions. We contrived problems where we neglected these solutions to
see how far dimensional analysis could take us.
In each problem in this chapter (and in this book), we emphasized the importance of
combining dimensional analysis with physical intuition and experimental observations
to reduce the complexity of the problem.
The falling rock and pendulum example analyses each showed how combining
dimensional analysis with experiments is a powerful combination that can be leveraged
to achieve the following: 1. Completely close (i.e., solve) a problem including
determination of the form of the hypothesized function and associated constants; 2. Use
dimensional analysis to collapse of experimental data and thereby use it how
dimensional analysis to reduce the number of dimensions in a problem; and 3. Identify
the key physics of a problem in such a way that the physics are comparable across
experimental setups, experimentalists, absolute scale, thermophysical properties, and so
forth.
The example of Kepler’s third law helped emphasized that we should include universal
constants with dimensions in our hypothesized function, and it demonstrated
experimental data collapse for observable planetary time scales.
Problems

5.1.    A vortex can be described as some coherent region of fluid that spins
about an axis in some frame of reference. Vortices and vortex
shedding phenomena in fluid flow are ubiquitous and vary widely in
size and shape, from tiny vortices shed by swimming goldfish to the
Great Red Spot, a hurricane-like storm 20,000 km in diameter
swirling around in Jupiter’s atmosphere. As with a spinning top, the
rotational inertia of such vortices persists until it is dissipated by
friction (the effect of viscosity) to the surrounding air. Consider a
smooth cylinder in a cross flow as shown in the following schematic.
The approach flow is a uniform fluid velocity 
 At sufficiently high
Reynolds numbers, the cylinder interacts with the fluid flow and
sheds vortices at some dominant frequency ω.
Apply Ipsen’s method to derive a relation for the dominant vortex
shedding frequency ω as a function of relevant variables in the
problem. Since this may be your first experience with Ipsen’s
method, approach the problem in a systematic way as follows. First,
fill in the blanks in the following table, which identifies the critical
variables in the problem:
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
ω
frequency of vortex shedding
T−1
approach flow velocity magnitude
LT−1
__
density of fluid
__
__
dynamic viscosity of fluid
__
__
diameter of cylinder
__
     You may want to check with section 3.3 for the definition and
dimensions of these variables. Next, hypothesize the unknown
function in the following format:

      Perform the step-by-step procedure to derive a nondimensional
version of this function. When done, you may need to apply concepts
we will present in section 6.1 to cast your derived function in terms
of a nondimensional Strouhal number: 
 is a Strouhal
number (a nondimensional frequency) and 
 See Fey
(1998) for a large amount of experimental data tabulated in terms of
these parameters, and the impressive collapse of experimental vortex-
shedding frequency data to a single, universal curve applicable across
absolute length and velocity scales, fluid types, and associated
thermophysical property data.
5.2.    The critical variables describing the idealized (perpetual!) oscillation
of a linear spring (spring constant k) and mass system on a frictionless
surface are identified in this sketch:
      Use Ipsen’s method to analyze the characteristic frequency of
oscillation. How many nondimensional parameters are involved?
5.3.    The Earth is an oblate spheroid. Hirt et al. (2013) presented high-
resolution estimates of the variation of the gravitational acceleration
constant along Earth’s surface. The minimum value was for the
Nevado Huascarán summit in Peru, reported to be 9.764 m2/s; and the
maximum value for the surface of the Artic Sea, reported to be 9.834
m2/s. Given these extremes, estimate the accuracy of the timing (in
seconds) required by Isaac Newton to be able to estimate variations in
Earth’s radii from pendulum period measurements.

1.  Note that this step is consistent with the theorem of P. W. Bridgman (1931). Briefly,
Bridgman’s theorem states that the only type of functional operation that can operate directly
on a quantity with dimensions is to raise that quantity to some power (and that this power is a
pure number without dimensions). See Berberan-Santos and Pogliani (1999) for a detailed
discussion and two proofs of the Bridgman theorem. Of course, functions such as logarithms,
trigonometric functions, and exponentials cannot operate on arguments that have dimensions.
At most, the arguments of such functional operators are composed of multiple dimensional
variables that combine such that the combination is dimensionless (e.g., a ratio of two lengths).
2.  Unpublished experiments quantifying a ball falling from heights of 2.26, 1.68, 1.12, 0.56,
and 0.28 m. The plastic ball was 7.6 cm in diameter, had a mass of 153 g, and was fitted with a
small green light–emitting diode for ease of tracking. The phone camera was approximately 3
m away to lower magnification (and hence ball image velocity at image plane). Videos were
recorded under dim room light conditions in my living room using a Samsung Galaxy S8
phone (model SM-G950U) at frame rate of 59 fps. Images from movies were read into and
analyzed using a custom Matlab (Mathworks) script. Briefly, color images were converted to
grayscale, and a time-ensemble median image was subtracted from each frame to remove
background (i.e., nonmoving image features). Image intensities were thresholded and resulting
shapes were processed morphologically and subject to size thresholds for identification.
Location data in Figure 5.2a were raw computed centroids for each of three realizations
(drops) per tested height. The uncertainty in ball location is approximately a ball radius (3.8
cm), and the temporal uncertainty in tracking was approximately 16 ms. The uncertainty bars
in Figure 5.2b reflect the uncertainty on the dimensionless quantity estimated using a
propagation of error analysis (Coleman and Steele, 1998). The higher uncertainty at the lowest
heights are expected as the relative error of both location and time are greater. I gratefully
acknowledge Philip D. Santiago for help with the experiments.
3.  Note an alternate function 
 could have been derived as follows using dimensional
analysis:
However, it not then appropriate to discard the parameters involving h and m and keep only 
 For one thing, we do not expect the rock’s travel time  for motions near the surface of
the Earth to be governed only by the radius of the Earth and also be independent of the height
dropped. Such an assertion does not conform with our experience and observations. Instead,
our experience shows that  is finite even for very small values of 
 These considerations
serve as a good introduction and motivation for rule ND6, which we will discuss at the
beginning of chapter 6. For now, we note that we must consider how all nondimensional terms
behave in some limit.

 
6
Combining Dimensional Analysis with Physical Intuition
and Experimental Observations
Suppose the uniform force of gravity to tend directly to the plane of the horizon, and the resistance
to be as the density of the medium and the square of the velocity conjunctly.
—Isaac Newton, Principia (1687)
This chapter begins with further formalization of the process of combining
dimensional analysis with physical intuition and experimental observations.
In chapter 5, I proposed rules D1–D5 around the process of selecting (and
excluding) the list of dimensional variables that describe physical
phenomena. In this chapter, I propose a set of six additional rules, rules
ND1–ND6, which are useful in applying physical intuition and
experimental observations to the task of simplifying the primary result of
dimensional analysis: a hypothesized function of relevant nondimensional
parameters.
After presenting rules we will analyze illustrative and, in some cases,
famous examples of the application of dimensional analysis and its
combination with physical intuition and experimental observations.
6.1    Rules of Thumb for Manipulating Functions of Nondimensional Variables
I will begin with a set of six proposed rules of thumb applicable to
functions of nondimensional variables. These rules are used and referenced

throughout the book as we combine dimensional analysis with physical
insight. I term these rules ND1, ND2, and so forth to denote that they apply
primarily to the manipulation and simplification of functions of
nondimensional variables.
As mentioned in chapter 5, these proposed rules are my effort to
formalize the process by which dimensional analysis can be combined with
physical intuition and experimental observations to simplify and even solve
problems. Note how each assumes some knowledge about or intuition
regarding the physics of the problem and then provides a specific technique
by which this intuition can be applied to the analysis.
6.1.1   Rule ND1: Reorganize Expressions of Nondimensional Variables
Recall from section 2.4 the vast generality and arbitrary nature of
expressing an unknown function such as
This same generality helps us manipulate this expression and posit new
functions that relate the relevant variables. We shall see that this is
particularly useful for functions of nondimensional variables. For examples,
we may want for convenience to express a related function between the
square of Y and the inverse of X. Reasons for such manipulations include:
To ensure that the analysis ends up with traditional/recognizable nondimensional
parameters such as Reynolds number, drag coefficient, Froude number, and so on.
To isolate a variable such that it appears in one or more nondimensional parameters and
not others
To isolate known or weak dependencies
To invert a function of a constant
To manipulate our nondimensional parameters, we recognize that each
nondimensional quantity can be multiplied by itself or by another raised to
a nonzero power, and the result is also nondimensional. Consider some
function 
relating 
the 
nondimensional 
dependent 
variable 
H 
to
nondimensional parameters X, Y, and Z:
 
 
 and 
 are each nondimensional for nonzero real values of a, b,
c, and d. Similarly, the product 
 is also nondimensional for such

exponents. Hence, we can posit any of the following
or
or
as three of many examples and for nonzero values of the exponents. Again,
a, b, c, and d are arbitrary (real) and nonzero powers of the nondimensional
parameter (and may be positive or negative).
In applying this principle, note that we must respect and preserve the
number of dimensions of the function. Hence, we cannot simply eliminate a
nondimensional quantity by dividing by itself (i.e., raising it to the 0th
power).
Last, dimensional analysis sometimes leads to an expression as follows:
where a function of a nondimensional variable X is equal to unity. We can
reorganize this function by inverting it as follows
That is, if a function of a variable is always equal to a constant (here unity),
then the variable must itself be some constant.
6.1.2   Rule ND2: Isolate, Then Evaluate, Known Dependence
This rule is not easily used, but it is very powerful when applicable. If the
form of the function is known for one of the independent variables x
(holding the others constant), then this dependence may be evaluated
explicitly. This evaluation is most successful if the function of
nondimensional variables is manipulated to have only a single
nondimensional term X, which contains the variable in question x. The
known dependence may arise from the following:
Experiments where the independent variable is varied while others are held constant
A strong analogy with a similar, known problem is invoked

Hypotheses are posed due to physical insights into the problem
Perhaps the most commonly hypothesized “known dependence” for an
independent variable x is a power law of the form 
In terms of our generalized notation, for some function of dimensional
parameters:
Consider a hypothetical case such that r is known to be directly
proportional to b raised to the sth power as in
in the case where the other variables are held constant. If the corresponding
function of the nondimensional variables is, for example,
then we have not isolated the variable in question (b) and we cannot use this
rule. If we manipulate the function (as per rule ND1) to derive
then the dependence on b is confined to the first term within the
parenthesis. If the other variables b, c, d, and e do not depend on b (e.g., as
per rule D2 in section 5.1.2), then we can hypothesize that
That is, we explicitly and formally write the mathematical (directly
proportional) dependence for the sole nondimensional parameter that
contains the dimensional variable of known dependence. This dependence
is formulated as a prefactor multiplying the unknown function. Note that
this respects the principle of dimensional homogeneity, since both the
dependent variable (on the left-hand side) and the prefactor are
dimensionless. Also note that the key is to isolate the quantity of known
dependence (here b). Given this, the nondimensional parameter that
contains this parameter of interest can contain other quantities (here a).

The following is an example I have adapted from Rayleigh’s (1915) brief
paper on dimensional analysis. Consider a function describing the total heat
transfer (energy per time) from a long thin wire immersed in a fluid with
specific heat 
 density ρ, conductivity k, moving at velocity V. For this
problem, Rayleigh leverages what I have termed rule D1 and begins his
analysis by hypothesizing the following function
Here L and a are the length and radius of the wire, respectively. As per rule
D1, Rayleigh has already intuited that the problem will not depend on two
temperatures individually, or on density and specific heat individually, but
in terms of a temperature difference 
 and the product 
 respectively.
Rayleigh’s use of our rule D1 has already reduced a nine-variable problem
to a seven-variable problem. A nondimensional analysis (e.g., using Ipsen’s
method) for such a hypothesized function yields:
Next, Rayleigh pursues the hypothesis that the dimensional heat transfer
rate  will scale proportionally as some power of velocity V. He uses this
information and what we here term rule ND2 to simplify the expression.
Rayleigh attributes this physical insight to the theoretical work of J. V.
Boussinesq (1905), who presented an approximate closed-form analytical
solution to this problem for the case of very thin thermal boundary layers
(and inviscid flow). In such a limit, the situation is nearly one-dimensional
heat transfer. For example, Boussinesq solves the problem by
approximating a streamline of inviscid flow around the cylinder as being
equivalent to inviscid flow over a flat, finite wall with a length equal to half
the cylinder’s circumference. In that simpler case, the problem is that of an
energy transport boundary layer subject to a uniform and steady-slip flow)
and the heat transfer rate scales as follows with velocity
To apply rule ND2, we first make sure that the dependent variable in
question is confined to a single nondimensional parameter. In this example,
velocity appears only within the first nondimensional parameter, 
 so

this condition is satisfied. Second, we note that the rest of the variables in
this parameter (a, 
 and k) do not depend on the identified variable V.
Third, we infer that the dependence will apply to the entire nondimensional
term involving velocity. Fourth, we explicitly evaluate the function as
This idea can be immensely useful in simplifying functions of
nondimensional variables. We should stress that this partial evaluation of
the function will only hold if the dimensional dependence holds (here 
 Of course, the true test of the approach is to see if the scaling
collapses experimental data.
A second example of this principle will be discussed in chapter 8 in the
context of pressure drops in pipe flow where the known (directly
proportional) dependence on pipe length is evaluated explicitly.
6.1.3   Rule ND3: Isolate a Variable with an Unknown but Weak Dependence
If the function is a very weak function of one parameter, then work to have
that parameter appear as little times as possible. Consider again the drag of
a sphere of diameter d traveling at velocity V. For high speeds, we might
hypothesize the drag force is given by
where ρ, μ, and c are respectively the fluid density, dynamic viscosity, and
the local speed of sound (a measure of the compressibility of the flow). A
naïve application of dimensional analysis might yield the following
where 
 is a Mach number Ma. Although dimensionless, the variables are
all “corrupted” by the speed of sound and we have lost our standard
definitions of drag coefficient and Reynolds number. Further, if we believe
the phenomena will be a weak function of Mach number (e.g., Ma less than
roughly 0.3), we then want to isolate the weak functionality. To remedy this,
we invoke rule ND1 in section 6.1.1 and manipulate the variables as
follows:

so
The possibly weak dependence on speed of sound is now confined to the
third parameter.
In some limited cases, we may be able to eliminate variables in some
limit, but only if we have some knowledge that the function has a weak
dependence of said variable in this limit. Here, in the limit of small Ma,
knowledge of the physics suggests that drag indeed becomes insensitive to
Mach number, and so we may write
Such elimination should be done with great care and requires knowledge
of the dependence (see rule ND6), or detailed experimental observations
(e.g., where Ma is varied while Reynolds number is held constant, and vice
versa).
6.1.4   Rule ND4: Replace a Nested Function with Its Independent Nondimensional
Parameters
After performing dimensional analysis, you may subsequently convince
yourself that one of the nondimensional parameters can be expressed as a
function of the others. For example, this may become apparent only after
you performed dimensional analysis. Also, you may have new experimental
evidence confirming such dependence. Consider the following function of
nondimensional parameters A, B, C, and D:
If you can define some known or unknown function such that 
 (or
confirm such experimentally), then you can simplify the hypothesized
function to

6.1.5   Rule ND5: Consider Absorbing an Approximately Constant Nondimensional
Variable into Function
In general, as we mentioned in rule D3, we may absorb nondimensional
parameters that are exactly constant into a function (e.g., π) without loss of
generality. This is always appropriate. The constant now just becomes part
of the definition of the function. For example, for geometric similarity, we
implicitly absorb all of the dimensionless and definable length, area, and
volume ratios of the geometry into the function.
In some cases, you may consider applying this approach in an
approximate fashion. Hence, we can simplify a function of nondimensional
variables by absorbing one whose variations have only negligible effect on
the dependent variable. In this way, we treat the nondimensional variable as
approximately constant. Consider the function
If variations of the nondimensional parameter D (e.g., over the full range of
expected values of D), have negligible effect on A (compared to the effect
of B and C), then consider treating this nondimensional variable as if it is a
constant and absorbing it into the function and the associated hypothesis
that
Again, such hypotheses may arise from experimental evidence, analogies
with other problems, or physical intuition about the problem.
6.1.6   Rule ND6: Be Careful Eliminating Variables—Even If They Are Small
It is not appropriate to eliminate a variable just because it is small. Such
elimination is only possible with some knowledge of the function or with
some physical insight. Consider the following hypothetical function in
terms of nondimensional variables A, B, C, and D:
Consider a limit such that D approaches small values. This limit alone is not
sufficient to determine the strength or weakness of the function’s
dependence. For example, consider that the underlying function may have
the form

Hence, the effect of D on A is strong in the limit of vanishing D. Also, if the
limiting behavior also affects the magnitude of C or B, then we must
evaluate the product CD versus the product BD in such a limit. Knowledge
of the physics is required to eliminate variables.
6.2    Spine Patterns of Liquid Drop Impacts and Blood Drop Patterns in Forensics
We continue our discussion of dimensional analysis with an example
problem that illustrates its utility and demonstrates application of some of
the eleven rules proposed so far in chapters 5 and 6. Consider the splatter
patterns of liquid drops moving through air and impacting on a hard
surface. This splatter results in “spines” that radiate roughly from the center
of the drop. Figure 6.1a shows images from experiments of this phenomena.
These experiments were performed by me using a single-channel (air-
displacement type) pipette to create 10 microliter droplets (diameter d = 2.7
mm) from heights of 0.15, 0.30, 0.64, 1.24, 1.55, and 1.85 m. The drops
impacted on sheets of construction paper and were imaged using a smart
phone camera.1 These shapes can be visualized fairly easily at home by
dropping water or milk on a piece of paper.

Figure 6.1
Fluid dynamic instabilities during splatter (onto a surface) of a liquid droplet lead to so-called spines
that radiate from the drop (left). Dimensional analysis leads to a correlation between the number of
spines and Weber number. The data collapses very well to a straight line in terms of square root of
Weber number for low We, but deviates from this line at higher values (likely due to the effects of
viscosity). The straight line shown is a scaling directly proportional to the square root of We (linear
regression between the origin and We0.5 = 30). Images were obtained by me and described in the
footnote to section 6.2. The data of (b) were here digitized from Adam (2012). The values in the
legend refers to droplet diameter (prior to impact).
The droplet spline phenomena is common, from the first few raindrops
hitting the sidewalk, to drops of sweat hitting a gym floor. The shape of
such drops are also relevant to forensic studies. For example, blood drop
shape can provide evidence as to the velocity and/or trajectory of blood

splatters at a crime scene. Adam (2012) and Attinger et al. (2013) present
reviews of the fluid dynamics associated with blood stains and blood
splatter in forensics, although the analysis presented here applies to all
liquids and not just blood.
We begin the analysis with a physical insight.
Physical insight:   The drops are due to an instability in the fluid dynamics
associated primarily with a competition between inertial forces and surface
tension forces. Hence, we can expect that the pattern will be insensitive to
liquid viscosity.
Hence, we base our function for the number of spines in terms of a
hypothesis that the following variables are essential and sufficient:
Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
N
number of spines (dependent
variable)
—
V
velocity of drop upon impact
LT−1
ρ
density of liquid
ML3
σ
surface tension
MT−2
d
diameter of drop (before impact)
L
Note how geometric similarity is here applied in an approximate sense only
(i.e., the drops are may be geometrically similar immediately prior to
impact, but the splatter patterns are not strictly similar). We hypothesize the
function
Note that N is dimensionless but certainly not a constant, so we cannot
apply rule D3. We can use dimensional analysis to show this can be written
as
Here we find a so-called Weber number relating inertia and surface tension
as

Inertial forces enhance fingering and therefore spines, while surface
tension reduces fingering. The preceding relation and the associated
interpretation of the Weber number are as far as dimensional analysis alone
can take us. We next consider insights based on experimental observations
analyzed in the context of the approximate dimensional analysis (e.g.,
which only approximated geometric similarity and which neglected the
effect of viscosity).
Figure 6.1a shows experimental images of water drops on a surface of
construction paper. The scale bar in the first image applies to all other
images. Shown together with each image is the value of the square root of
Weber number, We0.5, for each experiment. As in our analysis, the Weber
number is defined based droplet diameter and the estimated velocity upon
impact (see footnote to section 6.2). Figure 6.1b shows a plot of the
experimental data of Adam (2012). Plotted is Adam’s measured number of
spines as a function of the square root of Weber number. This square root
dependence can be discerned by, for example, plotting N versus the log of
Weber number and noting the slope. The power law We0.5 well collapses the
experimental data into a tight line for We below about 900 (We0.5 = 30). At
higher We, the data deviate from the power law and exhibit more scatter.
Next, we will consider the possible effects of viscosity. Note the
significantly greater vertical scatter in the data for high We. That is, there is
apparently a range of values of N for each value of We. As discussed in
section 4.3, such observation of “multiple experimental values” of the
dependent variable (N) for a fixed We is a fairly good indication that the
dimensional analysis has, in this regime of high We, neglected an important
variable. A hypothesis for such deviation (which is consistent with the
observations of Attinger et al., 2013) is that the experiments associated with
these high We are somehow dependent on the effects of viscosity, which
was ignored in the analysis. At the high values of We, the simple two-
variable solution 
 is plainly insufficient to collapse the data.
We might then revise our theory for this regime as follows. We form a
new list of essential variables as follows

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
N
number of spines (dependent
variable)
—
V
velocity of drop upon impact
LT−1
ρ
density of liquid
ML3
σ
surface tension
MT−2
d
diameter of drop (before impact)
L
μ
dynamic viscosity
ML−1T−1
Accordingly, we posit the following function
We then apply Ipsen’s method (left as an exercise to the reader) to derive
Then, we can apply rule ND2 to derive a more conventional form:
where 
 is a Reynolds number, Re. We see that including viscosity has
increased the complexity of the hypothesized function of nondimensional
parameters from two variables to three. Presumably, we can then perform a
new set of experiments and see if we can systematically collapse single
values of N to a surface defined by We and Re. To my knowledge, such
systematic experimental study of this problem has not been published.
Last, note that images of higher quality than those obtained by me in
Figure 6.1a are presented in the review by Attinger et al. (2013) (see figure
9 of that reference). Attinger et al. (2013) presents high-speed sequential
images of drops as they impact a surface. An interesting challenge
associated with such experiments is that spines of higher Weber number
drop impacts initially project outward (in a 2 ms time period) but then
quickly retract back within about 20 ms after impact. This rapid retraction is
due to the effects of surface tension and results in high velocity and fast

dynamics. Hence, precise and quantitative high-speed imaging of the
process is required for highest-quality, quantitative experimental data.
6.3    Atomic Explosions: An Example Confirmation of a Power Law
6.3.1   History of Atomic Explosion Analysis by G. I. Taylor
A famous example application of dimensional analysis is around an
analysis by British physicist (and fluid mechanician) Geoffrey Ingram
Taylor. The details of this story are discussed in detail by Deakin (2011) and
only summarized here. In 1941, Taylor was approached by the UK Ministry
of Home Security to speculate on the explosive yield of the USA’s newly
demonstrated nuclear fission bomb. Taylor did not begin with a dimensional
analysis but instead created a model based on inviscid Navier–Stokes
equations in spherical coordinates (including continuity), an equation of
state, and the Rankine–Hugoniot jump conditions for the shock wave.
Taylor’s equations related energy of the detonation to its radius versus time
and assumed an initial “point source” (energy released within a very small
space and within a very short duration) and a spherical detonation wave. In
the early 1940s, this problem was also studied by John von Neumann in the
United States and Leonid Sedov in the Soviet Union. The latter two
theoretical analyses were in a way more successful than that of Taylor in
that they found exact solutions of the respective approximate mathematical
models given similar assumptions.
Taylor’s solution, however, is described here because of his validation of
the scaling law by using experimental data; an essential aspect of
dimensional analysis. Comparison with experiments and the associated
collapse of experimental data in nondimensional space is the ultimate
validation of a scaling law.
As part of his analytical formulation, Taylor found an approximate
solution of the form
This can be inverted to solve for the explosive yield energy E to yield

Here the radius of the blast R should initially depend on only E, the time t
after the detonation, and the density ρ of the surrounding air. K was an
unknown parameter that Taylor estimated would be a function of the
specific heat ratio of the gas within the cloud. Deakin points out that this
relation is found explicitly in Taylor’s report but only implicitly in those of
Neumann and Sedov. Taylor submitted his report to his government in June
1941, and he was not cleared to publish this work until 1949.
The story continues in 1947 when the US Atomic Energy Commission
released a film of the atomic bomb Trinity test, along with 25 still
photographs (Mack, 1947). The photos showed the detonation wave at
various times and associated shape of the detonation wave (see examples in
figures 6.2 and 6.3). Such photos also appeared in Life magazine and other
popular publications.
Figure 6.2
Images of trinity atomic bomb explosion of 1945 published by the US Atomic Energy Commission
(Mack, 1947). Note the time stamps, scale bars, and location of ground level. The text regarding the
cloud’s “belt” and the cable are from the original Mack reference. G. I. Taylor used information from
such published images to estimate the explosive yield of the weapon.

Figure 6.3
G. I. Taylor’s data comparing blast radius and time. (a) Images from Mack (1946) of the first ~1 s of
the Trinity explosion. The comparison between such data and the current scaling result from
dimensional analysis are shown in (b). The power law fit has the form 
 The data
was digitized from Taylor (1950b). The y-intercept is 7.9.
Taylor used these published data to analyze the dynamics of the fireball.
To do this, he took the logarithm of both sides of equation (6.2) to derive
(Taylor, 1950)

Since the last term is approximately a constant (for any given detonation
under the assumptions), a plot of 
 vs. 
 should yield a straight
line. Taylor showed this relation was a very good fit to the experimental
observations, as shown in figure 6.3. This collapse of data validates the
scaling law predicted by the theory.
The comparison to experimental data provided Taylor a close estimate for
the extrapolated value of y-intercept of the fit; that is, a value of
from which he estimated the following implicit relation
Deakin discusses how Taylor, Sedov, and Neumann each estimated from
knowledge of the physics of shock waves that the value of K would depend
on the ratios of specific heats, γ, of the fluid within the blast. In fact, each
independently used analytical models to estimate the functional relationship
between K and γ. The three researchers independently derived estimates for
K within the narrow range of 0.851 to 0.856. It is important to note that
dimensional analysis alone did not and could not lead to an estimate of this
constant. Neumann’s estimate of 0.8510 is believed to be the most accurate,
and using it, we can estimate
6.3.2   Atomic Explosion Analysis Using Dimensional Analysis
The application of dimensional analysis requires two basic assumptions
used by Taylor. First, the detonation wave is assumed to be spherical.
Second, the energy is released within a relatively small space. The analysis
further assumes that heat transfer (e.g., radiative energy loss) is not
important in determining approximate explosive yield from radius data.
We begin by postulating the following essential variables:

Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
E
Energy released from a point
ML2T−2
R
Radius of detonation wave
L
t
Time since detonation
T
ρ
Density of air
ML3
We hypothesize the desired unknown function as:
This results in a single nondimensional parameter, and so a function of the
form
This leads to the hypothesis that the nondimensional group is a constant
(see rule ND1) and that
It is important to note that this is as far as dimensional analysis alone can
take us. It provides absolutely no way to estimate , and we cannot estimate
even the order of this constant.
As described earlier, it happens that the constant  is in fact very close to
unity and approximately equal to 0.85 (see Deakin for further discussion
and note that our  is Deakin’s parameter K). For example, at t = 6 ms the
radius of the shock wave is roughly 80 m. Substituting this and ρ = 1.2
kg/m3 and a value of 
 yields Taylor’s estimate of 17 kilotons of TNT.
The actual yield of the Trinity test is not precisely known. Estimates of
the yield of this bomb range from about 15 to 20 kilotons of TNT (Deakin,
2011). The estimate given here is within the modern, accepted (and public)
range.
This example is most interesting because it highlights both the power and
limitation of dimensional analysis. The hypothesized (and somewhat risky)
short list of variables and dimensional analysis yields a function relation of
the form

This relation demonstrably collapses the experimental data but dimensional
analysis provides absolutely no way to estimate the value of this important
constant.
6.4    World-class Weightlifters: Lifter-to-Lifter Comparisons and Lift Data Collapse
I here present a dimensional analysis applicable to weightlifting records.
The idea for this analysis has been attributed to the late Joe B. Keller of
Stanford University (as part of a seminar that the applied mathematician
taught in 1973 at Stanford called “Mathematics Applied to Athletics”).
However, I am not aware of Keller’s analysis or result or even his general
approach. Hence, presented here is my analysis of the problem.
Athletes who compete in Olympic and world-class weightlifting
competitions are divided into weight categories. This approach is perhaps
unnecessary given a correct scaling of each weightlifter’s ability. The
question here is: How do we scale the lifted weight so we can compare it to
a lifter of another weight class?
Physical insight:   The key insight here is that the weight you can lift scales
as the product of a maximum muscle stress 
 and a muscle cross-sectional
area A. We will assume that lifters are approximately geometrically similar.
We also assume that all of these athletes have the same mass density.
Given this insight, we proceed by applying rules D2 and D5. First, we
assume geometric similarity across weightlifters. If so, then their volume
(and weight) and cross-sectional area of any muscle can all be scaled with
the same geometric parameter. Here we arbitrarily select the value of their
height s. For example, given s and geometric similarity, weight scales as s3.
We therefore postulate the following variables
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
lifted mass (dependent variable)
M
s
height of lifter
L
maximum stress in muscle
ML−1T−2
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
ρ
body density of lifters
ML−3

As per rule D2, after including a length scale, we can include either the
body mass of lifters or their density. We here arbitrarily chose the latter. As
per rule D5, once we define geometric similarity and use these parameters,
we should not also include the mass of lifters 
 This is a crucial aspect of
dimensional analysis: Including redundant variables leads to superfluous
nondimensional parameters and less insight.
We can summarize the relevance of rules D2 and D5 as follows. A good
check is to make sure that each variable not included follows directly from
a variable included and geometric similarity. In the case of weightlifters, the
mass of lifters is simply 
 where  is a nondimensional constant
that follows from geometric similarity, so we exclude 
We hypothesize a function of the form
We perform dimensional analysis and derive
Note that the length scale s appears in both terms. We can rewrite the
dependent variable as follows:
where  is the aforementioned nondimensional ratio accounting for the
specific geometry of our geometrically similar lifters. As per rule ND5, we
can absorb this constant into a new function as follows:
Further, we can use the definition of  to eliminate the direct dependence
on length scale as follows:
Whence,

or, again using rule ND1, as
Here, we recognize that the group 
 as a sort of (dimensional)
stress index that measures the quality of a lifter.
Figure 6.4 shows a plot from world record data obtained from the
International Powerlifting Federation (IPF) as of 2018. Shown are lifted
mass data for deadlift and bench press as a function of the mass of the lifter.
The data are plotted both in their raw form and in the coordinates of 
vs. 
 which are derived from the dimensional analysis. The scaling fairly
well collapses the experimental data, particularly the bench press event.
Note that both plots show a fivefold variation in the ordinance. The
narrowing of the variations around the predicted scaling law suggests it may
indeed be applicable across body weights.

Figure 6.4
International Powerlifting Federation (IPF) world records for deadlift and bench press. Plot (a) shows
raw data for mass lifted as a function of the mass of the lifter. Plot (b) shows the same data for lifted
mass but as a function of 
 Both plots show variations of a factor of 5 on the ordinance. The
bottom plot includes horizontal lines at arithmetic averages of 18.5 and 14.3 for deadlift and bench
press, respectively. The predicted scaling fairly well collapses the data, reducing the maximum-to-
minimum variations from 1.3 to 1.1 for deadlift and from 2.0 to 1.1 for bench press.
Source: http://www.powerlifting-ipf.com (accessed July 2018).
6.5    Running (from) Dinosaurs: An Analysis That Does Not Assume Geometric
Similarity
Can a time-traveling human outrun a dinosaur? To tackle this seemingly
impossible question, we will first consider an analysis of the observable

running speed of (nonextinct) animals. The data we will analyze is from M.
R. Alexander (1991).
Physical insight 1:   Alexander (1991) presents a basic discussion of the
dynamics of walking versus running, the two basic gaits of bipeds. For
example, walking bipeds typically approximately fix the knee of the leg
touching the ground, and so their motion is approximately a rotation about
the foot contact. Think here of an upside-down pendulum with a pivot on
the ground and cresting the top of its arc as shown in figure 6.5. L is the
distance between the center of mass and the point of contact with the
ground (approximately hip height). When walking, a vertical force balance
of this simple model yields
Figure 6.5
Schematic of a human just breaking into a run. The runner’s mass m approximately pivots on the leg
touching the ground. We roughly model the dynamics as those of an inverted, solid-rod pendulum. At
the top of the arc, his maximum centripetal acceleration is the limited by his weight. A free-body
diagram of the mass/rod system is superposed onto the sketch on the right.
where N is the normal force exerted by the ground and 
 is the
centripetal acceleration. Since N is strictly positive (upward), the maximum
speed for walking is then limited by N = 0, where 
. Therefore, the

maximum tangential velocity of a walker’s center of mass is limited to
approximately
If the running speed is at the critical value of equation (6.4), then the
force on the leg is zero (gravity force equal to centripetal force). Just above
this speed, the incipient runner’s foot leaves the ground and, at some point,
neither foot touches the ground for some time—the difference between
walking and running. Moving even faster requires greater times and
distance where the body is not touching the ground. (Interestingly, the
runner can walk just above this limit if he wiggles his hips like an Olympic
walker so as to reduce the rise and fall displacements of his center of mass
and partially avoid the pendulum-like dynamics.)
The criterion of equation (6.4) can be expressed as Fr ≤ 1, where 
 is the nondimensional Froude number. Froude number can be
interpreted as capturing the trade-off between kinetic and potential energies
of motion. Consider
Physical insight 2:   Although quadrupeds may be geometrically similar to
each other, they are strikingly dissimilar to bipeds and have very different
gaits from those of bipeds. As Alexander (1991) describes, quadrupeds
have three basic gaits: walk, trot, and gallop. However, we here will
hypothesize that the idea of a critical Froude number dividing walking
versus running from bipeds may also be applied as criteria dividing walking
versus trotting and trotting versus galloping in quadrupeds. If this is correct,
then Froude number arises as a fairly general characterization of animal
gait. The importance of Froude number will help us identify a small
(perhaps minimum) number of relevant dimensional variables describing
maximum running speed for all animals.
Here we first present a dimensional analysis of the maximum running
speed of animals. We loosely follow Alexander (1983) and postulate the
following parameters:

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
U
velocity of a specific gait (e.g., running)
LT−1
Distance traveled in a single complete
cycle of leg movements
L
Hip height (distance from ground to hip)
L
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
Note that Alexander’s analysis is not based on geometric similarity.
Quadrupeds and bipeds are dissimilar. Instead, the analysis is based on the
basic idea presented earlier: That gait should be a strong function of Froude
number (as per the inverted pendulum idea) and one other length scale (the
stride length). Also, note that Alexander’s choice of variables includes two
independent length scales. The directions of these are orthogonal and leg
length is a fixed geometric parameter for each animal, while stride length is
determined with running speed. Alexander (1991) observes that hip height
is typically nearly the same as height to the center of mass of a running
animal. From these parameters, we hypothesize the following function of
interest
Note that we know we can exclude the mass of the pendulum, as per rule
D4. We employ dimensional analysis to derive
Note that we derived a nondimensional parameter that is simply the square
root of Froude number in terms of a leg length
We can apply rule ND1 to invert this (single valued) unknown function as

Figure 6.6a shows a comparison between selected raw data for stride
length versus velocity for three animals. The data is fairly linear for each
case (a characteristic not determinable by dimensional analysis), albeit with
different slopes and y-intercept values. Similar data are plotted in figure
6.6b in terms of the variables identified by dimensional analysis: 
versus square root of Froude number of the form 
 Shown together
with the data is a linear regression (best fit) line. The data suggests that the
function 
 is fairly well approximated by a straight line (with finite y-
intercept).

Figure 6.6
(a) Experimental data for two quadrupeds and human males for dimensional stride length versus
running speed U. (b) Nondimensional stride length versus square root of Froude number. Here, data
includes humans, kangaroos, camels, dogs, and rhinos. Each animal is represented several times
(moving at different speeds). The dimensional data collapses fairly well onto a single straight line
across species. Both figures were created by digitizing the data of plots shown by Alexander (1996).
The lines in (a) are linear fits suggested by Alexander (1996).
This fairly general collapse across species including bipeds and
quadrupeds suggests that the scaling might also be applicable to dinosaurs.
That is, to estimate the speed of dinosaurs, we hypothesize that the gaits of
dinosaurs is expected to fall close to the regression line of figure 6.6b. We
can obtain the slope m and y-intercept value b from a linear regression of
the experimental data for nonextinct animals as follows:

The linear regression is shown in figure 6.6 and suggests best-fit values of b
= 0.82 and m = 1.3. Given this fit of the data for modern animals, we
estimate the running speed of a dinosaur. From the fossil record of various
dinosaurs, we know
 (e.g., fossilized leg bones)
 (e.g., tracks on tar)
These types of estimates are presented in Alexander’s book The
Dynamics of Dinosaurs (Alexander, 1989). Table 6.1 is a reproduction of
the associated estimates (see data from Alexander 1989, table 3.2).
Table 6.1
Estimated speeds of dinosaurs (adapted from
Alexander, 1989)
Estimated 
Leg
Length (m)
Estimated
speed (m/s)
Gait
(mph)
data from Davenport Ranch (fig. 3.4 of
Alexander)
Large theropod
2.0
2.2
(4.9)
walk
Small theropod
1.0
3.6
(8.1) run
Large sauropod
3.0
1.0
(2.2)
walk
Large sauropod
1.5
1.1
(2.5)
walk
data from Winton (fig. 3.1 of Alexander)
Large theropod
2.6
2.0
(4.5)
walk
Small theropods
0.13–0.22
3.0–3.5
(6.7–7.8)
run
Ornithopods
0.14–1.6
4.3–4.8
(9.6–
10.7) run

Disappointingly (or encouragingly for prospective time travelers), the
running speed of large dinosaurs was fairly low. For example, a large
theropod such as Tyrannosaurus rex (see the sketch of a T. rex skeleton in
figure 6.7) would have trouble catching a human casually jogging at 5 mph.
Even small theropods like velociraptors are estimated to have run 8 mph.
The fastest of the bunch were ornithopods, which seemed to max out near
11 mph. Most healthy humans can muster running speeds of 15–20 mph.
The human world speed record is roughly 25 mph. Presumably, your time-
traveling self can likely outrun any dinosaur you meet. Just don’t get
nervous and trip.
Figure 6.7
Sketch of a reconstructed skeleton of Tyrannosaurus rex shown next to a basketball hoop 3.05 m (10
ft) from the floor. A similar comparison and sketch is presented in the book by Alexander (1989).
Note that the estimate of hip height is not easy to make for all dinosaurs.
There are only limited observations of detailed geometry, and Rainforth and
Manzella (2007) point out some of the challenges with this.
6.6    Summary
We began this chapter by proposing a set of rules ND1–ND6, which are useful in
integrating physical intuition and experimental evidence with dimensional analysis. So
far, we have discussed eleven rules in chapters 5 and 6. In chapter 11 we will present a
twelfth rule and then summarize the twelve rules in a table.
We explored particularly useful and historic examples of dimensional analysis where
these rules helped facilitate a combination of dimensional analysis with physical

intuition. The combination achieved surprisingly simple hypothetical functions for
highly complex problems.
We explored the spine patterns of liquid drops impacting a surface and derived a
function for the nondimensional parameters. This derived scaling only partially collapses
experimental data. We then discussed the hypothesis that this partial collapse is due to
the effect of viscosity, which was neglected in the analysis. We then updated our
hypothesis to include viscosity and saw that this necessarily increased the number of
nondimensional parameters and the complexity of required experiments.
We explored historical aspects of G. I. Taylor’s analysis of the explosive yield of an
atomic explosion. We showed how dimensional analysis leads us to the specific
functional dependence of observed blast radius versus time but does not by itself lead to
an estimate of the explosive energy yield. Nevertheless, experimental data does confirm
the scaling law predicted by dimensional analysis and collapses this data.
We developed an analysis for world-class weightlifters that helps compare world record
lifts across weight classes. The analysis helped identify an index that potentially helps
judge the quality of any one lifter and fairly well collapses the world record data,
particularly for the bench press competition.
We hypothesized variables involved in predicting the running speed of animals. The
hypothesis was based on considerations of an inverted pendulum and its relevance to the
transition between walking and running; and an additional parameter (stride length).
Interestingly, the analysis ignored geometric similarity (e.g., was applied to bipeds and
quadrupeds) but nevertheless yielded useful results.
Problems
6.1.    Zohuri (2015) argues that the wave length λ of surface (liquid) waves
can be described in terms of their frequency ω, wave height h, local
average depth of the water d, liquid density ρ, gravitational
acceleration g, and surface tension σ. The latter parameter being very
important for very small waves.
a. Propose a function for the nondimensional variables in this
problem.
b. For large waves, we might hypothesize that the wavelength
will be insensitive to surface tension. Simplify your function
to reflect this. To do this, apply rules ND1 and ND3 to first
manipulate the parameters such that surface tension appears
only in a single parameter. Then eliminate this parameter (as
an example of rule ND6). A good choice for the latter,
isolated parameter is the so-called Bond number 
which compares gravitation forces to surface tension forces.

6.2.    Postulate a function for power generated by a wind turbine in a wind
at velocity U. Clearly define your variables and identify their
dimensions. Neglect the effect of wind viscosity and neglect
compressibility effects. Also note that torque can be derived from
power and angular velocity (cf. rule D1). Then use Ipsen’s method for
the dimensional analysis.
6.3.    Repeat problem 6.2 but this time include the speed of sound as a
parameter to characterize the importance of compressibility effects
(i.e., high speeds). As the highest relevant velocity in the problem,
choose the translational speed of the turbine blade tip.
1.  Unpublished experimental visualization of droplet splatter patterns on the surfaces of sheets
of red construction paper. Droplets were created using a 1–100 μL single-channel pipette and
heights were measured with an ordinary tape measure. Impact velocity was estimated from the
drop heights and is listed in the main text neglecting the effects of drag for these short drops.
Water density and surface tension were taken as 998 kg/m3 and 7.29 N/m, respectively. A
Samsung Galaxy S8 phone (model SM-G950U) was used to obtain the images, and each
image was obtained within about 2 s after drop impact.

 
7
Two Examples Combining Biomechanics and Fluid
Mechanics
Walking on gravel is an uncomfortable experience for adults, but not for little children. A father
who is twice as tall and 8 times as heavy as his 8-year-old daughter must support himself on feet
whose surface area is only 4 times that of her feet. Thus, his “foot loading” is twice hers. No
wonder he seems to be walking on hot coals.
—Hendrik Tennekes (2009)
This chapter presents further examples of dimensional analysis wherein we
combine the rules proposed in chapters 5 and 6 to integrate physical insight.
We consider two problems that involve animal powered propulsion:
Olympic rowers and the dynamics of flight (both animal and machine
fliers).
7.1    Olympic Rowers and a Word of Caution on the Experimental Validation of
Scaling Laws
In the journal Science, Thomas A. McMahon (1971) asked the question:
Why do larger rowboats with more rowers go faster than smaller boats with
fewer rowers? How much faster should they go? He analyzed rowing shells
to derive a law suggesting that rowing speed of geometrically similar shells
will have a speed proportional to the number of rowers raised to the 1/9th
power.

Figure 7.1 shows drawings similar to those of McMahon’s paper,
including the cross-sectional area of boat within the water and the beam
(width) and length of boat.
Figure 7.1
McMahon considered geometrically similar shells characterized by length s. He considered also the
wetted area A of the shell under the water line; and n oarsmen each of weight 
 McMahon (1971)
presents a similar schematic describing his analysis.
McMahon’s analysis was based on an analysis of approximate scaling
relations. Hence, we will discuss his approach more clearly in chapter 13.
Here we present a dimensional analysis that uses ideas leading to these

approximations. The presentation will iterate between physical insights and
dimensional analysis rules to try to capture the flavor of such approaches.
Further, I present a brief criticism of McMahon’s experimental
validation. Namely, I will argue that the functional dependence he predicts
is extremely weak (a scaling to the 1/9th power), and such a weak
dependence is extremely difficult to validate with experiments. I then
attempt to generalize this to the challenges of experimentally validating any
power law dependence.
Physical insight 1:   McMahon’s analysis assumes each rower adds a
constant weight 
 but also contributes a constant power 
 to rowing.
McMahon also recognizes that the boat structures employed in these races
get heavier for the number of rower seats, and so he assumes a constant
ratio of boat structure weight 
 to rower weight (so a two-rower boat is
2/3 the weight of a three-rower boat). We will also invoke McMahon’s
hypothesis that the drag on the boat will be some function of the wetted
area of the boat (a concept we will explore further in section 10.3). We will
characterize both the wetted area of the boat and its volume under the water
in terms of a shell length at the water line s. Our approach is different from
McMahon’s in that we immediately invoke geometric similarity, so we have
only one linear dimension. Also, McMahon formulates his arguments in
terms of the entire boat length  (as in his sketch). Despite this, his estimates
are consistent with wetted/submerged geometry (e.g., McMahon’s  is a
linear function of the number of rowers). Last, we anticipate that the
buoyancy force of the submerged volume will be related to the weight of
rowers (from Archimedes’ principle). We postulate the following variables

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
n
number of rowers
—
V
velocity of boat
LT−1
ρ
density of water
ML3
s
shell length (at the water line)
L
weight of each rower (a constant)
M LT−2
power provided by each rower
(constant)
M L2T−3
weight of boat structure per rower (a
constant)
M LT−2
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
μ
dynamic viscosity of water
ML−1T−1
Unlike McMahon, the current analysis is more general as we here include
the dynamic viscosity of water in anticipation of the importance of drag on
this problem. Again, our geometric similarity concerns the geometry under
the water line, and we assume both wetted area and submerged geometries
are characterized by the single length scale s. We hypothesize a function as
follows in terms of a single length scale s as per rule D5:
n is nondimensional but not constant; hence, we cannot apply rule D3. We
apply Ipsen’s method as follows:
Eliminate L with s:
Eliminate M with 
Eliminate T with 

or
Dimensional analysis has reduced the problem from nine to six variables.
Let us now apply further physical intuition. To apply rule ND5, we
assume the weight ratio 
 is constant. Accordingly, we can force the
nondimensionalization to include this ratio by applying rule ND1 to divide
the third nondimensional parameter in the parenthesis by the second
without loss of generality, hence
Note this does not change the number of parameters in the formulation.
Since 
 is a constant for this problem, we can simply absorb it as per
rule ND5 into the definition of the function (since it is a nondimensional
constant). Hence,
Next, we recognize the relation of the last two terms to Froude number
and Reynolds number, respectively. Using rule ND1, we raise the
penultimate parameter to the negative ½ power and invert the last to show
this explicitly.
As we shall discuss in chapter 9, the drag force on a boat is related to
both Froude number and Reynolds number. We can express this in terms of
nondimensional parameters as

At this point, we invoke rules ND2 and ND4 to recognize that the
dependence on Reynolds and Froude numbers will be only through the drag
coefficient, and so we replace these as
Physical insight 2:   The shells used in competitions all have similar shapes
and travel at very similar velocities (varying by, say, 10%–20%). Hence, we
will assume all of these boats have approximately the same drag coefficient.
This enables us to invoke rule ND5 and rewrite an approximation for our
function such that we absorb the nondimensional value of the roughly
constant drag coefficient into the function as:
We should recognize that the first term in the function approximately has
the form of input power per power dissipated by drag (for an assumption of
constant drag coefficient). That is, for constant drag coefficient, we can
write the denominator as 
 which is drag force multiplied by
velocity. Hence, we use rule ND1 to multiply the first term by
nondimensional n to include total power as follows:
Physical insight 3:   Taking a cue from Archimedes’ principle, we can force
the formulation to include a ratio of total weight of the boat and rower(s)
system and the weight of the (geometrically similar) displaced water
volume. To do this, we can group the total weight of the boat and rowers’
weight 
 with a weight of displaced volume directly proportional
to 
 (basically the principle of rule D1). This is a choice resulting from
knowledge of the physics and not dimensional analysis alone. To force this,
we can multiply the second term in the function by the square of a
nondimensional in this problem, the square of Froude number, 
 In

this second term, we accordingly also replace the partial weight, 
 with the
total weight 
 as per rule D1. This results in the following:
Physical insight 4:   We make the assumption that the number of rowers
only affects the problem in the fact that rowers contribute to total power
(via 
 and by increasing the weight and displaced volume (via their
collective contribution to the increased total displaced water volume 
Accordingly, we drop n as an independent parameter and keep it only in the
other relevant terms (invoking rule ND2 for a known dependence):
Physical insight 5:   Last, Archimedes’ principle applies strictly to the
hydrostatic case of nonmoving boats and no fluid flow. However, we will
assume that the boats move slowly enough that Archimedes’ principle
approximately applies (i.e., their motion is unlike skiing or surfing). This
last hypothesis helps us approximate the argument of the function as a
constant. Since the function of a constant is constant (rule ND5, cf. section
2.4):
where
For the second constant:
We now combine equations (7.1) and (7.2) to eliminate the length
coordinate and obtain

or
where
The dimensional analysis predicts that the velocity of the boat should
approximately scale as the number of rowers raised to the 1/9th power! This
is a very weak dependence. The hypotheses and reasoning seem sound, but
can we show that this is accurate? We explore this using figure 7.2, which
shows data from the world record times, T, to finish 2000 m races as a
function of rowers. We explore the scaling by plotting the data as 
for several values of the integer m. We see McMahon’s theory (m = 9) has
reasonable agreement with these world records. However, we note that
scaling laws of m = 8 or m = 10 are just as reasonable given the limited
range of the data.

Figure 7.2
World record times for 2000 m rowing races for boats with n = 1, 2, 4, and 8 rowers. The top plot (a)
is a plot showing times T versus rower number. The bottom plot (b) shows a comparison between
times T and the logarithm of the number of rowers. Shown together with the data in (b) are power
laws of the form 
 with m equal to 8, 9 (McMahon), or 10. Given the limited variation
of boat rowers (8:1), it is difficult to experimentally validate the precise scaling law.
Source: Data obtained from http://www.concept2.com (accessed July 2018).
The ambiguity among the various scalings in figure 7.2 helps identify a
couple of potential challenges of dimensional analysis and power law data
collapses. The analysis showed an elegant scaling law of the form 
 since this scaling collapses the data. However, true
validation would require a sufficient range of experimental data to
discriminate among the various theories. In this case, we simply do not

have enough variation in the experimental data. This is especially true here
as the power dependence is extremely weak. Consider we have an 8:1
variation (just under one order of magnitude) in n. The 9th root of 8 is just
0.9, or just a 10% drop in T. I estimate we would need experiments with
boats rowed by up to about 80 world-class rowers (!) before we can validate
this power law. In McMahon’s defense, there are simply no 80-rower boat
events in the Olympics. Still, the analysis is an excellent example of
reduction of variables using physical intuition.
Last, note that another (and perhaps more intuitive) way of tackling this
boat and rower problem is to directly write approximate algebraic equations
for Archimedes’ principle, a drag law, and so forth and then perform
dimensional analysis on these approximate algebraic equations. We shall
demonstrate this approach in detail in chapter 13 when we look at scaling
based on approximate governing equations. We shall also use this approach
to more explicitly demonstrate the dependences of boat velocity on drag
coefficient, rower power, rower weight, and boat weight.
7.2    A Derivation for the Great Flight Diagram: Approximate Data Collapse
Consider all of the complex dynamics associated with the flights of animals
and machines of all shapes and sizes. Fliers in Earth’s atmosphere include
gnats and houseflies, small and large birds, ultralight airplanes, F-16 fighter
planes, and Boeing 747s. Tennekes (1997) presents an intuitive and
inspiring description of the concept of flight. He uses basic concepts of
density and velocity to describe mass flow deflected by wings and
subsequently the deflection and change of momentum flow created by
wings. He attempts to unify the dynamics of all flying objects, from a
midge (a small insect) to a jumbo jet.
We here present a dimensional analysis for the flight problem that will
follow the format we have used so far. Importantly, unlike Tennekes, we
will include in our analysis the dynamic viscosity of air. As we shall see,
this generalization leads us to derive a clear Reynolds number dependence
for the problem. This in turn will let us more clearly introduce drag and lift
coefficients. Hence, the current approach is different from Tennekes’s, but I
believe the approach is consistent with his ideas.

Our goal is to relate flight velocity to flyer weight mg, and so we choose
the following variables:
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
U
velocity of level flight
LT−1
s
wingspan of flier
L
M
mass of flier
M
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
μ
dynamic viscosity of air
ML−1T−1
ρ
density of air
ML−3
Again, we include the dynamic viscosity of air in anticipation of the
importance of drag and lift for this problem. Interestingly, in choosing a
single length scale s to describe all fliers, we will implicitly assume a basic
geometric similarity for all fliers. Although Tennekes does not discuss this
geometric similarly explicitly, we might here consider this basic shape a
single torso (a fuselage) with two major symmetric wings on either side.
The wings tend to have more area than the central shape and extend in a
direction approximately perpendicular to the free stream direction. This
bold approximation is depicted schematically in figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3
Two very roughly geometrically similar flyers characterized by a single dimension (say, wingspan s).
The shapes can perhaps be described as an elongated cylindrical body with two major symmetric
wings extending on either side. Neither commercial jet nor midge is shown to scale!
From this concept of geometric similarity and the postulated variables,
we can hypothesize a desired function of the form:

Here we have (blatantly and roughly) assumed geometric similarity
across all flyers and, as per rule D5, use a single length scale to describe
them all (witness the audacity of Figure 7.3). We explicitly include power
of flight as per rule ND4, and we will discuss this further in section 7.2.1.
We apply Ipsen’s method. Eliminate L with s:
Eliminate M with 
Eliminate T with 
So we arrive at three nondimensional parameters, one of which is an inverse
Reynolds number.
Physical insight 1:   As discussed in chapters 4 and 9, we expect
(nondimensional) drag coefficient, 
 and lift coefficient, 
 each to be a
function of Reynolds.
Here, we will make a very bold (i.e., risky) assumption to derive Tennekes’s
result: Namely, we will assume that 
 and 
 are both constants. If so, we
can invoke rule ND5 and absorb these assumed constant parameters into a
newly defined function as

Physical insight 2:   The dependent variable in the latter function is just the
mass of the flier divided by the mass of the displaced air. For geometrically
similar fliers in Earth’s (air) atmosphere, we can assume this
nondimensional parameter is approximately constant, hence
Hence, we can write equation (7.5) as
To force this equation to include the weight of the flyer and parameters
from the problem, we can multiply the left-hand side by the constant value 
 and absorb this value into a new constant:
or
This relation can be interpreted as the condition for level flight where
weight is equal to lift. Lift on the right-hand side in turn can be interpreted
as a constant lift coefficient (here 
 and the product of dynamic pressure
and a planform area of the flyer. That is,
We wish to obtain a scaling between weight and velocity. To eliminate
length scale, we should relate s to the flyer mass. Since we consider
geometrically similar flyers, we can express the mass as a function of the
flyer density, 
 a volume-averaged density of the flyer’s body/structure.
For bodies of jumbo jets to houseflies, this volume-averaged value should
not deviate much from the density of water (e.g., consider YouTube videos
of airliners slowly and purposely sunk into ocean water). Hence, we can
express mass as follows:

Dividing the two expressions (equations [7.6] and [7.8]) for weight:
We can use this new expression for length scale s to eliminate s from the
level flight condition:
The brazen assumption of geometric similarity, the ruthless pairing down of
variables to a small list, and the approximations of approximately constant
quantities (including lift coefficient!) provides a beautifully simple scaling
law between flyer weight and velocity. The next section compares this
scaling to experimental data.
7.2.1   The Great Flight Diagram
The evidence that the scaling of equation (7.9) holds some insight is in its
comparison with experimental data. Tennekes (1997) presents the plot
shown in figure 7.4, which he has called the great flight diagram.

Figure 7.4
Tennekes’s great flight diagram is a plot of weight W of a wide range of fliers versus cruising speed
for horizontal flight U. The line is a power law of the form 
 where the value of the
constant is set at 47 for these axes.
From our assumptions, we see that likely the most restrictive assumption
(and an important reason for the scatter in the diagram) is the fact that we
have neglected dependence of lift and drag coefficients on Reynolds
number (and so kinematic viscosity). We will discuss this further in the next
section.
Tennekes discusses this figure in detail, and we list here a few colorful
examples from his discussions.

The animals to the left of the vertical line (at 10 m/s, or about 22 mph) might not be able
to fly to their nest/home in a strong wind.
The data point marked Pteranodon is an estimate for an extinct flying reptile, the largest
of the Cretaceous era (weighing 170 N with a 7 m wingspan). It’s heavier per flight
velocity than the trend line, but it is believed to have spent most of its flight time soaring
above cliffs (e.g., not continuously flapping).
The data point marked Argentavis magnificens is an estimate for the largest flying
animal in history, which is also believed to have mostly soared. This giant bird weighed
700 N and had a 7 m wingspan and wing area of 8 m2. The estimates for larger soaring
birds deviate from the line to a larger degree than smaller birds (which tend to flap their
wings as they fly).
Recall that 
 Human power per weight is relatively low, and so the Gossamer
Condor human-propelled plane has very large wings and very low velocity. This very
light vehicle is powered by a single pedaling pilot struggling to stay aloft. The situation
also affects the performance of the solar-powered aircraft shown in the data.
The power versus weight versus velocity issue affects all fliers. For example, sports
planes (leisure type craft) tend to be slower (above and to the left of the trend line), but
they creep toward the trend line as engine power increases.
Historically, aircraft engines gained greatly in power per weight ratio. Low power initial
implied low cruising speeds (one advantage being short takeoff and landing, e.g., on
grass fields). As engine power increased through World War I and World War II, total
weight also increased. This greater power enables higher velocity (to defy drag) and so
requires less wing area. Interestingly, the net result is that wing area is roughly constant
for increases in engine power.
For the smallest fliers, the simple aerodynamic principles applied in the derivation do not
apply since their characteristic Reynolds number is so low. The poor fruit fly’s data point
is off the plot. Tennekes points out the fruit fly’s flight is in a low Reynolds number
(viscous) regime, and he imagines its flight is like “flying in syrup.”
The very top speed of the fliers is capped at about 250 m/s by the local speed of sound
(about 295 m/s at 30,000 ft). Transonic and supersonic flight requires analysis of
compressibility effects (e.g., using Mach number), which were not considered here.
The approximate collapse of data for fliers across 11 orders of magnitude
of weight is nevertheless remarkable.
7.3    Justification for Excluding Flier Power from the Formulation
Recall our ruthless pairing down of the list of salient variables in this
problem and its associated hypothetical function for flier velocity:

At first look, it would seem useful (even prudent) to include an additional
variable: Power. Flier power, P, helps determine the ability of a flier to
overcome drag force, 
 which is itself a strong function of velocity (e.g.,
drag scales as 
 for approximately constant drag coefficient). Also, the
absolute output power of a flyer (e.g., in derived units of watts) should
somehow be limited by its mass. We here discuss a brief justification for
excluding power of the flier, which helps emphasize our very important rule
D2: namely, to exclude variables that can be uniquely derived from (or
expressed as functions of) other variables in the problem. In consideration
of whether to include power of the flyer, we formulate the power dissipated
by the flight motion as follows:
We then express exactly in terms of a drag coefficient as a function of
Reynolds number (see section 4.4) as follows:
Hence, we see that power is derivable from variables already included in
the problem (namely ρ and U and Reynolds number) and so we can exclude
it. That is, we invoked rule D2 and exclude variables for lift and power as
they will be approximately determined from the included quantities.
7.4    Including Viscosity in the Flight Analysis
In this section, I present a generalization of the Tennekes’s flight analysis,
which explicitly includes the effect of viscosity (and so Reynolds number).
We first use dimensional analysis alone to explicitly derive and show the
Reynolds number dependence. We then use the concept of a lift coefficient
(itself a result of dimensional analysis!) to derive a simple expression for
the Reynolds number dependence.
Recall that dimensional analysis alone led to the following function
(equation [7.4]) relating the hypothesized relevant variables in the problem
Applying rule ND1, we can rewrite this as

And so we have forced the problem to explicitly include a traditional
Reynolds number of the form 
 Given this form, we can still apply
physical insight 2 of section 7.2 and assume that all flyers have
approximately the same mass density. In doing so, we use rule ND5 to
absorb the approximately constant nondimensional term 
 into the
definition of a new function as
The expression now explicitly shows that the relation between the length
scale and speed of flyers explicitly depends on Reynolds number.
To show the Reynolds number dependence explicitly in the final result,
we invoke two of the aforementioned physical insights. First, we again
make the assumption that Earth’s flyers have approximately the same
density leading the earlier defined constant  (as per equation [7.8]):
Second, we recognize that the weight of the flyer scales as a lift force that is
related to the dynamic pressure. However, this time, consistent with keeping
the effect of viscosity in the analysis, we do not assume that the lift force is
directly proportional to the dynamic pressure, but instead express the lift
force in terms of a lift coefficient (which depends on Re, discussed earlier).
Accordingly, we modify equation (7.7) as follows:
Here, the ratio is exactly unity (in level flight) by definition of the lift
coefficient. In other words, the variable lift coefficient 
 has here replaced
our earlier constant 
 making the expression much more general. Including
a lift coefficient implies that the lift force does not necessarily scale with

dynamic pressure alone, as we had assumed earlier. We can combine
equations (7.11) and (7.12) as follows:
Rearranging equation (7.13),
Last, we substitute equation (7.14) back into equation (7.12) to derive
simply
or
Last, to explicitly show the dependence of the lift coefficient on viscosity
(and therefore Reynolds number Re), we write this as
Here the notation 
 refers to the variable lift coefficient’s dependence
on Reynolds number. Again, the analysis captures the scaling with the 6th
power of velocity. However, this time our result is more general than that of
Tennekes, inasmuch as it includes explicitly the effect of Reynolds number
on the scaling. The value of Re varies widely in the data of the great flight
diagram, and this helps, at least in part, explain the significant variations
from a single-valued function observed in the data. We can think of the
scatter in the great flight diagram as evidence strongly suggesting that the
analysis is missing an important variable, namely viscosity.
7.5    Summary

We used dimensional analysis to relate the number of rowers to the speed of a row boat.
We assumed geometrically similar shapes submerged under the waterline and assume all
drag came from water forces on the boat. Dimensional analysis alone resulted in a six-
dimensional problem. We applied physical insights and approximations to reduce this to
a simple scaling law.
An important fluid mechanics concept for the rowing problem was the assumption that
boat drag coefficient should be a function of Reynolds and Froude number. For the
relatively narrow range of boat speeds for competitive rowers, we assumed that the drag
coefficient was a constant value.
McMahon’s scaling predicts that boat times will scale with the number of rowers as 
dependence. This very weak dependence is difficult to validate given the experimental
data, and it highlights the importance of having sufficient variation in experimental
parameters to demonstrate power laws.
An important biomechanical concept for the rowing problem was that each rower
influences the problem only by contributing an additive contribution to the total input
power and additive contribution of weight (which increases drag via the geometrically
scaled geometry below the waterline).
We looked at formulating the flight speed U of fliers as a function of their weight mg.
Our presentation included a dimensional analysis that combined physical intuition with
ruthless and bold approximations including constant flier density and geometric
similarity type assumption (for airliners and mosquitos!). We also assumed constant
values of both the lift and drag coefficients.
For earthly fliers, we derived a remarkably simple but still useful relation of the form: 
 Amazingly, 
 shows some significant collapse of data across 11
orders of magnitude of weight and two orders of magnitude of velocity.
Last, we derived a more generalized version of Tennekes’s scaling law, which explicitly
includes the effect of viscosity via a variable lift coefficient and its explicit dependence
on Reynolds number. We hypothesized that the latter formulation helps explain some of
the scatter of the data about the predicted scaling law.
Problems
7.1.    Consider again the scaling derived here between the number of
rowers and the speed (and race times) of boats.
a. For this scaling, estimate the number of required rowers
required in a geometrically similar hull to row at 2 and 3
times the velocity of a single rower.
b. Estimate the same number of rowers but for a scaling of the
form 
 These estimates should give an intuition
for the wide variation in rower number required to

discriminate between the two scaling laws, considering
experimental uncertainty, and so on.
7.2.    Given the scaling we derived for rowing, estimate the competitive
edges gained by either one of the following: a 5% reduction in drag
coefficient or a 5% reduction in total weight. Compare your estimated
time reductions to the time differences among the first, second, and
third place 2016 Olympic Games, Men’s single sculls. The times were
as follows:
Medal
Rower
Time
Gold
Mahe Drysdale (New Zealand)
6:41.34
Silver
Damir Martin (Croatia)
6:41.34
Bronze
Ondrej Synek (Czech Republic)
6:44.10
Source: http://nbcolympics.com
7.3.    Note the secondary abscissa along the top of the great flight diagram.
This axis relates wing loading in units of pressure (Newtons per
square meter) to flight speed across the data. Derive an expression for
such wing loading consistent with Tennekes’s scaling analysis.
7.4.    Set up and perform a dimensional analysis applicable to the quotation
from Tennekes at the beginning of this chapter. Relate foot surface
pressure to the height of the walker.

 
8
Buckingham Pi Theorem: An Alternate Method
There must be as many different units as there are different kinds of quantities to be measured, but
in all dynamical sciences it is possible to define these units in terms of the three fundamental units
of Length, Time, and Mass.
—James Clark Maxwell and Joseph John Thompson
The Buckingham Pi theorem is of historic significance and the most
commonly taught method of performing dimensional analysis. For example,
it is the primary method taught in most undergraduate courses in fluid
mechanics (e.g., White, 2016; Fox et al., 2015). Such courses are often the
only place where undergraduate engineering students learn about
dimensional analysis. A minor advantage of the Buckingham Pi theorem is
that some of the process lends itself to teaching students about matrix
algebra. We here present it only for completeness and as a comparison to
Ipsen’s method. We end this chapter with some notes comparing the two
methods.
8.1    Buckingham Pi Theorem
The following describes the Buckingham Pi theorem process. Given a
relations among n-dimensional variables of the form
or alternately

then n parameters may be grouped into (n − m) independent ratios of the
variables q (called Π groups), which are related as
or
Here, m is the rank of the so-called dimensional matrix describing the
dimensions of the variables q. This value will be described further later.
Comment: Usually, m is the minimum number of independent dimensions required to specify the
dimensions of all variables 
 In a few cases (e.g., when different dimensional
systems are used to express the variables), this is not the case.
Process for finding Π groups:
List all of the parameters involved in the problem.
Select a set of fundamental/primary dimensions (e.g., M, L, T).
List the dimensions of all parameters in terms of fundamental/primary dimensions (e.g.,
in terms of M, L, and T). Construct the dimensional matrix. Columns are relevant
parameters (e.g., force, velocity, pressure, etc.). Rows are the fundamental dimensions.
The rank, m, of the dimensional matrix is the dimension of the largest nonzero (square)
determinant (e.g., if there is a nonzero three-by-three submatrix, then the rank is three or
larger).
Select from the list of parameters a number of repeating parameters equal to m. The
repeating parameters should contain all of the primary dimensions and not have primary
dimensions that are simply powers of another repeating parameter (e.g., don’t choose a
length and a volume). Importantly, the repeating parameters should not form a
nondimensional variable among themselves.
Set up the dimensional equations, combining the repeating parameters selected in step 4
with each of the remaining parameters, to form dimensionless groups.
Check to see that each group is in fact dimensionless.
8.2    Pressure Drop in a Pipe Explored Using the Buckingham Pi Theorem
We here present an example of Buckingham Pi theorem. Consider the
pressure drop inside a long, horizontal, cylindrical tube (a pipe). Fluid
mechanicians have long known (from experimental observations) that this
pressure drop is a function of the characteristic length scale of the
roughness of the inside wall of the tube (White, 2016). The formulation of
the problem presented here is adapted from a similar example provided by
Fox et al. (2015) with modifications in the format of the presentation.
Postulate the key variables as follows:

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
Δp
pressure drop in pipe (dependent
variable)
ML−1T−2
U
area-averaged velocity through pipe
LT−1
d
inner diameter of pipe
L
s
length of pipe
L
ε
roughness element length (e.g., standard
deviation)
L
ρ
density of fluid
ML3
μ
dynamic viscosity of fluid
ML−1T−1
Select a set of fundamental/primary dimensions (e.g., M, L, T).
List variables in terms of primary dimensions.
Next, construct the so-called dimensional matrix. The rows of the
matrix correspond to the fundamental dimensions (here M, L, and T).
The columns are the variables of interest. The elements of the matrix are
the power to which the fundamental dimension is raised within the
variable’s dimension as follows. Note that the order of rows and
columns is arbitrary. Hence, we list below two example versions of the
dimensional matrix.
     Version 1 of dimensional matrix:
     Version 2 of dimensional matrix:
The rank, m, of the dimensional matrix is the dimension of the largest
nonzero (square) determinant (e.g., if there is a nonzero three by three

submatrix, then the rank is three or larger). These square matrices can be
constructed by putting rows or columns in any order (and technically, all
such combinations must be explored!). We’ll here first check the
leftmost square matrix within version 1. Note that, in anticipation of this,
we wrote version 1 such that most of the powers expressed in it are
nonzero (although this, of course, does not ensure the determinant will
be nonzero). Continuing, the leftmost square matrix of version 1 matrix
is:
For which the determinant D is
The determinant is nonzero and so, the rank of our dimensional matrix is
3 (equal to rank of highest nonzero square submatrix). There are no
larger (e.g., four by four) square matrices within the dimensional matrix,
so we can stop looking.
Select from the list of parameters a number of repeating parameters equal to m. We here
choose
These repeating parameters contain all primary dimensions and do not
have primary dimensions that are powers of another repeating parameter.
Importantly, these repeating parameters should also not form a
nondimensional group among themselves. Note that the latter must
always be verified with the Buckingham theorem, else it will not work.
For problems involving many variables (e.g., in this book we consider
problems involving up to nine variables), this process is tedious and
performed manually by the user of this theorem.
Next, we set up the dimensional equations to form dimensionless groups. Taking one at a
time,
a.  We first address a nondimensional pressure drop Δp in terms of the
repeating 
parameters 

We can write the solution to this in terms of linear independent
equations as
This can be solved by hand or using, again, using simple matrix
algebra. We find
whence, 
b.  
We write
We find
whence, 
c.  
We write
We find
whence, 
d.  

We write
We find
whence, 
Therefore, our function for the nondimensional parameters (termed here “Pi groups”) is
This concludes the process.
8.3    Use of a Large Number of Scaled Pressure Drop Measurements to Close the
Problem
In this section, we present an analysis wherein we again leverage
experimental observations to achieve greater insight and help close the
problem. The comments in this section are included in this chapter but are
independent of the type of dimensional analysis used (whether it is
Buckingham Pi theorem or Ipsen’s method). Starting from the function in
terms of nondimensional variables, we have
We can simplify this by applying our rule ND2. Namely, the function of
pressure drop is expected to vary in direct proportion to length s. Twice the
length of pipe should lead to twice the pressure drop. For this reason, we
should take care in our dimensional analysis to isolate the length to occur in
but one nondimensional parameter, here 
 We then apply rule ND2 and
evaluate the known dependence as follows:

This is in fact correct and accurately predicts the data (White, 2016). To
align with more conventional notation, we can now apply rule ND1 to
manipulate the function into the following form:
As per convention in the fluid mechanics community, we now define a
factor f that is equal to the arbitrary function we derived from dimensional
analysis as follows:
That is, the function  is formally called the friction factor for pipe flow (or
the Darcy–Weisbach friction factor) and is extremely useful in design of
pipe systems. The shape of this three-variable function (describing the
relation among three nondimensional variables) has been painstakingly
mapped out for over 100 years of careful and tedious experiments. An
example collection of such experiments is shown in figure 8.1. The figure
shows a plot of friction factor f as a function of 
 and scaled
roughness 
 In describing the importance of surface roughness to achieve
dynamic similarity of the data of figure 8.1, Johann Nikuradse (1950)
wrote:
Similitude requires that if mechanically similar flow is to take place in two pipes they must have a
geometrically similar form and must have similar wall surfaces. The first requirement is met by the
use of a circular section. The second requirement is satisfied by maintaining a constant ratio of the
pipe radius r to the depth k of projections [our ratio 
]. It was essential, therefore, that the
materials producing the roughness should be similar.

Figure 8.1
Plots relating pressure drop and velocity through a pipe. Top plot (a) shows measurements of
dimensional pressure gradients along the pipe as a function of the area-averaged (aka bulk) velocity
in the pipe. All are experimental data as reported by Nikuradse (1933, 1950). These data are only
roughly half of the data reported by Nikuradse, and each series is roughly parabolic. However, the
trends among the series are complex and nonmonotonic due to the effects of changing both
viscosities and relative surface roughness. The bottom plot (b) shows the data collapse into a plot for
nondimensional friction factor (the function  of our analysis). Here, a plot of log (base 10) of 100
multiplied by friction factor f as a function of log of 
 for various values of
nondimensional roughness 
Figure 8.1 shows how friction factors for all pipe roughness collapse to a
single curve of the form 
 (a function predicted analytically by
laminar flow theory) for 
 less than about 2,300. The transition of f from a

single straight line at low 
 to multiple solutions at higher 
, each
dependent on the value of 
 is coincident with a transition from laminar to
turbulent flow (cf. section 3.3) and the importance of inertial effects
(including the effects of turbulent fluid flow interacting with roughness
elements on wall). The shape of the three-variable function is still complex,
but, in the plot of nondimensional numbers, we see that the data organizes
nicely into a single curve per value of 
. Also, increases in 
 result in a
monotonic trend among the curves.
A large collection of the type of scaled data of figure 8.1 was obtained by
Nikuradse and has continued to be been obtained and compiled by many
over the last 100 years or so. These data have been analyzed and collated
into a single plot known now as the Moody chart (after Lewis Ferry
Moody). A detailed plot of the Moody chart can be found in any
undergraduate text book on fluid mechanics. See, for example, figure 6.13
of White (2016) and or the large printed illustration of the Moody chart on
the inside of the back cover of Fox et al. (2015). The Moody chart can be
interpreted as a careful curve fit to a compilation of a large amount of pipe
flow data that has been scaled in terms of the friction factor 
This famous chart is used by engineers and technicians to perform
calculations of pressure drop in pipes of all shapes and materials.
The curves in the Moody chart are determined from experimental data.
Fox et al. (2015) provide the following mathematical expression for a curve
fit that is accurate to within a few percent error for flows in the turbulent
region is:
This fit constitutes an approximate full closure of our pressure drop in a
pipe problem. Without solving equations governing fluid flow, we have
derived a useful relation among the key variables. That is, by analyzing
experimental data in the context of dimensional analysis, we can determine
the approximate underlying function. The fractional power of 1.11 reminds
us that this is indeed a curve fit and not from basic principles.
8.4    Buckingham Pi Theorem versus Ipsen’s Method

In this book, we have chosen Ipsen’s method over the better known and
more commonly taught Buckingham Pi theorem (White, 2016; Yarin, 2012)
for dimensional analysis. For readers who are users of the Pi theorem, we
here propose that Ipsen’s method has four advantages. First, Ipsen’s method
avoids the Pi theorem’s tendency that multiple Pi groups contain the same
repeating parameter. Instead, Ipsen’s step-by-step method can more easily
be used to specify the dimensional variables that appear within the various
nondimensional parameters of the final expression. Second, for the Pi
theorem, one must at times verify (manually) that the repeating parameters
do not form a Pi group among themselves. The latter step is not needed for
Ipsen’s method. Third, unlike the Pi theorem, Ipsen’s method requires no
knowledge of linear algebra such as the meaning and application of
determinants or matrix manipulation of any kind. Fourth, in my experience,
Ipsen’s step-by-step procedure method is more compatible and easily
integrated with the rules of combining physical insight with dimensional
analysis that I propose in this book, namely rules D1–D5 and ND1–ND6
proposed in chapters 5 and 6, respectively. For example, Ipsen’s method can
be initiated easily after applying rule D1, while the standard Pi theorem
approach does not conventionally offer such flexibility in the initial
hypothesis. The solution of the “overspecified problem” aspect associated
with including a variable with a unique dimension (as per rule D2) follows
from inspection of Ipsen method (i.e., we cannot eliminate a unique
dimension using multiplications of or divisions by the other variables). In
contrast, rule D2 is obscured within the conditions of the determinant
calculated in the Pi theorem. Also, judicious choice of “chosen variables” of
Ipsen’s method as per section 5.2 can be used to achieve the goals of rules
ND1 and ND2. That is, Ipsen’s steps are, with some practice, more easily
applied so as to guide which variables appear in which nondimensional
parameter.
In my opinion, Ipsen’s method is more intuitive and insightful than
Buckingham Pi theorem. Ipsen leads us inexorably to the correct number of
nondimensional groups every time. The slight “time saving” of
programming Buckingham Pi steps (e.g., matrix manipulation) is not worth
the cost distancing oneself from the variables and analysis.
8.5    Summary

For completeness, we summarized the Buckingham Pi theorem as a comparison method
for dimensional analysis. The Buckingham Pi theorem leverages some concepts of linear
algebra to aid identification of nondimensional parameters called Pi groups.
Several steps of the Buckingham Pi theorem lend themselves to programming via linear
algebra, but the method also requires manual and sometimes tedious verification that the
so-called repeating parameters do not form a Pi group among themselves (otherwise the
method will fail).
As an example application of the Pi theorem (and an very important example of
dimensional analysis in general), we analyzed pressure drop of fluid flow through pipes
with finite surface roughness.
After taking dimensional analysis as far as it would go, we applied rule ND2 and used
physical intuition to posit that the pressure drop in the pipe should scale directly
proportional with its length s. As per rule ND2, we isolated the nondimensional variable
involving pipe length, 
 and then explicitly evaluated this dependence by taking it as
a prefactor to a new unknown function involving the rest of the parameters.
The Moody chart visualizes the three-dimensional dependence among nondimensional
pressure drop (termed the friction factor), Reynolds number, and relative surface
roughness. Interestingly, the first of these depends mostly on the third for large values of
the second and third.
We discussed several advantages of Ipsen’s method over the more commonly taught
Buckingham Pi theorem. Perhaps the most important advantage of Ipsen is that it is
easily compatible with the rules proposed in this book (and summarized in section 11.3)
around integration of dimensional analysis with physical intuition and experimental
observations.
Problems
8.1.    Apply the Buckingham Pi theorem to relate the frequency of
oscillation of a guitar string ω to its tension T, length L, and mass m.
8.2.    Repeat the surface wave dynamics problem 6.1, but this time using
the Buckingham Pi theorem to derive the nondimensional variables.
8.3.    Consider again the pressure drop in a pipe as described in this
chapter. Repeat the Buckingham Pi theorem approach on the function
    However, purposely make the poor choice of the following three
repeating parameters: U, d, and s. (These repeating parameters form a
nondimensional group among themselves, 
 What goes wrong?

 
9
Leveraging of Model Data to Build and Understand
Prototypes
At first we had taken up the problem merely as a matter of sport, but now it was apparent that if we
were to make much progress it would be necessary to get better tables from which to make our
calculations. In September we set up a small wind tunnel. … We made thousands of measurements
of the lift, and the ratio of the lift to the drift.
—Orville Wright (1953)
In this chapter, we summarize some principles of leveraging experimental
data from models to the design and study of prototypes. A prototype refers
to an early, full-scale working model of a machine or system. For example,
a prototype might be a fully functional airplane or a full-scale vacuum
cleaner robot. The word “model” refers to a construct or assembly used to
predict the behavior or performance of the prototype, and thereby save
money. For example, a 1/20th scale model might be easier and cheaper to
fabricate and study experimentally than the prototype. Consider for
example a small model of an airplane fabricated from a polymer using 3D
printing and placed in a wind tunnel.
9.1    Geometric, Kinematic, and Dynamic Similarity
The three mathematical expressions relating measurements and conditions
of models to those of a prototype are called similarity rules. We must
identify relations that relate measurements of the models to predicted

corresponding behavior the prototype. These relations are known as scaling
laws between model and prototype. Consider this question:
Question 9.1:   What aspects of the model and prototype should be similar
for us to make predictions on prototype based on experiments with the
model?
Basically, there are three similarity conditions that must be met:
(1) Geometric similarity:   This is the obvious requirement that the model
and prototype be the same shape. So, for example, all of the ratios of
lengths of respective features and all of the angles are the same between
the model and the geometrically similar prototype. See also section 4.1.
(2) Kinematic similarity:   This requires the velocities (including velocities
of fluid interacting with solid bodies) at corresponding/homologous
points in the model versus prototype be in the same direction and that
their magnitudes be related by a constant scale factor. For example, the
streamline patterns will also be related by a constant scale factor. Note
that this requires geometric similarity. For example, in fluid flow, the
boundaries of a body form partly form the shape of streamlines.
Kinematic similarity also requires that the same flow regime be true for
both model and prototype. For example, if compressibility, surface
tension, or free surface effects are all absent from the prototype flow,
they must be avoided in the model flow.
(3) Dynamic similarity:   This requires that, in the model and prototype,
identical types of forces at corresponding points be parallel and be
related by a constant scale factor throughout any objects or flow fields.
This is the most restrictive requirement, since dynamic similarity
requires both geometric and kinematic similarity.
Dynamic similarity ensures that model and prototype (indeed any two
versions of the same phenomena with different absolute scales) will be
relatable. This leads us to the answer of our earlier question.
Answer to question 9.1:   We need the condition of dynamic similarity.
When achieved, model data can be used to quantitatively predict prototype
conditions including prototype kinematics (e.g., position and velocity) and
dynamics (forces).

Comment: Note that, in general, the scale factors for geometric (lengths), kinematic (velocities),
and dynamic (forces) are, in general, different from one another. For example, a model sphere
may be 1/5th the diameter of a prototype sphere, while the drag force on the model sphere may
be 1/25th that of the prototype.
9.2    Experimental Design and Interpretation: To Match All Variables, Match All but
One
We here describe the mechanics of deriving similarity laws. Consistent with
our use of Ipsen’s method (vs. Pi theorem), we will use 
 to indicate the ith
nondimensional group (vs. Buckingham’s 
 notation).
Question 9.2:   How do we ensure dynamic similarity between model and
prototype flows?
An answer to question 9.2:   For dynamic similarity, each value of a
nondimensional parameter of the model must match the respective value for
that same parameter evaluated for the prototype. For m Pi groups (e.g.,
derived using Ipsen’s method) associated with the essential physics of the
problem, we have
For example, for the submarine drag from section 3.4, we would ensure
that
Now, our hypothesized functional relationship implies that we must match
all but one nondimensional parameter. Consider the functional relation for
either prototype or model:
If our hypothesis is correct, then knowledge of 
 determines 
 Hence, we can say that if 
 for model is known then 

for model is known. If we match 
 for model to prototype,
then 
 of prototype will also be matched, since
This leads us to an improved answer to question 9.2.
A better answer to question 9.2:   Match the m − 1 independent
nondimensional variables in the model with the respective nondimensional
groups of the prototype. If the hypothesized function is correct, this ensures
the dependent variable, the mth group, will also be matched. In this notation
Match 
 between model and prototype
If so, then for the dependent variable will also be matched: 
Note that similarity can be defined as the condition that each of the
nondimensional “natural variables” of the model be the same as each
respective nondimensional parameter for the prototype.
9.3    Examples of Model and Prototype Studies
We will here discuss a few example applications of dimensional analysis
wherein measurements on a model are used to think about and design a
prototype. The relations between them are called similarity laws.
9.3.1   Submarine Prototype Scaling
Consider again the submarine from sections 4.2–4.3 and 5.3. Imagine we
use three-dimensional printing to create a 1/10th scale model of the
prototype. We want to use a force measurement sensor and a wind (not
water) tunnel blowing air at standard conditions to estimate the drag versus
velocity curve for the prototype, which will travel at 0.5 m/s. At what air
velocity do we run the wind tunnel? How do we relate the model’s drag to
the prototype’s drag?
We proceed as follows. Our known information is as follows (where
subscripts m and p respectively denote model and prototype):
Model
Prototype

As we saw in chapters 4 and 5, the relevant function relating the
nondimensional terms is
For convenience, we have formulated the Reynolds number in terms of
kinematic viscosity defined as 
 For dynamic similarity, we recognize
that, if we match Reynolds number, then the drag coefficient will also be
matched (cf. the “better answer” to question 9.2 in section 9.2). Hence, we
write the similarity laws as follows.
If
Then
From equation (9.2),
That is, our model is so small (1/10th the length of the prototype) and the
kinematic viscosity of water is so much smaller than that of air 
 that we must run the model in the wind tunnel at a velocity
149.5 times higher than the prototype velocity through water. Note that if
our wind tunnel cannot run at this high velocity (roughly 270 km/h or 168
mph for this example), then we must revisit our choice of using air or
consider building a larger scale model. For example, perhaps we use a 3D
printer to create four sections and then assemble these.
If the wind tunnel can handle the velocity of our original estimate, then
we can relate the drag from similarity law equation (9.3):

So the magnitude of the drag forces measured in the model should each be
multiplied by about 3.72 to predict the corresponding prototype forces.
9.3.2   Boat Drag and How Scale Model Studies Are Not Always Possible
We wish to estimate the drag caused by the water on the boat (the hull drag)
as a function of velocity for a planned full-scale prototype. Hull drag is a
complex function of the speed of the boat relative to the water, the
orientation of the boat (e.g., a heeling sailboat), and the conditions of the
water surface (e.g., the size and shape of waves). The image of figure 9.1
helps capture some of the complexities in the problem. We here pursue a
fairly simplified versions of these dynamics.
Figure 9.1
A sloop with a reefed mainsail on a starboard tack. The boat’s hull interacts with both ocean waves
and waves of its own making. Source: http://www.pexels.com.

We here start with a simple problem: the case of an upright boat traveling
steadily in otherwise calm water. We build a geometrically similar model
and fabricate this model with the correct volume-averaged density so that
(when it is at rest) it floats on the water at the correct waterline (so the
waterline position of model versus prototype will be geometrically similar).
Our model is positioned in a water tank and towed through the water. We
make measurements on the model and try to extrapolate these to the
planned prototype.
Hull drag is due to both shear forces of viscous drag and to pressure
forces on the hull. The pressure forces are due to the coupling of the water
velocities and the deformed shape of the free surface. For example, even in
calm water, the motion of a boat itself disturbs the water and creates waves.
In essence, you can think of the motion of a boat as being resisted by a
wave of its own making.
Consider geometrically similar boats of length L. We postulate the
following key variables:
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
drag force on boat
MLT−2
U
velocity of boat
LT−1
L
length of boat at water line
L
g
gravitational acceleration
LT−2
ρ
density of fluid
ML3
μ
dynamic viscosity of fluid
ML−1T−1
We hypothesize the following function for drag:
Here, as per rule D5, we have invoked geometric similarity (for the
submerged part of the boat in contact with water) and so use a single length
scale L to describe the geometry. We have six variables and three physical
quantities. We apply Ipsen’s method and derive the following:
We can invoke rule ND1 to divide the left-hand side by 0.5 and write as

where we again see the trade-off between the kinetic and potential energy
(here, of wave motion) as characterized by Froude number, Fr.
Now, for dynamic similarity we require the following similarity laws
between model and prototype:
So that, given our hypothesized function, we will have
Now, consider a boat model constructed to 1/20th scale and used to
predict the hull drag of a prototype to operate at 10 m/s. At what velocity
should the model test be run? Is water a possible liquid for the test? First,
we review our information:
Model
Prototype
Matching model and prototype Froude numbers, we have this similarity law
Both model and prototype will operate on Earth’s surface, so 
 and
From the Reynolds number similarity

The model test liquid cannot be water! In fact, it must have a kinematic
viscosity of about 1% that of water. If we glance through table A.1 of the
appendix and similar data, we quickly see that no such available liquid
exists (aside perhaps for some exotic cryogenic superfluid).
We come upon a great difficulty in predicting prototype designs for ships:
It is very difficult to match both Re and Fr simultaneously. See Fox et al.
(1985) for further discussion. The reason for this becomes clear if we
consider the difference in dependence between velocity and length for the
two relevant scaling laws. Assuming water is used for both model and
prototype (and both will operate in Earth’s gravity), then we can rewrite the
dynamic similarity conditions in dimensional form as follows:
The first relation implies that the smaller the model, the higher should be
its velocity to match Re. Conversely, the second relation implies that the
smaller the model, the lower its velocity should be to match Fr. It is not
easily achievable (and often impossible) to achieve dynamic similarity with
a small-scale model.
This simple comparison helps explain why several countries have, at
great expense, built giant “model basin” tanks to test near-full-scale
“models” of planned prototype boats. One such tank is the historic David
Taylor Model Basin in Bethesda, Maryland. This facility included a test
tank 2,968 ft long by 21 ft wide and depths of up to 16 ft and housed in a
3,200 ft long building. It was designed to accommodate model ships up to
40 ft in length and tow them up at speeds of up to 50 knots (ASME, 1998).
9.4    Summary
To be useful, model experiments should be geometrically, kinematically, and
dynamically similar to prototype experiments. Dynamic similarity requires geometric
and kinematic similarity.

Dynamic similarity implies that all the important/relevant nondimensional parameters of
the model are equal to the respective nondimensional parameters of the prototype.
To ensure the latter condition, we need to match all but one of the nondimensional
parameters in the problem. Doing so ensures that the last one will necessarily be
matched.
For some problems, matching all nondimensional parameters may not be feasible or
even possible.
In our example of boat drag, we concluded that matching both Froude and Reynolds
numbers is very difficult because of the respective inverse scalings these have with
respect to length and velocity.
Problems
9.1.    A prototype submarine is to travel at 1 m/s in the ocean. You wish to
construct a 1/50 scale model that will be tested in fresh water. What
should be the speed for model test? What is the ratio of prototype to
model drag force? Hint: The density of sea water is 1,027 kg/m3,
while that of fresh water is 998 kg/m3. The viscosities are
approximately the same (1.0e−3 kg⋅m⋅s−1).
9.2.    You observe experimentally that water flow through a circular tube
with diameter d = 2 cm becomes turbulent at a bulk velocity of 11.5
cm/s. For airflow in the same tube, what is the volume flow rate in
m3/s that causes transition to turbulence?
9.3.    Non-Newtonian fluids are fluids that do not follow Newton’s
proportional relation between rate of strain and shear stress. One
relevant nondimensional number is the Bingham number, Bm, which
is used to characterize relative strength of shear and elastic stress and
has the form
Here 
 is the yield stress of the non-Newtonian fluid, and  is
dynamic viscosity. V and d are characteristic velocity and length
scales, respectively. You wish to study the dynamics of (including
forces on) smooth spheres moving through such a fluid using a model
sphere with a diameter that is 1/10th the diameter of the prototype
sphere. Both model and prototype will be operated in the exact same

fluid. What is the correct model-to-prototype velocity ratio to match
the model versus prototype Bm? Can you easily match both Bm and
Reynolds numbers?

 
10
Small Changes in Geometry Can Have Significant
Effects: The Effect of Roughness on Drag
Eiffel found that the resistance to a sphere moving through air changes its character somewhat
suddenly at a certain velocity. The consideration of viscosity shows that the critical velocity is
inversely proportional to the diameter of the sphere.
—Lord Rayleigh (1915)
There are experimental data available for many types of physical
phenomena. However, the problem of interest to you may not have been
studied exactly. It may be very tempting to roughly approximate predictions
for one geometry given data for a similar geometry (indeed we saw in
chapter 7 a scaling that approximately equated the shape of a mosquito and
airliner). However, it is not always the case that the behavior of one
geometry can be used (i.e., “stretched”) to predict behavior of another. In
nonlinear phenomena, a tiny change can have a big effect. Seemingly small
differences in geometry can at times have significant effects. We have
already seen one example of this in chapter 8, where we discussed the
significant importance of pipe inner surface roughness on pressure drop. In
this chapter, we discuss in some detail a similar problem: the significant
effect that relatively small roughness elements can have on the drag of
immersed bodies. We also here discuss how drag scaling laws obtained for
one shape might be used to roughly predict the drag experienced by
different shapes.

10.1    Roughness and the Drag of Spheres
We first discuss an example where even slight changes in geometry can
have a big effect, making it difficult to approximate the behavior of one
body given data for another. In section 3.4.2, we discussed drag coefficients
of geometrically similar, smooth spheres. How well do these results apply
to a sphere with a roughened surface? Not very well, it turns out. One
reason for this is that even the 0.1% relative roughness can have
pronounced effects on the near-wall flow of fluid (the boundary layer).
The physical situation and influence of sphere roughness is depicted
schematically in figure 10.1. Roughness elements have a strong effect on
the regions of the fluid flow very near the surface known as the boundary
layers (see section 3.3). For 
 greater than about 10, the boundary layers
are very thin regions near the surface where the balances among viscous
forces, pressure forces, and inertia are important. In this region, the fluid
imparts a high shear force on the body. At the very front of the sphere, the
flow is decelerated and there is accordingly a region of high pressure
(dynamic pressure effect), while the wake is a region of relatively low
pressure. Higher inertia, turbulent boundary layers do a better job of
wrapping around the sphere and persist further into the low-pressure region.
Roughness elements favor turbulent boundary layers and hence turbulent
boundary layers are able to wrap around the sphere more efficiently,
resulting in a smaller wake and less pressure-based drag. The situation may
at first seem counterintuitive (since turbulent boundary layers have greater
shear stress than laminar boundary layers). However, as we shall discuss
further in section 10.3, the effects of pressure forces on drag are here more
important than shear stress forces, and so overall drag is reduced by the
smaller wake of the turbulent boundary layers. See similar discussions in
Incropera et al. (2013) and White (2016).

Figure 10.1
Laminar-to-turbulent transition of the boundary layer can significantly decrease drag on a sphere.
Shown are schematics of flow around a sphere for 
 values less and greater than about 
 For
low 
 the boundary layer remains laminar and this relatively low inertia flow separates early (at
low separation angle of about 80°) from the sphere, causing a large wake (a low pressure region). For
rougher spheres and higher 
 the boundary layer transitions to turbulent. The turbulent flow
separates at a higher angle (near 120°), resulting in a smaller wake. Roughness elements can cause
early transition to turbulence, and so a small change in geometry (relative height of small roughness
elements) can have a large effect on visible behavior.
A correct application of dimensional analysis would proceed as follows.
We first hypothesize the following parameters as controlling the drag on
spheres with finite roughness:

Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
drag on a sphere (dependent variable)
MLT−2
V
external flow velocity
LT−1
d
diameter of sphere
L
ε
roughness element length (e.g., standard
deviation height of surface features)
L
ρ
density of fluid
ML3
μ
dynamic viscosity of fluid
ML−1T−1
Such a list implies the following hypothesis for the functional dependence:
We can then apply dimensional analysis to derive
We invoke rule ND1 to reformulate this in terms of a more conventional
nomenclature as follows:
where
Figure 10.2 shows a plot of a wide range of experimental data for the
drag of rough and smooth spheres in terms of the nondimensional
parameters of drag coefficient 
 and Reynolds number Re. As shown by
these measurements by Achenbach (1972, 1974), spheres with turbulent
boundary layers have smaller wakes than laminar spheres and so
significantly less drag. Further, spheres with rough surfaces promote earlier
transition of laminar to turbulent boundary layers.

Figure 10.2
Drag coefficient of smooth and rough spheres as a function of 
 and characteristic roughness. The
smooth sphere data was digitized directly from Achenbach (1972), and the rough sphere drag data
from Achenbach (1974). The relative scale of surface roughness can have an immense effect on drag,
particularly at moderate to high 
The drag force measurements of figure 10.2 for smooth spheres are from
Achenbach (1972), and the data for spheres of various nondimensional
roughness 
 (where ε is the characteristic length scale of the roughness
elements) are from Achenbach (1974). The sharp drops in drag coefficient
for figure 10.2 (often termed the “crisis” region in these drag plots) can be
roughly interpreted as regions where the boundary layers become turbulent
and so suddenly begin to more efficiently wrap around the sphere, creating
a smaller wake. Achenbach notes the critical Reynolds number at which
this drop occurs decreases monotonically with Re. This effect of roughness
can have profound effects on drag coefficient—even though it is a small
(and sometimes microscopic) change in geometry.
See Blevins (1984) and Choi (2006) for discussions of the drag
coefficient of (rough) golf balls and experiments showing how golf balls
can fly further than an equally sized and weighted smooth balls.
The preceding discussions point out that the shape and relative (to
diameter) scale of roughness elements can have a significant effect on drag.

Hence, predicting drag of a rough sphere from smooth sphere data is not
accurate. The general lesson is that fluid flow problems of moderate and
high Reynolds numbers are sufficiently complex and nonlinear that even
tiny changes in the geometry (here the size of small roughness elements)
can have a strong effect on macroscopic behavior such as the drag.
10.2    Pressure Drop in Smooth versus Rough Pipes
As a brief, second example, consider the analysis for pressure drop in a pipe
presented in section 8.3. From the experimental data of Nikuradse we see
that at 
 roughness elements of characteristic scaled length
of 
 can raise the friction factor from about 0.0085 (for a smooth
pipe) to 0.02. That is, a 0.1% change in the scale of the surface roughness of
the interior of the pipe alone can increase absolute pressure drop (e.g.,
measured in kPa) in the pipe by a factor of 2.4.
10.3    Estimating Drag from Different Shapes
Despite the strong sensitivity of surface roughness, we may nevertheless
wish to obtain even rough estimates of the drag of one body given data
from a similarly shaped body. Taking a lesson from the first part of this
chapter, we first might strive to find data with roughly the same relative
roughness ratio 
 where d is the characteristic macroscopic dimension for
the body of interest. However, which macroscopic geometric scale should
we choose to compare two differently shaped bodies? Consider first a
generalized drag coefficient and Reynolds number, defined as follows:
V is the free-stream (approaching) velocity. The length scale  in Re is
typically the chord length or body length parallel to the stream. For
cylinders, spheres, and disks,  is typically a diameter.
White (2016) provides some advice on how to roughly estimate drag data
of one geometric shape given drag data for another slightly different shape.

An important choice is the area A variable in the drag coefficient. The
following are good choices for three typical cases:
Frontal area A (the area of the body projected into the direction of approach free stream):
This area is most appropriate for nonstreamlined bodies—that is, so-called “bluff”
bodies (think of stubby, thick bodies like a falling meteor or a sphere).
Planform area A for streamlined bodies and/or very wide, flat bodies: For such bodies,
this is the area of the body projected in a direction perpendicular to the free stream and
often the maximum projected area. For example, planform area is the area of the shadow
of streamlined airplane in level flight at high noon.
1. Wetted area A for surface ships and barges: This is the (curved) surface area in contact
with the water during motion.
A judicious choice of the characteristic area (using the preceding
guidelines) for various drag coefficients helps us approximate drag
coefficients for which we may not have direct data. For example, for a
smooth, streamlined body (a specific torpedo shape or airfoil), we may
predict absolute drag using drag coefficients calculated based the planform
area A, since the body’s drag is a strong function of this area.
As another example, we might estimate the drag on a human body falling
(in a horizontal, spread-eagle position similar to a skydiver as discussed in
section 4.4.3) using the frontal area of a similar shape. If there is no similar
shape available, we might use the closest available. For example, we might
use the data for a finite cylinder with the air flow in a direction
perpendicular to the cylinder’s axis. We would use the 
 vs. Re data
with length scale  for Re as the “diameter” of the cylinder of the person’s
torso and A equal to projected area of the person. Loth (2008) also discusses
the approximation of drag coefficients of irregular shapes.
10.4    Example of Incorrect Dimensional Analysis: Neglecting a Parameter
Consider again the dimensional analysis of the section 10.1 for the drag on
spheres. As mentioned earlier, the problem of drag coefficients on bodies
with a finite surface roughness is complex because seemingly slight
differences in the geometry (the relative height of small roughness
elements) can have a profound effect on drag, particularly at moderate and
high values of Reynolds number. Achenbach’s (1974) data was obtained
with a 0.2 m diameter sphere, so the smallest controlled roughness element
length he reported was on the order of 50 microns. Consider that, at Re =
300,000, such 50 micron scale roughness elements can reduce the drag

coefficient (and hence the absolute drag force on a sphere of equal
diameter) by about a factor of 10 (relative to a smooth sphere). As
discussed in section 10.1 and shown in figure 10.1, this extreme sensitivity
to minute (even microscopic) differences in geometry is due to the effect of
the surface roughness on the boundary layers of the flow around the sphere.
Small roughness elements can cause the boundary layer to become
turbulent so that it has greater ability to wrap around the sphere before it
separates, resulting in a smaller wake.
Given this tiny “nearly hidden” effect of surface roughness, consider now
an incorrect (but understandable) application of dimensional analysis
wherein we neglect the parameter describing the characteristic height of
roughness elements in the analysis. This would lead to the following table
of parameters:
Variable
Definition
Physical
quantity
drag on a sphere (dependent
variable)
MLT−2
V
external flow velocity
LT−1
d
diameter of sphere
L
ρ
density of fluid
ML3
μ
dynamic viscosity of fluid
ML−1T−1
This list is consistent with the following hypothesis for the functional
dependence:
and the following incorrect result for the problem.
Dimensional analysis alone does not point out any problems. We are
simply missing a key parameter: the length scale of roughness elements.
The problem would arise when we begin to obtain and analyze quantitative
experimental measurements. Figure 10.3 depicts the type and extent of the
problems that would arise. This figure depicts the large variation of 
 and
Re implied by the measurements of Achenbach (1972, 1974) as shown in

figure 10.2. The gray area shown in the plot are the possible locations of
drag coefficient measurements given values of Re. Hence, for the current
example, we measure drag forces across with spheres of varying diameters,
in flows with varying velocities, and in fluid of varying properties, but we
would ignore the roughness of the surfaces of our test spheres. The data
would easily be scattered throughout the entire grey area in the plot. The
two nondimensional parameters, 
 and Re, would help us identify a
“neighborhood” of solutions, but never a single valued functional
relationship for drag coefficient given Re. For example, we would find that
a single value of Reynolds number can result in a wide range of drag
coefficients (as depicted by the vertical column of circles). We would
reasonably (and correctly) conclude that our “independent variable” (Re) is
not sufficient to specify drag force. Clearly, we have not well specified the
problem as the dependent parameter varies widely for equal values of the
independent variable. This would be the strongest evidence that our list of
parameters was incomplete, and this might motivate us to look for other
“hidden” variables that we are not yet controlling.

Figure 10.3
Example of the type of ambiguity that would result from mistakenly excluding the parameter
describing surface roughness height in the dimensional analysis associated with the data of figure
10.2. Most important, one value of Re would yield many and widely different values of drag
coefficient 
 (as depicted by the vertical column of circles). Also, a wide range of Re could easily
yield the same drag coefficient (horizontal row of circles).
Recall from figure 10.2 that the local minimum in 
 associated with the
drag “crises” explained earlier. This local minimum implies that there are at
least two values of 
 for each value of the independent parameter Re, even
when we account for roughness. This double value of drag is associated
with regimes where shear and pressure drag respectively dominate in
regions of low and high Re (cf. section 10.2). In the current example, where
we ignore roughness, we would see not two but a wide range of Re values
for each value of 
 (particularly in the range below about Re = 300,000).
Again, this ambiguity would be evidence that we are missing an important
variable.
Another ambiguity would arise in comparing data between two
laboratories. Imagine that one lab uses exclusive one diameter and one
roughness (e.g., while varying velocity). A second lab uses a second
diameter and a second roughness. Even if the labs exactly match Re, their

measured drag coefficients will never match unless they both (by some
coincidence) used the same respective values of 
.
In brief, missing an important parameter leads to ambiguities that become
clear only after experiments are performed.
10.5    Summary
We found that approximating quantities in one geometry using nondimensionalized
experimental data for an approximate geometry is not always possible. As an example of
this, we noted how the drag coefficient function versus Reynolds number for rough
spheres (in turbulent flow) is very different from that of smooth spheres. We saw a
similar disparity for pressure drop in smooth versus rough pipes in chapter 8.
We discuss some rules of thumb in making rough estimates of drag on a macroscopic
shape given drag coefficient data for similar geometries (e.g., given approximately same
surface roughness). For bluff bodies, we scale drag and lift coefficients with projected
area (projected in flow direction). For streamline bodies, we use planform area. For
streamlined boats, we use wetted area.
Last, we discussed an example of the type of ambiguities that could arise from missing
an important variable in dimensional analysis: neglecting roughness element heights in
the drag data for spheres. The ambiguities would become increasingly clear as we obtain
and analyze experimental data. Missing an important variable would also preclude
meaningful lab-to-lab comparisons.
Problems
10.1.  E. Achenbach’s (1974) rough sphere data was obtained from
experiments with a 0.2 m diameter sphere. He imparted roughness
by, for example, abrading the surfaces with emery paper. What
characteristic roughness height (in microns) would you require to
reproduce his data for relative roughness of 
 = 25E−5 using a 2 cm
diameter sphere?
10.2.  The Robins–Magnus effect refers to the transverse force experienced
by a spinning sphere or cylinder in a cross flow. Think of the curve
flight of a spinning ball in baseball or golf. A golf ball (4.27 cm
diameter) can spin as fast as roughly 8,000 rpm as it travels through
the air at 20 m/s.
a. You wish to reproduce these conditions in a wind tunnel with
a maximum wind velocity of 20 m/s. What model ball
diameter do you need? How fast should the model golf ball
spin?

b. If the prototype (standard) golf ball has dimple depths of
about 0.25 mm, what will be the dimple depth of the model
golf ball?
10.3.  Approximate the shape of your body tucked into a “ball” as a sphere.
Estimate your terminal velocity in this position. For the function
relating drag coefficient versus Reynolds number, use the
experimental data given by Achenbach for rough spheres (see figure
10.2). Note that Achenbach defines his drag coefficient in the usual
manner with a factor of 0.5 in the denominator.

 
11
The Riabouchinsky–Rayleigh Paradox and the Rule of
Relevance
In this chapter, we discuss a discussion between Lord Rayleigh and Dimitri
Riabouchinsky that occurred shortly after publication of Rayleigh’s (1915)
paper on dimensional analysis. The published discussion between these two
important figures seemed to point to a paradox in dimensional analysis—
namely, that the incorporation of physical insight seemed, in at least one
case, to increase the complexity of the problem. This chapter describes the
resolution of this issue and then proposes a generalized rule that we can
apply to all dimensional analyses. I call this the “rule of relevance.” At the
end of this chapter, we summarize the twelve rules that we have proposed in
this book for combining physical intuition and experimental observations
with dimensional analysis.
11.1    The Riabouchinsky–Rayleigh Paradox
In his seminal paper on dimensional analysis, Rayleigh (1915) gave an
example for the total, steady-state heat transfer rate  from a long, thin
cylinder of length L and radius a. He considered the wire and fluid as being
characterized by single temperature each, respectively T and 
 See section
6.1.2 and the discussion of rule ND2 for additional details around this
problem. For the assumption of an inviscid fluid flow, the following table

shows the variables Rayleigh hypothesized as essential. The two rightmost
columns provide the basic dimensions in Rayleigh’s analysis as per this
book and, in parenthesis, the basic dimensions considered by Rayleigh:
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
heat transfer rate (energy
per time)
MLT−2
(ET−1)
a
radius of wire
L
(L)
L
length of wire
L
(L)
cylinder-to-fluid
temperature difference
Θ
(Θ)
specific heat of the fluid
per volume
ML−1T−2Θ−1
(EL−3Θ−1)
V
velocity of fluid
LT−1
(LT−1)
k
conductivity of fluid
MLT−3Θ−1
(EL−1T−1Θ−1)
Note that Rayleigh’s dimensional analysis did not use the convention of L,
T, M, and Θ that we have adopted. He did not use mass as a stand-alone
dimension and used the following basic dimensions for the problem:
L, T, Θ, and E
where E is defined as the dimension of energy (here, thermal energy).
Rayleigh’s approach exemplifies rule D1 in that, as per many steady-state
heat transfer problems, Rayleigh expects the problem to scale not with two
temperatures individually but as their difference, 
 Second, Rayleigh
expects the problem to scale not individually with either specific heat or
density (of fluid) but only in terms of the product of these two, 
 To
continue with Rayleigh’s analysis, his hypothesized function is then
Rule D1 applies as we have formulated in terms of known dependencies for
temperature difference and the product of density and specific heat.
Performing Ipsen’s method (using either L, T, M, and Θ dimensions or with
Rayleigh’s L, T, Θ, and E), we can derive

We note that any such consistent change in the list of basic dimensions
should yield a similar result. Next, Rayleigh reasons that, in the limit of
large aspect ratio, the heat transfer will not depend on this the aspect ratio.
As per rules ND3 and ND6, he proceeds to eliminate the aspect ratio and
derive
Four months after Rayleigh’s publication of March 18, 1915,
Riabouchinsky (1911) wrote and published the following comment on
Rayleigh’s paper. Riabouchinsky’s comment is aimed at the latter,
simplified version of Rayleigh’s formulation wherein Rayleigh considered
only a single geometrical length a. In its entirety, Riabouchinsky’s
published comment reads as follows:
Lord Rayleigh gives this formula 
 considering heat, temperature, length, and
time as four “independent” dimensions. If we suppose that only three of these quantities are really
independent, we obtain a different result. For example, if the temperature is defined as the mean
kinetic energy of the molecules, the principle of similarity allows us only to affirm that 
Here, I quote Riabouchinsky’s comment exactly except for the equations
where we have used the current notation for clarity. He basically points out
that, using kinetic theory, we can express temperature in terms of the kinetic
energy of molecules, apparently removing the dimension of temperature
from the problem. However, the result is an additional nondimensional
parameter! That is, additional physics seems to have resulted in a less
powerful result and less insight. This issue has been termed the Rayleigh–
Riabouchinsky paradox.
Indeed, this paradox seemed to puzzle even the great Rayleigh. Two
weeks later, he responded to Riabouchinsky’s comment by writing “it
would indeed be a paradox if the further knowledge of the nature of heat
afforded by molecular theory put us in a worse position than before in
dealing with a particular problem. … It would be well worthy of
discussion.”
And so we here discuss it further.

11.2    Resolution of the Apparent Paradox
The so-called Rayleigh–Riabouchinsky paradox (where additional physics
and removal of a variable increases the number of nondimensional
parameters) has been discussed by several authors, notably Sedov (1950),
Macagno (1971), and Cooper and West (1988). To resolve this conundrum,
let’s first look at Riabouchinsky’s comment a little more closely. He
proposed removing temperature by introducing the average kinetic energy
of molecules. Namely, he proposes removing the dimension Θ using a
definition of ΔT such that it is directly proportional to, and has dimension
of, energy E.
Interestingly, as Sedov (1950) pointed out, Riabouchinsky has left out a
dimensional constant in introducing kinetic theory, namely the Boltzmann
constant, 
 As per our discussion in section 5.1.3 and rule D3, this is
inappropriate in dimensional analysis. The correct relation in kinetic theory
between molecular kinetic energy and temperature has the following form:
Hence, the relationship between energy and T is not 
 but 
Before continuing, let us here explore the implications of this. If we include
the dimensional fundamental Boltzmann constant, then Riabouchinsky’s list
of variables would look something like this:
Variable
Definition
Physical quantity
heat transfer rate (energy per time)
MLT−2
(ET−1)
a
radius of wire
L
(L)
L
length of wire
L
(L)
cylinder-to-fluid temperature
difference
MLT−1
(E)
specific heat of the fluid per volume
L−3
(L−3)
V
velocity of fluid
LT−1
(LT−1)
conductivity of fluid
L−1T−1
(L−1T−1)
Here again, the Rayleigh–Riabouchinsky dimensions are shown in
parentheses. Hence, performing dimensional analysis, we have

Note that I here used rule D1 in assuming the various groupings
involving  and the product of density and specific heat. The expression is
now dimensionally correct. However, this alone does not resolve the issue.
The paradox’s resolution is that Riabouchinsky’s choice of variables has
introduced irrelevant physics into the problem. Introduction of the
microscopic motion of molecules into the problem is irrelevant. Indeed, the
problem has been formulated in terms of continuum principles wherein time
and space averages lead to the very concept of continuum quantities such as
conductivity, density, specific heat, and temperature. Cherry-picking one
continuum quantity such as temperature and then attempting to remove this
continuum variable by “decomposing” it into molecular velocities is neither
relevant nor useful. It introduces new physics that are not required.
Stated another way: The continuum velocity of the fluid is comparable to
the time scales of advection and conduction of heat, the essence of the
problem. Despite Riabouchinsky’s use of the same variable, V, this velocity
is very different (in magnitude and interpretation) from the mean average
kinetic velocity of molecules. It also does not scale in the same way. For
example, the conduction of heat scales as a temperature difference ΔT,
while the kinetic molecular velocity is a function of the absolute
temperature T. Introduction of such disparate physics takes away from the
analysis. See notably Sedov (1950), Macagno (1971), and Cooper and West
(1988) for discussions of this paradox.
11.3    The Rule of Relevance
I here attempt to generalize the lesson of the Rayleigh–Riabouchinsky
paradox as follows:
Dimensional analyses should include only relevant physics and should be careful to exclude
irrelevant physics.
Relevance is, in turn, determined by the questions we ask. For Rayleigh’s
treatment of the Bousinessq problem, kinetic theory was irrelevant because
Rayleigh asked a question about the heat rate (a volume-averaged concept)
in terms of continuum temperature difference and as a function of

continuum thermophysical quantities and macroscopic dimensions. This is
much different from, say, asking about the average increase in the kinetic
energy of individual gas molecules that touch the cylinder (for which we
might invoke kinetic theory, Boltzmann constant, and the like).
In this book, we have in fact already touched on the subject of relevant
physics in dimensional analysis. In section 5.4, we first asked a simple
question regarding the time for a body near the surface of the Earth to fall
from an initial height 
 neglecting air resistance. To simplify the question
and focus on relevant physics, we considered a uniform and constant value
of acceleration of Earth’s gravity (at its surface) g. We hypothesized a
function of the form 
 and the result of dimensional analysis
was simply
This was a succinct summary of the relevant physics, and an exclusion of
irrelevant physics.
In sections 5.5 and 5.6, we then changed the question and broadened the
scope of what is relevant physics. Namely, we asked about the time scales
of orbital periods of interacting celestial bodies (of immense mass) across
vast distances. Here we kept G as per rule D3 and considered
Dimensional analysis then led us to
From this, we eventually gleaned some version of Kepler’s third law.
The key to the latter example is that the new question prompted newly
relevant physics of celestial motion, and this led to a new treatment and
new variables. It prompted additional complexity.
Bridgman (1911) also discusses the resolution of the Rayleigh–
Riabouchinsky paradox as follows. Bridgman’s argument is basically that
all problems of dimensional analysis involve selection of a sufficient set of
physical quantities to describe that problem. The list is then ultimately
validated by how accurately the list models the physical situation. In
deciding which quantities to neglect, Bridgman writes, “the justification

will involve real argument and a considerable physical experience with
physical systems of the kind which we have been considering. The problem
cannot be solved by the philosopher in his armchair, but the knowledge
involved was gathered only by someone at some time soiling his hands with
direct contact.” In other words, the “proof” that any list of variables is
correct and sufficient is ultimately how well (and how sufficiently) the
resulting theory agrees with experimental observations.
11.4    Summary of Rules of Thumb for Combining Physical Insight with Dimensional
Analysis
In sections 5.1, 6.1, and 11.2, I proposed a set of rules of thumb useful in
dimensional analysis. Table 11.1 summarizes these rules:

Table 11.1
Rules of thumb for dimensional analysis proposed in this book
No., Relevance
Rule
Example
D1.
Dimensional
variables
If the variable consistently appears as some
grouping (e.g., algebraic), then use the
group as an independent variable.
For spring and combined mass
problem, hypothesize function
as
D2.
Dimensional
variables
Exclude a variable if you can express it as a
function of the others.
Write 
 as 
if 
D3.
Dimensional
variables
Keep dimensional constants, but absorb
nondimensional constants.
Einstein: 
 not 
 Circle: 
 not 
D4.
Dimensional
variables
Exclude any variable that involves a unique
dimension.
Given 
 if only z
contains dimension of mass,
then 
.
D5.
Dimensional
variables
If invoked, leverage geometric similarity.
Take into account any length s,
area A, and volume V simply
with 
ND1.
Nondimensional
Variables
Reorganize expressions of nondimensional
variables (but maintain the same number of
parameters).
We can write 
 as 
 for nonzero
a, b. Also 
 yields X =
constant.
ND2.
Nondimensional
Variables
Isolate, then evaluate, a known dependence
(if other variables are not affected).
Given 
 and 
 we might conclude 
ND3.
Nondimensional
Variables
Isolate a variable with an unknown but
weak dependence.
For a weak dependence on 
Never
instead
ND4.
Nondimensional
Variables
Nested function of nondimensional
parameters.
Simplify 
 to 
 if 
ND5.
Nondimensional
Variables
Consider absorbing into function a
nondimensional parameter on which the
dependent variable has a very weak relative
dependence.
For 
 write 
 if dependence on D
is known to be very weak.
ND6.
Nondimensional
Variables
Be very careful eliminating variables—
even if they are small.
 for small D could
be of some form 
hence we cannot eliminate D.
Rule of
relevance
Include relevant physics, exclude
irrelevant.
 for a rock on
Earth, but 
for Earth vs. the sun.

 
12
Common Dimensionless Groups
A colour is a physical object as soon as we consider its dependence, for instance, upon its
luminous source, upon other colours, upon temperatures, upon spaces, and so forth.
—Ernst Mach (1914)
In addition to the numbers 
, Re, We, and Fr, which we have discussed in
most detail, we further summarize some common dimensionless groups in
the next two sections and in table 12.1.

Table 12.1
Examples of dimensionless groups (adapted from Yarin, 2012)
Name
Symbol
Formulation
Comparison ratio
Field of use
Biot
Bi
Convection heat transfer to
conduction heat transfer
Heat transfer
Bond
Bo
Gravity force to capillary force
Motion of drops,
bubbles, wicking
Brinkman
Br
Heat dissipation to heat transfer
Viscous flow,
heat transfer
Capillary
Ca
Viscous force to capillary force
Multiphase flow
Damkohler
Da
Reaction rate to transport rate
(diffusive rate shown)
Reacting flows
Dean
De
Centrifugal and inertial force
relative to viscous force
Flows in curved
channels
Eckert
Ec
Kinetic energy to thermal energy
High speed flows
Euler
Eu
Dynamic pressure to pressure
drop/difference
Aerodynamics,
channel flow
Froude
Fr
Inertia to gravity force, kinetic
energy to potential energy
Wave motion,
biomechanics
Grashof
Gr
Buoyancy force to viscous force
Natural
convection
Knudsen
Kn
Mean free path to characteristic
dimension
Rarefied gas flow
Lewis
Le
Thermal diffusivity to molecular
diffusivity
Combined
heat/mass
transport
Mach
Ma
Inertia to compressibility forces
High speed flows
Peclet
Pe
Advection rate to diffusive rate
Convection, mass
transport
Prandtl
Pr
Momentum diffusivity to thermal
diffusivity
Heat transfer in
fluid flow
Reynolds
Re
Inertia force to viscous force,
dynamic pressure to viscous
pressure
Fluid mechanics
Schmidt
Sc
Momentum diffusion to molecular
diffusion
Mass transport
Weber
We
Dynamic pressure to capillary
pressure
Bubble
formation, drop
impact
12.1    Mach Number

The Mach number applies to high-speed (compressible) flows and can be
formulated as follows:
V = local fluid velocity
c = local speed of sound.
Squaring this ratio and introducing density and length, we have a ratio of a
kinetic energy per unit fluid volume (i.e., a dynamic pressure) to the
potential energy stored in the compressible fluid:
Consider that c can be well approximated in terms of an isentropic change
in pressure with respect to density as
Hence,
12.2    Euler Number
The Euler number (aka pressure coefficient, 
 is defined as
 dynamic pressure of approaching flow
 static pressure of approaching flow
p = local pressure
The Euler number is especially important for (nearly inviscid) flows at
sufficiently high Reynolds numbers and in regions outside of boundary
layers and wakes.

12.3    Table of Dimensionless Groups
Table 12.1 presents a list of common nondimensional groups and a
summary of their interpretations and fields of use. The formulations in the
table use common variables for dimensional scales including L, v, T, p, g,
and λ for characteristic length, velocity, temperature, pressure, gravitational
acceleration, and mean free path, respectively. Thermophysical properties
used include respectively k, 
 μ, β, and σ for conductivity, specific heat,
dynamic viscosity, coefficient of thermal expansion, and surface tension.
Also used are speed of sound, c, and heat transfer coefficient, h.
Depending on the problem, it can be very useful to classify
nondimensional parameters in this table as ratios of one type of the
following quantities: forces, energy, transport rates, lengths, or pressures.
For example, our discussions around Reynolds number have mostly
interpreted it as a ratio of inertial to viscous forces. However, in some cases
(e.g., unsteady flow problems), it may be useful to think of Reynolds
number as a ratio of the advective transport of momentum versus the
diffusion of momentum via viscosity. Consider that the two directions of
this transport can be orthogonal (so the force ratio comparison is less
useful). Weber number is most clearly a ratio of two types of pressure or
pressure forces. Knudsen number is most clearly interpreted as a length
ratio. Among Schmidt, Prandtl, and Lewis numbers, there are two
independent nondimensional parameters, and all involve groupings of
thermophysical properties. These groupings are perhaps best described as
characterizing transport rates among transport of momentum (via viscosity),
molecular diffusion (via Brownian motion of molecules), and storage and
diffusion (via phonon transport) of thermal heat.
12.4    Summary
We presented physically intuitive descriptions of the nondimensional Mach and Euler
numbers.
We presented a table of common nondimensional parameters including their common
formulation and physical interpretation.
Physical interpretations of common dimensional groups include ratios of forces, energy,
transport rates, and pressures.
Problems

12.1.  Show that another version of Peclet number can be derived by
combining the Peclet number of table 12.1 with the Lewis number
shown in the table. This Peclet number is applicable to convective
heat transfer phenomena.
12.2.  We can think of a generalization of the Peclet number as describing
the ratio of advection of momentum, heat, or species to the diffusion
of these respective quantities. Show that the Reynolds number can
therefore be interpreted as a form of Peclet number. Consider a
product of Schmidt and Reynolds numbers and discuss briefly.
12.3.  Dean number De can be used to characterize fluid flows in circular
pipes of diameter d whose centerline is curving through a circular arc
of radius r. Show that Dean number can be expressed as the
geometric mean of inertial forces (in streamwise direction) and
centripetal forces (perpendicular to the streamwise direction).
12.4.  Derive a more interesting version of capillary number where surface
tension forces and viscous forces are each characterized by different
length scales x and y, respectively.

 
13
Scaling Using Approximate Equations
… eine reine Zahl, die wir die Reynolds’sche Zahl nennen wollen. [R is a pure number; we will
call it the Reynolds number.]
—Arnold Sommerfeld (1908)
We have looked at the application of dimensional analysis to problems
where we have enough intuition and/or understanding to identify essential
variables, but we have not (for the most part) striven to write the governing
equations or to scale such equations. In some cases (e.g., running dinosaurs,
flying birds, the biomechanics of weightlifters and rowers), the governing
equations are either unknown or extremely difficult to solve. In other cases,
we have ignored our knowledge of the basic equations in order to test and
demonstrate the power of dimensional analysis. But in the latter case, we
only feigned ignorance to learn about dimensional analysis.
Observing and developing an understanding of the physical world to the
point where we can discover and test (by experimental observation)
governing principles and laws that predict behavior is an essential (perhaps
the essential) goal of science. Even a basic understanding of governing
equations is often superior to simple dimensional analysis alone. By “basic
understanding,” consider that you may be able to draft a governing equation
for a process that you cannot resolve analytically. The equations may be

algebraic relations or may be ordinary or partial differential equations
(PDEs).
Deriving nondimensional parameters from governing equations is always
superior to deriving from dimensional parameters alone. The number of
nondimensional parameters resulting from scaling of governing equations is
always equal to or less than those obtained from analyzing the variables
alone.
In this chapter, we discuss the scaling of governing equations by
revisiting the example of the Olympic rowboats (sculls) from chapter 7. In
section 7.4, we applied our step-by-step approach of dimensional analysis
to McMahon’s (1971) problem, and then applied the rules summarized in
table 11.1 to introduce physical insight. We note that McMahon himself did
not approach the problem in this way—instead, he hypothesized a set of
proportionality relations that respected the dependence of variables but not
the principle of dimensional homogeneity (PDH). For example, McMahon
expresses velocity dependence on boat length as 
 and so on. He
then combines these proportionalities to derive his final result of 
Here, I will take a different tack. I identify algebraic relations among key
variables but will strive to work with relations that respect PDH. If an exact
relation is not known, then I will define and work with appropriate (and
verifiable) constants for these relations. We will also more explicitly
consider geometric similarity.
We first invoke Archimedes’ principle to relate total weight to the
geometry of the displaced volume (of length s). From Archimedes’
principle, the weight of the displaced water can be expressed as
Here, the dimensionless constant 
 takes into account the shape of the
particular geometry of the submerged portion of the boat (geometric
similarity of the submerged geometries demands all scales have same value
of 
 Rearranging,
We now leverage our knowledge of drag laws as discussed throughout
this book, particularly in chapters 4, 7, and 10. The drag laws for

geometrically similar bodies suggest that the total rowing power of the boat 
 in terms of a boat drag  can be expressed in terms of a drag coefficient 
 as
The dimensionless constant  here accounts for whichever particular area
best characterizes the boat drag. For example, McMahon insightfully
suggests the hull’s wetted area, consistent with our discussion section 10.3.
Here, we consider the geometric similarity of the immersed geometry and,
naturally, take into account the wetted area of the boat. Note that, for this
rowing analysis, the specific choice of area is unimportant so long as there
is at least one that makes 
 approximately constant (e.g., insensitive to
Reynolds number). Combining our Archimedes and drag relations to
eliminate length scale:
Solving for V in terms of n (our original question), we arrive at
The latter equation is nondimensional. We can algebraically rearrange this
as
We see the same 
 result as before, but in the current analysis we have
kept additional information regarding the exponents of weight, the drag law,
and so forth. Importantly, our approach (unlike McMahon’s approach) has
resulted in an equation that explicitly includes the effects of viscosity via
the drag coefficient. Our more general result helps explore the trade-offs
and dependencies among drag coefficient reduction, the rowing power
contributed by any one rower, and weight reduction. The current result also
clearly identifies a natural rower quality measure of the form 

 which may be useful in analyzing the trade-off between
output power and weight of potential rowers. Dimensional analysis and
scaling of even approximate equations governing the physics is indeed a
powerful tool with great potential for insight.
13.1    Summary
Throughout this book, we have performed dimensional analysis by identifying essential
variables in a problem and then analyzing the relation among them. We have also striven
to identify rules and guidelines by which physical intuition can be brought to bear. In
this chapter, we introduced a separate and powerful method based on analysis of
approximate governing equations.
Analysis of even approximate governing equations can be superior to more standard
dimensional analysis alone because the form of the equations already limits and specifies
relations among variables.
We demonstrated this approach by revisiting the rowing example from chapter 7 to
derive a scaling law. The analysis is more intuitive than that presented by McMahon in
that it preserves PDH (in contrast to simple proportionality statements, which do not). In
addition, our analysis was arguably more complete than McMahon’s in that it resulted in
a scaling law that considers the effect of viscosity (through the drag coefficient) and
includes verifiable proportionality constants in the final relation. Our relation also
identifies trade-offs among drag coefficient reduction, weight reduction, and power
output per weight for the rowers.
Deriving nondimensional parameters from governing equations is typically superior to
deriving from dimensional parameters alone. The number of nondimensional parameters
resulting from scaling of governing equations is always less than or equal to those
obtained from analyzing the variables alone.
Problems
13.1  The equation of motion for falling rock and neglecting air resistance is
given by
Nondimensionalize this equation using the respective initial height
and velocity, 
 and 
 as scaling constants. Identify any
dimensionless parameters that arise.
13.2.  Conservation of energy states that the summation of kinetic energy
and potential energy is constant (e.g., neglecting the heat generated by
friction). We express this for some mass as

Nondimensionalize the equation using the respective characteristic
velocity and height, 
 and 
 as scaling constants. Identify any
dimensionless parameters that arise.
13.3.  Consider the following equation for the time t response x(t) of an
underdamped spring-mass system with a damping coefficient γ (due
to friction), a natural frequency ω, and a phase α, which can be
written as
where 
 
is 
the 
initial 
magnitude 
of 
the 
displacement.
Nondimensionalize this equation and consider the limiting behavior
as the argument of the exponent (which must itself be
nondimensional) becomes small but not zero.

 
Closing Note
The analyses and various examples presented in this book should serve as
an introduction to the general approach and value of dimensional analysis
and provide some guidance as to how to combine dimensional analysis with
physical insight. My hope is that readers will try their luck at posing a new
scaling law and validating it with experiments.

 
Appendix A: Properties of Common Fluids
Table A.1
Fluid properties at 1 atm and 20°C (adapted from White, 2016)
Temperature dependence of water viscosity (from Fox et al., 2015):

 
References
Achenbach, E. The effects of surface roughness and tunnel blockage on the flow past spheres.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 65.1 (1974): 113–125.
Achenbach, E. Experiments on the flow past spheres at very high Reynolds numbers. Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 54.3 (1972): 565–575.
Adam, C. D. Fundamental studies of bloodstain formation and characteristics. Forensic
Science International 219.1–3 (2012): 76–87.
Alexander, M. R. A dynamic similarity hypothesis for the gaits of quadrupedal mammals.
Journal of Zoology, London 201 (1983): 135–152.
Alexander, M. R. Walking and running. The Mathematical Gazette 80 (1999): 488.
Alexander, R. M. Dynamics of dinosaurs and other extinct giants. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1991.
Almedeij, J. Drag coefficient of flow around a sphere: Matching asymptotically the wide
trend. Powder Technology 186.3 (2008): 218–223.
American Society of Mechanical Engineering. Historic mechanical engineering landmark: The
David Taylor Model Basin. Naval Surface Warfare Center, Carderock Division, West
Bethesda, Maryland, January 30, 1998.
Attinger, D., et al. Fluid dynamics topics in bloodstain pattern analysis: Comparative review
and research opportunities. Forensic Science International 231.1 (2013): 375–396.
Batchelor, G. K. The life and legacy of G. I. Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2008.
Belendez, A., C. Pascual, D. I. Mendez, T. Belendez, C. Neipp. Exact solution for the
nonlinear pendulum. Revista Brasileira de Ensino de Fisica 29.4 (2007): 645–648.
Berberan-Santos, M. N., and L. Pogliani. Two alternative derivations of Bridgman’s theorem.
Journal of Mathematical Chemistry 26.1–3 (1999): 255.
Blevins, R. D. Applied fluid dynamics handbook. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1984.
Boussinesq, J. V. Comptes rendus. Journal de Mathematiques 1 (1905): 285–332.
Bridgman, P. W. Dimensional analysis. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1931.

Chandkrasekhar, S. Newton’s Principia for the common reader. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1995.
Choi, J., W.-P. Jeon, and H. Choi. Mechanism of drag reduction by dimples on a sphere.
Physics of Fluids 18.4 (2006): 041702.
Coleman, H. W., and W. G. Steele. Experimentation and uncertainty analysis for engineers.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 1998.
Colino, J. M., A. J. Barbero, and F. J. Tapiador. Dynamics of a skydiver’s epic free fall.
Physics Today (April 2014): 64–65.
Cooper, N. G., and G. B. West, eds. Particle physics: A Los Alamos primer. Cambridge: CUP
Archive, 1988.
Deakin, M. A. B. G. I. Taylor and the Trinity test. International Journal of Mathematical
Education in Science and Technology 42 (2011): 1069–1079.
Duan, Z., B. He, and Y. Duan. Sphere drag and heat transfer. Scientific Reports 5 (2015):
12304.
Fey, U., et al. A new Strouhal-Reynolds-number relationship for the circular cylinder. Physics
of Fluids 10.7 (1998): 1547.
Fourier, J. Analytical theory of heat. Translated by Firmin Didot. Cambridge University Press,
1822.
Fox, R. W., A. T. McDonald, and P. J. Pritchard. Introduction to fluid mechanics. Ninth
edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
Fulcher, L. P., and B. F. Davis. Theoretical and experimental study of the motion of the simple
pendulum. American Journal of Physics 44.1 (1976): 51–55.
Gibbings, J. C. Dimensional analysis. London: Springer, 2011.
Hirt, C., S. Claessens, T. Fecher, M. Kuhn, R. Pail, and M. Rexer. New ultrahigh-resolution
picture of Earth’s gravity field. Geophysical Research Letters 40.16 (2013): 4279–4283.
Incropera, F. P., A. S. Lavine, T. L. Bergman, and D. P. DeWitt. Principles of heat and mass
transfer. Seventh edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2013.
Ipsen, D. C. Units, dimensions, and dimensionless numbers. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960.
Lemon, D. S. A student’s guide to dimensional analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2017.
Lima, F. M. S., and P. Arun. An accurate formula for the period of a simple pendulum
oscillating beyond the small angle regime. American Journal of Physics 74.10 (2006): 892–
895.
Macagno, E. O. Historico-critical review of dimensional analysis. Journal of the Franklin
Institute 292.6 (1971): 391–402.
Mach, E. The analysis of sensations, and the relation of the physical to the psychical. Chicago:
Open Court, 1914.
Mack, J. E. Semi-popular motion-picture record of the Trinity explosion. U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission, MDDC-221, 1946.
Mahajan, S. Street-fighting mathematics. MIT OpenCourseWare, 2008.
Maxwell, J. C., and J. J. Thompson. A treatise on electricity and magnetism, vol. 1. Clarendon,
1892.
McMahon, T. A. Rowing: A similarity analysis. Science 23 (July 1971): 349–351.

Mills, I., T. Cvitaš, K. Homann, N. Kallay, and K. Kuchitsu. Quantities, units and symbols in
physical chemistry. Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell Science, 1993.
Moulton, F. R. The influence of astronomy on mathematics. Science (1911): 357–364.
Newton, I. Newton’s Principia: The mathematical principles of natural philosophy. Trans. A.
Motte. New York, NY: Geo. P. Putnam, 1850.
Nikuradse, J. Gesetzmäßigkeiten der turbulenten Strömung in glatten Rohren (Nachtrag).
Forschung im Ingenieurwesen 4.1 (1933): 44.
Nikuradse, J. Laws of flow in rough pipes. National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics,
Technical Memorandum 1292, 1950.
Rainforth, E. C., and M. Manzella. Estimating speeds of dinosaurs from trackways: A re-
evaluation of assumptions. Contributions to the paleontology of New Jersey (II)–Field guide
and proceedings, 2007 Oct. 12–13; Geological Association of New Jersey XXIV Annual
Conference and Field Trip, 2007.
Rayleigh, L. The principle of similitude. Nature 95 (1915): 66.
Riabouchinsky, D. The principle of similitude: Letter to the editor. Nature 95 (1915): 591.
Roth, E. Drag of non-spherical solid particles of regular and irregular shape. Powder
Technology 182 (2008): 342–353.
Rott, N. Lord Rayleigh and hydrodynamic similarity. Physics of Fluids A 4.12 (December
1992), 2595–2600.
Russell, J. L. Kepler’s laws of planetary motion: 1609–1666. British Journal for the History of
Science 2.1 (1964): 1–24.
Schlichting, H., and K. Gersten. Boundary-layer theory. Berlin: Springer, 2000.
Sedov, L. I. 1950. Similarity and dimensional methods in mechanics. New York: Academic
Press, 1959.
Sommerfeld, 
A. 
Ein 
Beitrag 
zur 
hydrodynamischen 
Erklärung 
der 
turbulenten
Flüssigkeitsbewegung. Proceedings of the International Congress on Mathematicians (Rome,
April 6–11, 1908) 3 (1909):116–124.
Taylor, G. I. The formation of a blast wave by a very intense explosion. I. Theoretical
discussion. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 201.1065 (1950a): 159–174.
Taylor, G. I. The formation of a blast wave by a very intense explosion. II. The atomic
explosion of 1945. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 201.1065 (1950b): 175–186.
Taylor, M., A. I. Diaz, L. A. Jodar-Sanchez, and R. J. Villanueva-Mico. 100 Years of
dimensional analysis: New steps toward empirical law deduction. arXiv preprint.
arXiv:0709.3584.
Tennekes, H. The simple science of flight. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Van Dyke, M. An album of fluid motion. Stanford, CA: Parabolic Press, 1982.
White, F. M. Fluid mechanics. Eighth edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2016.
Wright, O., and F. C. Kelly. How we invented the airplane. Philadelphia: McKay, 1953.
Yarin, L. P. The pi-theorem. Berlin: Springer, 2012.
Zohuri, B. Dimensional analysis and self-similarity methods for engineers and scientists.
Berlin: Springer, 2015.

 
Index
Aerodynamics
airfoils, 32–33, 135–136
bluff bodies, 135–136
falling body, 35–38
of flyers, 100–107. See also Flight; Effect of streamlining
lift and drag coefficients, 101
Ambiguities arising from incomplete dimensional analysis, 137–138
Archimedes’ principle, 94, 152
Astrophysics
orbital period of planets, 57
universal gravitational constant, 44, 55–57. See also Kepler’s third law; Orbital period
Atomic explosion analysis, 78–81
Trinity bomb test, 79–80
Baumgartner, Felix, 38
Bench press. See Weightlifters
Bingham number, 129
Biomechanics
muscle stress, 82
of flight, 99–105
of rowers, 97–98
of weightlifters, 82–84
walking and running, 84–86
Blood splatter (forensics), 74
Boats
drag on row boat (racing shell), 93–99, 151–153
drag on ships, 125–128
Bodies falling through air
bluff body, 135
skydiver, 35
stone (or ball), 50–54

Boltzmann’s constant, 143
Bond number (Bo), 91
Boundary layers
laminar versus turbulent, 22–23, 131–132
separation, 131–134
Brute force experimentation, 29–31
Buckingham, Edgar, 2
Buckingham pi theorem
comparison to Ipsen’s method, 119
method, 111–115
Closing a problem with experiments, 50–54, 61–62, 116–118
Commercial jet, 101–105
Collapse of data
atomic explosion radius, 80
droplet splatter spine data, 76
falling body, 53
general concept, 34–35
mechanical and animal flyers, 104
orbital periods, 57
pendulum periods, 62
rower velocity data, 99
running animals, 88
weightlifter data, 84. See also Scaling
Conservation of energy, 20
Darcy friction factor, 116
Dead lift. See Weightlifters
Determinant, 113
Dimensional analysis. See Ipsen’s method
Dimensional functions, rules for. See Rules for combining physical insight with dimensional
analysis
Dimensional matrix, 113–114
Dimensionless numbers, 148
Dimensions, 6–9
of derivatives, 8
of integrals, 8
versus units, 6
Dinosaur speed, 84–89
table of data, 89
Tyrannosaurus rex (T. rex), 89
Drag
on a cylinder, 32–33
drag crisis, 134
effect of streamlining, 32–33
on flyers, 105–108
power dissipated, 29, 97, 105–106
on rough spheres, 131–135

on smooth spheres, 33–35, 133–135
on a submarine, 29–31, 47–49
surface roughness effect on, 45, 131–135. See also No-slip condition
Drag coefficient (CD), 32–37, 48–49, 101–102, 105, 135–136
Drag crisis, 134
Dynamic pressure, 22–23
Dynamic similarity, 121–129
Einstein, Albert, 43
Effect of streamlining, 32–33
Euler, Leonhard, 1
Euler number (pressure coefficient, Eu), 149–150
Fission bomb. See Atomic explosion analysis
Flight
aircraft engine power, 103
angle of attack, 32
and drag coefficient, 48–49, 101, 105
great flight diagram, 99, 102–105
human powered, 103
insects and mosquitos, 105
lift coefficient (CL), 107
wing span and area, 28, 100–103
Fluid mechanics, 21–24. See also Aerodynamics; Boats; Drag; Flight; Pipe flow
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 6
Friction factor. See Darcy friction factor
Froude number (Fr), 86–89, 96
in biomechamics, 86–89
in wave motion, 96
Functions, 9
asymptotic limits of, 14–15
function of a constant, 10
inversion of, 10–11, 87, 108
nested function, 11
range of applicability, 11
unknown functions, 9–10. See also Rules for combining physical insight with dimensional
analysis
Gait, 85–87
running vs. walking, 85–86
Geometric similarity, 28–29, 33
relevance to absorbing dimensionless constants, 44–45
Guessing unknown functions, 13–14
Heat transfer
between wire and flow, 70–71, 141–143
continuum versus noncontinuum, 144
Hydraulics. See Fluid mechanics; Pipe flow

Ipsen, David Carl, 3, 45
Ipsen’s method
comparison with Buckingham pi theorem, 119
description and comments, 45–47
detailed examples of, 48, 52, 56, 95, 100–101
inelegant applications of, 49–50
Kepler’s third law, 57
Kinematic similarity, 121–122
Kinetic energy, 20
Kinetic theory, 143
Knudsen number (Kn), 148–149
Laminar flow, 23–24
Lewis number (Le), 148–149
Liquid droplets
splatter and spine patterns, 74–77. See also Weber number (We)
Lift coefficient (CL), 32, 101–102, 107
Mach number (Ma), 31, 38, 71–72, 105, 147–149
Martini glass, 13–14
Maxwell, James Clerk, 6, 112
McMahon, Thomas A., 93
Midge, 100–101, 104
Models and prototypes, 28–29, 121–128
Momentum, 19–20
Muscle stress, 82
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), 32
Newton, Isaac, 1, 2, 5, 19, 20, 21, 22
Newtonian fluid, 21
Newton’s second law, 1, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 36, 51
No-slip condition, 21–22
Nondimensional functions, rules for. See Rules for combining physical insight with
dimensional analysis
Olympic athletes. See Weightlifters; Rowers
Orbital period, 56–57, 145
Peclet number (Pe), 148, 150
Pendulum, 59–63
measuring Earth sphericity, 63
upside-down, 85
Pi (π), 44
Pipe flow, 112–113, 116–118
Moody chart for, 117
proportionality to pipe length, 116
roughness effect on, 112–113, 117–118
Potential energy, 20–21

Power
of flyers, 105–106
of rowers, 152–153
Power law
atomic explosion radii, 80
droplet splatter spine data, 76
mechanical and animal flyers, 104
orbital periods, 57
as possible asymptotic limit, 15
rower velocity data, 99
Prandtl number (Pr), 148–149
Principle of dimensional homogeneity (PDH), 12
in approximate equations, 152
in evaluating a known dependence, 70
guessing functions, 13
spotting errors, 12–13
Rayleigh, Lord, 1–2, 70–71, 131, 141–143
Reynolds number (Re), 23–25
critical (transition), 24
as dependent variable in boat drag, 96
determining size of wake, 132–133
drag dependence on, 35, 134
in droplet splatter, 77
in flight, 101
in flight power dissipation, 105–106
forcing formulation to include, 72
interpretations of, 32, 48–49, 149
inverse scaling to Froude number (Fr), 127–128
laminar versus turbulent, 23–24, 132, 134, 117
lift dependence on, 106–107
in prototype scaling, 124–125
versus roughness for bluff body drag, 133–135
Riabouchinsky, Dimitri, 2, 141–142,
Riabouchinsky–Rayleigh Paradox, 141–143
resolution of, 143–144. See also Rule of relevance
Rowers, 93–99, 151–153
Rule of relevance, 144–146
Rules for combining physical insight with dimensional analysis
for functions of dimensional variables (rules D1–D5), 41–45
for functions of dimensionless variables (rules ND1–ND6), 67–73
rule of relevance, 144–145
summary of, 146
Running speed of animals, 85–90
Scaling, 121–128
confirmation of scaling of atomic explosion data, 78–81
difficulty in confirming a weak scaling, 98–99. See also Collapse of data

Schmidt number (Sc), 148–149
Sedov, Leonid, 78
Similarity laws, 122–123
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 151
Speed of light, 43–44
Speed of sound, 71, 72, 91, 105, 147, 148. See also Mach number (Ma)
Spine patterns (droplets). See Liquid droplets
Splatter, 75–76
Sports science
Olympic weightlifters, 82–84
rowers, 93–98, 151–153
Strouhal number (St), 65
Submarines, 29–32
Ipsen’s method applied to, 47–49
Taylor, Geoffrey Ingram, 78
Tennekes, Hendrik, 9, 93, 104–105
Terminal velocity, 37–38
Thermophysical properties, 148–149, 157
Turbulence, 23–24. See also Turbulent flow
Turbulent flow, 23–24
boundary layer, 22–23, 131–134
laminar-to-turbulent transition, 23–24
pipe flow, 116–119
wake, 131–135
Unit conversion factors (UCFs), 8–9
Units, 6–7
Système internationale d’unités, 6
Universal gravitational constant, 55
Vaschy, Aimé, 2
Von Neumann, John, 78
Weber number (We), 75–77
Weightlifters, 82–84, 109

