www.it-ebooks.info

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
 
 
 
 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

v
Contents at a Glance
About the Author....................................................................................................xxi
Acknowledgments................................................................................................xxiii
Introduction...........................................................................................................xxv
■
■Chapter 1: Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP.............................. 1
■
■Chapter 2: Defining the Chart of Accounts.......................................................... 27
■
■Chapter 3: Document Control.............................................................................. 41
■
■Chapter 4: Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees............. 55
■
■Chapter 5: Creating a General Ledger (G/L)......................................................... 65
■
■Chapter 6: Clearing Open Items........................................................................... 81
■
■Chapter 7: Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs............................. 101
■
■Chapter 8: Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing........................... 111
■
■Chapter 9: Defining the House Bank.................................................................. 117
■
■Chapter 10: Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases............................................ 151
■
■Chapter 11: Customizing a Cash Journal.......................................................... 163
■
■Chapter 12: Financial Statement Versions (FSV)............................................... 173
■
■Chapter 13: Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules.............................. 189
■
■Chapter 14: Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable................ 203
■
■Chapter 15: Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence.................. 263
■
■Chapter 16: Customizing Special G/L Transactions........................................... 281
■
■Chapter 17: End User - Accounting Document Posting..................................... 297
www.it-ebooks.info

vi
■ Contents at a Glance
■
■Chapter 18: Customizing the Controlling Module.............................................. 359
■
■Chapter 19: Customizing New General Ledger Accounting............................... 421
■
■Appendix A: Useful General Ledger Accounts.................................................... 469
■
■Appendix B: Some Useful Transaction Codes.................................................... 547
Index..................................................................................................................... 555
www.it-ebooks.info

xxv
Introduction
In this introduction, I explain the meaning of the acronym SAP, the origin of SAP, and the concept of SAP 
implementation. We will go further to look at Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) as it relates to SAP, the 
importance of SAP, and the steps involved in implementing SAP ERP. 
What Is SAP?
SAP (Systems, Applications, and Products) in data processing is the leading ERP (Enterprise Resource 
Planning) business application software in the market today. The software provides a unified platform that 
allows business processes integration. SAP is developed by SAP AG, a German software company founded in 
1972 by five ex-IBM employees. With its headquarters in Germany, SAP has regional offices around the world.
SAP is used by many Fortune 500 companies worldwide as a business solution for processing 
operational data and for generating reports in real-time, which helps all levels of management make better 
decisions and enables them to manage business processes effectively and efficiently.
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning)
ERP is accomplished through business software packages like SAP that are made up of application modules 
that companies use to store data and manage business processes as a whole. Modules involve accounting, 
human resources, security, supply chain management, and more. These modules are used to manage the 
“8Ms,” (Man, Material, Machine, Money, Method, Minutes, Management, and Marketing). The idea is to 
improve efficient management enterprise resources.
Besides SAP, ERP packages are produced by Oracle (PeopleSoft), BAAN, JD Edwards, and Siebel,  
among others.
The Importance of SAP ERP
Since its inception in 1972, SAP has gained international acceptance across the world by large organizations 
as the most preferred business solution package. SAP ERP is structured in three-tier layers, which makes 
it a robust ERP software solution. Apart from being the most widely used application software in the world 
today, the following benefits are derived from the use of SAPERP.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxvi
■ Introduction
Real-Time Three-Tier Architecture
SAP supports a real-time three-tier (R/3) architecture made up of these three layers:
• 
Presentation Layer: This is the first layer in a typical three-tier architecture and it 
serves as the input device that controls the SAP system. It is user-friendly Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) that’s used by the end-user to input data into the system.  
It also serves as a data-output device. The presentation layer communicates with the 
application layer.
• 
Application Layer: This layer serves as the middleman in a SAP system. It’s where 
the all processing is done. The application layer can be referred to as the central 
processing unit (CPU). It collects data from the database, processes it, and passes it 
to the presentation layer.
• 
Database: Allows the data to be stored, called up, and modified.
The real-time three-tier architecture allows separate business processes to function under a single, 
integrated business management information system.
Customizable Solution
SAP ERP 6.0 is scalable and suited for medium and large organizations, since it provides a customizable 
solution using the structured programming language, ABAP/4. This flexibility allows companies to 
customize the system to meet their specific needs. In order to enable customers and partners to customize 
the SAP application to meet their specific-business requirements, SAP comes with the Easy Access menu 
and the Implementation Guide (IMG) menus.
Easy Access
The Easy Access menu is a user-specific point of entry into the SAP system. It is the first screen that comes up 
when you logon to SAP. It is designed in a tree structure containing a list several key items that provide the 
options that allow you to navigate the system and perform tasks and business processes. For example, you 
can perform transactions and generate reports and access web addresses (where you can access documents 
from a remote internet server). 
IMG (Implementation Guide)
The IMG is a generic tool that you can use to customize business processes and requirements to meet 
specific needs of a company. You are presented with three implementation variants in SAP:
• 
SAP Reference IMG. This is a standard structured hierarchical tool in R/3 system 
(real-time three-tier architecture) that contains the procedures for customizing 
various country settings and application modules in the SAP system.
• 
Project IMG. Configuration process can be very daunting. To help manage 
the complexity involved when using the reference IMG, you can create each 
implementation project based on specific functions needed for business processes 
and requirements. For example, you could use it to reduce the project scope to 
specific objects such as countries.
• 
Project View IMG. You choose certain properties by specific criteria in order to 
generate views to organize your project activities. For example, a project view could 
hold each activity required in a project IMG.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxvii
■ Introduction
Matchcode
Matchcode is a user-friendly search function designed to help you lookup or retrieve data records stored  
in the system. It’s an efficient way of looking for records stored in the system when you do not remember 
their keys.
Supports Other Operating Systems
SAPERP 6.0 EHP7 is very versatile and supports various operating systems, such as:
• 
Microsoft Windows 2000 professional, Microsoft XP professional, and Microsoft 
Server 2003
• 
HP UX 11.11 and HP UX 11.23
• 
Novell SUSE SLES9
• 
Sun Solaris 9 and Sun Solaris 1
• 
IBM AIX 5.2 and IBM AIX 5.3
Unified Platform
SAP provides the platform where all business processes are executed in a single system and share  
common information.
Incorporating Multiple Languages and Currencies
SAP ERP is ideal for multinational organizations because of the flexibility incorporated, which allows the 
system to run on multiple currencies and use different languages. These features make SAP a global  
software solution.
Integrated ERP Solutions
SAPERP is an integrated ERP package that incorporates other modules. These include Financial (FI), 
Controlling (CO), Material Management (MM), Sales and Distribution (SD), Production Planning (PP), 
Human Resources (HR), Financial Supply Chain Management (FSCM), Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM), and others.
Reduced Implementation Cost
The cost and time needed to implement SAP can be reduced by applying rapid-implementation techniques 
using global and industry-specific templates during customization.
Global Presence
As the market leader in ERP, the SAPERP solution is currently used in over 28 industry sectors and has a 
strong global presence in more than 120 countries worldwide. This number is predicted to rise.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxviii
■ Introduction
SAP FICO
FICO stands for Financial (FI) and Controlling (CO). These are the two core modules in SAP and are tightly 
integrated to help management maintain and generate financial reports for efficient decision-making and 
strategic planning.
Financial (FI)
The FI module is a business process designed specifically for organizations to maintain their financial 
records efficiently on a daily basis, for management to be able to ascertain their financial position, and for 
those who need to generate financial statutory reports for external purposes to meet the needs of various 
stakeholders in real-time.
The FI module consists of other sub modules, including: General Ledger (G/L), Accounts  
Receivable (AR), Accounts Payable (AP), Bank Accounting, Asset Accounting, Special Purpose Ledger,  
Travel Management, and so on.
FI is integrated into other modules like Sales and Distribution (SD) and Material Management (MM). 
Postings made in these modules with financial implications are posted real-time to FI.
Controlling (CO)
The Controlling module is designed specifically to provide operational information to management to  
aid better decision-making, and for formulating strategic and operational planning. In SAP ERP,  
the Controlling module is composed of the following sub modules: Cost Element, Cost Center,  
Internal Order, Activity-Based Costing, Product Costing, Profitability Analysis, and Profit Center.
Why This Book?
This book arose out of my sincere desire to simplify the complexity involved in SAP FICO configuration.  
It is also an attempt to make SAP FICO configuration an interesting career path for those so inclined. 
As a SAP trainer at the corporate and individual level, I’ve learned that the best way to teach is to design 
a systematic approach that guides beginners step by step through using all learning resources available.  
This can make learning fun and interesting. That is what I have done in this book.
You’ll find that SAP ERP Financial Accounting and Controlling: Configuration and Use Management 
is one of the most illustrative SAP FI books on the market. It includes numerous screenshots and practical 
examples. Even those without prior configuration knowledge or skills of any sort will be able to follow each 
step with ease, which is what makes this book unique.
To promote a better understanding of the complexities and concepts of the activities throughout 
the book, I followed a problem-based approach that tries to replicate real-world situations. As you work 
through each problem, you will gain the practical experience needed to become an expert in the world of 
SAP. Every problem used in the book is geared to meet business processes and requirements unique to each 
customizing step, but the overall objective is to equip you as a functional SAP consultant on the completion 
of this book.
The book covers the financial (FI) module, the controlling (CO) module, the new general ledger (G/L) 
accounting modules, and some aspects of end-user postings.
This book is unlike others in that it incorporates IMG (Implementation Guide) and accounting. The 
IMG side of the system is where SAP configurations are performed and the accounting side of the system is 
where end-users input data into the system. It is also unique in giving readers a great opportunity to learn the 
rudiments of FI, CO, new G/L implementation, and accounting for end-users simultaneously. The benefit of 
combining the SAP implementation and Easy Access is that you have an opportunity to explore both sides of 
the system to gain an in-depth understanding of how data flows in the system. Additionally, trainers will find 
the book excellent material for those charged with showing others how to configure and use SAP FICO.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxix
■ Introduction
A Quick Overview of the Book’s Contents
Each chapter provides a sequence to be followed in customizing SAP FICO from start to finish. The 
sequence has been arranged to give you the opportunity to work through a complete FICO customizing 
lifecycle progressively. Each chapter includes all the configuration concepts or activities necessary for your 
customizing or draws on a previous chapter. 
Chapter 1 sets the scene by looking at organizational structure and explains how to create various 
objects in SAPR/3. This includes how to create company codes, business areas, segments, country-specific 
settings, and so forth. 
Chapter 2 explains and defines the Master Record, including how to edit the Chart of Accounts and how 
to assign a company code to the Chart of Accounts. It further explores how to define the Account Group and 
Retained Earnings account.
Chapter 3 looks at the purpose of document control and various forms of document types in the SAP 
R/3 system. It also looks at the steps involved in defining number ranges and setting field status variants.  
It emphasizes the various principles along with the importance of posting keys, normal and special posting 
periods, and how to create variants for posting periods.
Chapter 4 explores posting authorizations by discussing the purpose of posting authorization, defining 
tolerance groups for G/L accounts and employees, assigning users to defined tolerance groups, and creating 
accounts for clearing differences.
Chapter 5 takes a look at the general ledger and its sub ledgers. It covers when to use line items and 
open item management, how to create G/L accounts, and how to set other objects settings to consider when 
creating G/L accounts.
Chapter 6 discusses clearing open Items and various types of open-item clearing issues. It covers 
configuring automatic open item clearing, maximum exchange rate difference settings, the importance of 
foreign currency valuation, foreign currency balance sheet accounts, and G/L account balances managed on 
an open-item basis. It also looks at types of exchange rates and how open items are valued in foreign currency.
Chapter 7 explains how to define local and foreign currencies for company codes, maintain the 
relationship between currencies per currency type, and the purpose of exchange rates. It also explores how 
to maintain the various exchange rate types and how to define translation ratios for currency transactions.
Chapter 8 explores how to define GR/IR (Goods Receipt/Invoice Receipt) and how to configure GR/IR 
settings in the SAP R/3 system.
Chapter 9 deals with the House Bank and how master records are created in it. It explains using the 
House Bank ID and account ID, bank statements supported by SAP, creating global settings for electronic 
bank statements, configuring manual bank statements, defining posting keys and posting rules for check 
deposit, and defining variants for check deposit.
Chapter 10 looks at taxes on sales and purchases, including VAT. It covers how to create sale and 
purchase taxes in SAP R/3, how to specify the tax category in the G/L accounts to which taxes are posted, 
how to assign the basic tax code for sales and purchases, how to specify the accounts to which different tax 
types are posted, and how to assign tax codes for non-taxable transactions.
Chapter 11 covers the cash journal by explaining what it is and explaining which items are defined 
when setting up a new cash journal. It identifies the document types for cash journal items, explains how to 
create G/L accounts for cash journals, and how to set up the cash journal.
Chapter 12 explains the Financial Statement Versions (FSV). The chapter looks at how to create an FSV 
from scratch, covers the specifications to be conducted when defining FSV, how to call up FSV hierarchy 
nodes, and how to assign appropriate G/L accounts.
Chapter 13 explores the Integration of FI with other modules in SAP R/3. This includes automatic 
postings of material to FI, using the valuation class of material as the key to which the G/L account materials 
are posted, the settings for automatic posting configuration, how to create inventory accounts using the BSX 
transaction key, how to create corresponding credit accounts for GR/IR clearing account using the WRX 
transaction key, how integration of FI and SD works, how to prepare revenue account determination, and 
how to define accounts for overhead cost controlling.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxx
■ Introduction
Chapter 14 deals with Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable, including the steps involved in creating 
a payables/receivables, the function of the account group, how to create IDs for accounting clerks, how to 
create vendor/customer details, how to resolve number range overlaps, and more. It also covers payment terms 
in SAP, the purpose of defining payment terms in SAP R/3, and how to create installment plans. The chapter 
also defines the sort method and adjustment accounts for regrouping receivables/payables, and adjustment 
accounts for receivables/payables by maturity. Finally, the chapter shows you how to adjust or post document 
reversals using the negative posting method, and how to define reasons for reversal.
Chapter 15 covers correspondence and dunning, including how to define correspondence types,  
sender details, the various levels involved in defining dunning. It explains how to determine special  
G/L transactions so the system can dun them.
Chapter 16 looks at why it is important to disclose special G/L transactions separately by using 
alternative reconciliation accounts. It provides an explanation of special G/L transactions, including 
guarantees, down payments, and bills of exchange. It also covers down payments in depth.
Chapter 17 looks at how to create and change vendor/customer master records in Easy Access, how to 
post invoices in the system, how to treat credit memos, how to hold and park documents, how to manage 
incoming and outgoing payments, how to process partial payments and residual items, how to generate 
dunning, and how to manage cash journal postings. 
Chapter 18 explores some of the Controlling modules, starting with the overall organizational structure. 
It then looks at cost element accounting, cost center accounting, and profit centers.
Chapter 19 looks at the new general ledger and its benefits, the leading/non-leading ledgers, how to 
define ledgers and currencies, what scenarios are and how to assign them to ledgers. It also briefly explains 
accounting principles and how to assign them to ledger groups. Finally, it covers real-time integration 
of controlling (CO) with FI, how to define documents for entry view in a ledger, the classification of G/L 
accounts for document splitting, zero-balance clearing, and more. 
Appendix A covers all the appropriate G/L accounts needed for your configuration. 
Appendix B provides some useful transaction codes that allow you to access tasks easily rather than 
going through the menu path, which may be time-consuming.
www.it-ebooks.info

1
Chapter 1
Customizing Organizational 
Structure in SAP ERP
In this chapter, you learn how to customize the key organizational units in Financial Accounting (FI). At the 
end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Define a company
• 
Define a company code
• 
Assign a company to a company code
• 
Define a business area
• 
Define a segment
• 
Define and assign fiscal year variants to a company code
• 
Define open and closing periods variants and assign variants to a company code
Organizational Structure
Organizational structure is a formal line of command structured systematically to highlight the order of 
authority, relationships, position, communication, duties, responsibilities, and reporting procedure in an 
organization. The primary objective of an organization is to utilize its resources effectively to maximize 
return to the shareholders. To do this, an organization needs a formal organizational chart (organogram) 
spelling out how tasks and activities are allocated, coordinated, and supervised. In addition, it shows how 
information flows between various management levels.
SAP tends to mimic the conventional organizational structure in the representation and distribution of 
tasks in the system based on functions and departments. In SAP, the structure is made up of organizational 
units just like the conventional organizational structure in a business.
The organizational units in FI in SAP ERP are specifically geared toward meeting business functions and 
generating reports (financial statements) for external purposes while meeting legal regulations. Creating an 
organizational unit is a minimum requirement in SAP FI.
Organizational structure in FI is company code-specific. As part of organizational structure 
customization in a SAP system, it is therefore mandatory to define appropriate organizational units in the 
system for the system to be able to perform your business processes effectively.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
2
Figure 1-1 depicts the organizational units in Financial Accounting and the sub-modules within 
Financial Accounting in SAP ERP using an organizational chart. The sub-modules in Financial Accounting 
include Accounts Payable, Accounts Receivable, General Ledger, Asset Accounting, and so on. Data entered 
at this level is valid for all company codes and organizational units in the client.
The Client
The client is an independent unit in the SAP ERP with its own master records and sets of tables. Data entered 
at this level is valid for all company codes (defined in the next section) and organizational units in the client. 
In other words, all the company codes in the client will have access to data created at this level. For that 
reason, the client is said to be the highest level in a SAP system hierarchy. The benefit of the client is that 
data is entered only once, thus eliminating duplication, reducing redundancies, and saving resources like 
storage space. As all company codes in the client can have access to the same data created at this level, the 
need to create individual data for each company code is eliminated.
Each client has its own unique log-on key, which must be entered by the user in order to access the 
client and perform business processes.
In a client, you can define one or more company codes. Likewise, one or more business areas can be 
assigned to one or multiple company codes, as depicted in Figure 1-2.
Company Code
A company code is a separate independent and legal entity that allows you to model and remodel your 
business organization based on financial reporting requirements (such as the profit and loss statements 
and balance sheets). Every company code in SAP ERP is represented with a unique four-character code. The 
code allows you to identify a company in a client. This is the case in an environment where you have more 
than one company code in a client.
Financial
Accounting
Accounts
Payable
Accounts
Receivable
Asset
Accounting
Figure 1-1.  Example of organizational units of Financial Accounting in SAP 
Client
Several Company Codes can
be assigned to one or more
Business Areas and vice
versa.
Business
Area 1000
Business
Area 2000
Business
Area 3000
Business
Area 4000
Company
0001
Company
0002
Company
0003
Figure 1-2.  Many-to-many relationships between company codes and business areas
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
3
In practice, global corporations have operations in several countries across the globe and it is often 
mandatory for global corporates by law to meet legal reporting and disclosure requirements in each country 
of their operation. Every country has its own accounting regulations with which companies operating within 
their border must comply. SAP ERP is beneficial in this aspect, because it allows organizational units in 
the same corporate organization functioning in various countries to function independently for reporting 
purposes. This enables you to meet specific tax and other legal reporting requirements by allowing you to 
use a separate unique company code for a company in each country.
In the SAP ERP when customizing company code, you define the following items:
• 
Company name
• 
Country
• 
Language key
• 
Currency
In addition, a company code must be assigned at least one operational or primary chart of accounts 
needed for business processes in the company code. Occasionally, a group chart of accounts may be needed 
for controlling purposes and a country-specific chart of accounts may be needed to meet country-specific 
reporting requirements. A group chart of accounts is optional. You will learn about chart of accounts in 
detail in Chapter 2.
Let’s Start Customizing
When you log on to SAP ERP, the SAP Easy Access screen is displayed (Figure 1-3).
Figure 1-3.  Select Tools to commence customizing
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
4
The Easy Access screen contains a list of functions to choose from. It is the initial point of entry into 
the SAP ERP. In order to call up the Customizing: Execute Project screen where you will commence your 
customzing, follow the menu path: SAP Easy Access ➤ Tools ➤ Customizing ➤ IMG ➤ Execute Project 
(SPRO) ➤ SAP Reference IMG.
A quicker way to access the same screen is by using transaction codes. Transaction codes are used to 
navigate a task in a single step, by bypassing the standard menu path that involves several time-consuming 
steps. You use a transaction code (TC) to access the task you want to execute by typing it into the Command 
Field, which is the blank field circled in red on the top-left side of the screen in Figure 1-3. Transaction 
codes are standard sets of alphabets and figures recognized by a SAP system that allow you to access specific 
tasks in SAP. The benefit of using transaction codes is that it is faster to access tasks or enter a customizing 
workspace that you want to execute in SAP.
The SAP Project Reference Object (SPRO) is a standard transaction code that allows you to access 
the Customizing: Execute Project screen without using the menu path. SAP ERP comes with a set of tables 
containing transaction codes. This table can be assessed by typing SE38 into the Command Field to go to the 
ABAP Editor: Initial, where you will look for the transaction code you want to use. The ABAP Editor: Initial is 
beyond the scope of this book. However, you can also access transaction codes on the Easy Access screen by 
choosing Extras ➤ Settings on the menu bar at the top of the screen or simply by pressing Shift+F9 on your 
keyboard. The Settings screen pops up with several options to choose from. Select Display Technical Names, 
which is the last item of the displayed list of available options by making sure that the checkbox is activated. 
Then press Enter. This action allows the system to display technical names before every function. A list of 
useful transaction codes appears in Appendix 2, which you can use as a reference.
To call up the Customizing: Execute Project screen, type SPRO into the Command Field now. Figure 1-4 
will appear. This screen allows you to go to IMG Display screen, where you can select from the list of displayed 
tasks to commence your customizing. 
Figure 1-4.  SAP Reference Implementation Guide
In the top-left of this screen, you’ll see the SAP Reference IMG button. IMG simply stands for 
Implementation Guide for customizing in SAP R/3. The button takes you to the lists of all the tasks that 
constitute implementations in the SAP ERP system that you can choose from as part of your configuration.
Click the 
 button to go to the Display IMG screen (Figure 1-5). Display IMG contains 
a list of customizing steps available in the SAP ERP. Select Enterprise Structure from the tree structure. This 
is where you will start your configuration for this activity.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
5
In the Enterprise Structure under Financial Accounting, you will define your company, Company Code, 
Business Area, and Segment and assign a company code to your company.
Define a Company
In SAP, a company is an organizational unit treated as a legal entity from which a financial statement is 
generated in line with legal requirements. It is mandatory that a company be defined at least as part of 
financial accounting component to which one or more company codes are assigned in the SAP ERP system. 
You will define a company at this initial stage and then later in this chapter you will also define a company 
code and assign the company to the company code.
There are two ways to access the screen where company is defined in SAP R/3. You can follow this menu 
path: IMG ➤ Enterprise Structure ➤ Definition ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Define Company or you can use 
the transaction code OX15. This is a standard transaction code for creating your . When you use either the 
menu path or the TC, the Change View “Internal Trading Partners”: Overview screen appears (Figure 1-6). 
This is where you define the parameters for your new company. This screen displays the list of company 
codes in the system as an overview before you define your own company code.
Figure 1-5.  Customizing the Display IMG screen 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
6
■
■Note  Notice in Figure 1-6 that a list of company codes is displayed on the screen. This is normal, as other 
company codes may already exist in the system.
Click the 
 button to go to the next screen, which is called New Entries: Details of Added 
Entries (Figure 1-7). You will define your company code using four characters and your company details.
Figure 1-6.  Defining the company code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
7
The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is divided into two sections. The first section contains 
fields where you will enter your company code and company name. You have the option of entering a 
second company in the section if you have more than one company name. The second section is the 
detailed information section and it contains the field that will enable you to enter the company’s address, 
language key, and your company currency. Update the following fields using this information:
Company: Enter four alphanumeric characters as your company code in this 
field. This code will serve as your company identifier in an environment where 
multiple company codes exist in the system. You can use up to four characters of 
your choice as you deem fit.
Company Name: Enter your company name in this field. For example, the 
company name we use in this activity is Company C900 Plc. This field allows up 
to 25 characters.
Detail Information: This section allows you to enter information about your 
company. Details entered here can include a correspondence address and the 
currency used when generating company code financial statements. Enter your 
company’s address, post code, city, country code, language key, and currency 
code in the appropriate fields.
Figure 1-7.  New Entries screen to enter your company’s details 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
8
■
■Note  The SAP system comes with standard codes/keys for most countries:
—Country code/key: This key is represented in the SAP ERP as the country key where your 
company is operating. For example, Great Britain’s code is GB, the United States’ is US, Germany’s is 
DE, and so on.
—Language code/key: This is your company language code. For example, Great Britain’s language 
code is EN, USA’s is EN, Germany’s is DE, and so on. Enter your company language key in this field. 
If you are not sure of your language key, you can search for it using the search function.
—Currency code/key: For example, for Great Britain the code is GBP, for the United States it is 
USD, for Germany it is EUR, and so on.
After you have entered your company code and address, press Enter on your keyboard or click the  
Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries.
■
■Note  You cannot use an existing company code. If your company code already exists, the system will issue 
an error message when you click the Enter button, at the bottom of the screen. You will see “An entry already 
exists with the same key” on the status bar. If this happens, use another four characters as your company code.
Finally, click Save 
. The system will notify you that 
 on the status bar at the bottom of 
the screen.
Since this is your first configuration exercise, when you try to save a newly created item the Prompt for 
Customizing Request screen will pop up. Customizing request allows the system to store your entries for 
transportation to other SAP systems. This happens only once, when you save your configuration the first 
time. If this screen pops up, follow these steps to create your request:
	
1.	
Click the Create Request 
 icon on the Prompt Customizing Request pop-up 
screen. This allows you to create your unique change request. You can create 
your own request number or choose from existing request numbers.
	
2.	
The Create Request screen is displayed. This screen allows you to enter a short 
description as a request description. Enter any description of your choice in the 
Short Description field and click the Save 
 button.
	
3.	
The Prompt for Customizing Request dialog box is displayed again. Click the 
Enter 
 button to save your configuration so far. Once the system has saved your 
settings, the system will notify you that 
 on the status bar.
The next step in your configuration process is to return to the IMG Structure to perform another 
customizing task. Click the Back 
 button on top-right side of the screen twice to return to the IMG 
Structure Implementation Guide. The implementation guide contains lists of all actions requiring 
implementation in SAP R/3.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
9
Define a Company Code
In this exercise, you define your company code. You can define more than one company code if required. 
In the SAP ERP, the company code is an organizational unit used in FI to structure a business process for 
financial reporting purposes. SAP FI gives you the option to edit (create from scratch) your company code or 
copy the parameters of an existing company code and modify them to meet your requirements.
In this activity you will create your company code from scratch instead of copying existing company 
code parameters. Choose Edit Company Code Data from the displayed list in Figure 1-8. Follow the menu 
path: IMG ➤ Enterprise Structure ➤ Definition ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Edit, Copy, Delete, Check 
Company Code or use the transaction code OX02 to go to the Choose Activity screen.
Figure 1-8.  Editing the company code data
■
■Note  If you choose to copy an existing company’s data from the list of displayed company codes in the 
system instead of creating a new company code from scratch, use the activity Copy, Delete, Check Company 
Code in Figure 1-8. This allows you to copy an existing company’s code data that comes standard in the SAP 
system. Examples of standard company codes in SAP are 0001, 1000, 2000, and so on. The company code you 
have copied will retain most of the properties of the copied company code. Not all the properties are retained, 
so make sure you go through each step involved in customizing and update all the inherited properties of the 
copied company code to your own company code as appropriate.
■
■Tip  It is advisable to create your company code from scratch, as this will give you the opportunity to cover 
every step involved in customizing your company code.
When you choose Edit Company Code Data, the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is 
displayed (Figure 1-9). This screen allows you to enter your company code details in the appropriate fields. 
The company code details you enter in this screen will be treated by the system as your company data. The 
screen is divided into two sections. The first section contains the fields for your company code and name. 
The second section, which is the Additional Data section, contains your company’s city, country, currency, 
and language.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
10
Update the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen with your company code data. To enter further 
address details, click the Address (Shift+F5) 
 button at the top of the screen. This action will call up the 
Edit Address screen (Figure 1-10). This screen enables you to update your company code master record with 
the relevant information.
Figure 1-9.  The New Entries screen is where you add your company’s details
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
11
Figure 1-10.  The screen to enter your company’s address and contact details
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
12
This screen is divided into five sections: Name, Search Terms, Street Address, PO Box Address, and 
Communication. Update each section with your company code information. It is not mandatory that you 
complete every field on this screen. Update the relevant fields only:
• 
Name: In this section you can enter your company title and name in the appropriate 
fields. The example uses Company C900 Plc as the company name. The name you 
enter here will represent your company code name in the system.
• 
Search Term 1 / 2: You have the choice of entering up to two search terms in this 
section. This is optional, but I recommend that you use meaningful terms. You can use 
the first four characters of your company name. For example, if your company name is 
Company C900 PLC, you could use COMP as your search term, as in Figure 1-10. The 
advantage of using search terms is that they allow you to search for a company code 
quicker in a situation where you have several company codes in the system.
• 
Street Address: This section allows you to enter a street/house number. This is 
usually your company’s street/house number, postal code/city, country, and region. 
Upon entering your country and region, the system will automatically display the 
timezone and region, which is your city code. This is usually the first two letters of 
your company code’s city.
• 
Post Box Address: If your company uses a post box address, you can enter it in  
this section. This may include a company’s post box, postal code, and company 
postal code.
• 
Communication: This section allows you to enter the language, phone number, 
mobile phone number, fax number, email, and so on used by your company for 
correspondence and contacts.
Update the Edit Address screen as in Figure 1-10. Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on the 
keyboard to confirm your entries. The Edit Address screen disappears and the new Entries: Details of 
Added Entries screen containing your company code data is displayed. Click the Save 
 button. The 
Prompt for Customizing Request screen pops up. Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the Prompt for 
Customizing Request screen. The system will then save your company code data and issue a notification that 
 on the Status bar at the bottom of the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen.
Since you have just defined your company code, the next step in this activity is to assign your company 
code to your company. Return to the Display IMG screen by clicking the Back 
 button twice, in order to 
assign the company code you have created for your company. The Display IMG screen is a tree structure 
containing all the customizing tasks in SAP R/3. Choose Assign Company Code to Company from the list of 
displayed items. This will take you to the screen where you will assign your company code to your company.
Assign Company Code to Company
To complete the customizing task of defining your company code, you must assign the company code to 
your company. The entire process is a simple, logical sequence. You define your company code, set the 
values for your company code, and assign your company code to your company (Figure 1-11).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
13
You assign your company code to your company from the Change View “Assign Company Code -> 
Company”: Overview screen (Figure 1-12). To access this screen, use the menu path: Enterprise Structure ➤ 
Assignment ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Assign Company Code to Company or use the transaction  
code OX16. 
Define
Company Code
Set Value for the
Company Code
Assign Company
Code to
Company
Figure 1-11.  Steps involved in defining and assigning a company code to a company
Figure 1-12.  Assignment of your company to its company code
The Change View “Assign Company Code -> Company” Overview screen contains a list of company 
codes in the system. You may have a large number of companies in the system. Instead of having to scroll to 
search for your company among the company codes in the system, you can simply click the 
 
button at the bottom of the Change View “Assign Company Code -> Company”: Overview screen. The 
Another Entry screen pops up. Enter four identifier characters that make up your company code into the 
company code field and click the Enter 
 button. Your company code will automatically be displayed on 
top of the company code list on the Change View “Assign Company Code -> Company” Overview screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
14
■
■Note  In SAP ERP R/3, you can create more than one company code depending on your client’s needs.  
If you chose to define another company code, repeat the previous steps by defining a company and a company 
code using another company code and name, and then assigning that company code to the company.
You will notice that your company code is displayed on top of all the company codes in the system. 
Your company code and city are displayed and the company field is blank. Simply type your company code 
into the company field. If you cannot remember your company code, use the Search function or Matchcode 
button next to the company field to search for your company code, as depicted Figure 1-12. After you enter 
your company code, save your company code settings.
Now that you have assigned your company code to your company, let’s look at how to define a business 
area, which will serve as an organizational unit for a specific segment of your business operations. You can 
use this for internal reporting purposes. 
Business Area
A business area is an organizational unit that represents a specific business segment in SAP that defines 
a functional area of operation, a plant, or an area of responsibility. For example, business areas can be a 
product the company sells, a geographical location, and so on. Business area is optional and is intended 
purely for internal financial reporting. They can be used across company codes for reporting. They are also 
viewed as balancing entities that can produce their own set of financial statements.
You define a business area in SAP ERP using four characters. A business area can be assigned to a 
company code or several company codes. Likewise, it is also possible to assign a company code to a business 
area or several business areas. The advantage of using a business area is that it allows management to generate 
internal financial reports on a business function or a combination of business functions. These reports aid 
management in decision-making, because they make it easy to tell how well a business area is performing.
You can create more than one business area, depending on your client’s requirements. In the exercise 
that follows, you will create two business areas: London and Manchester. Once business areas are created, 
it is then possible to generate profit-and-loss statements and balance sheets for business areas below the 
company code level. The financial statements created at this level are for internal purposes only and help 
management to determine the performance of each business area.
Define a Business Area
Problem: Your client wants to be able to access the performance of their business divisions 
by generating internal performance reports consisting of P&Ls and balance sheets for two 
business areas. You have been asked to define two business areas for your company code 
for Manchester and London to satisfy this requirement.
Defining a business area enables you to complete the settings that will allow your company to maintain 
financial statements by function, sales area, plant, or geographical location. Let’s define the business areas 
for Manchester and London. Follow the menu path: IMG ➤ Enterprise Structure ➤ Definition ➤ Financial 
or use transaction code OX03.
The Change View “Business areas”: Overview screen is displayed. This is a table containing the list of 
business areas in the system. Click the 
 button at the top-right side of the screen to access the 
screen where you will define your business area. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is 
displayed. This is a blank table of several rows and two columns that allows you to specify your business area 
code and add a description of your business area (Figure 1-13). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
15
Update the following fields:
• 
Business Area: Enter four characters for the business area. This code will enable you 
to identify your business areas. Figure 1-13 shows that we have created two business 
area codes: C100 for London and C200 for Manchester.
• 
Description: This field will enable you to enter the names or short descriptions of 
your business areas.
When you’re satisfied with your settings, in order to ensure that the system accepts your entries, click 
Enter 
 to confirm your entries. Then save 
 your business areas.
Segment
A segment is used to highlight items disclosed in financial reporting by segment. This is opposed to a business 
area, which forms part of an organizational unit for which a financial statement is drawn for internal purposes. 
Accounting principles and standards (U.S. GAAP, IFRS, IAS, and so on) mandate that companies produce 
segmental reporting in certain situations for external purposes. A segment may be a department, product, or 
geographic location. Segmental reporting is purely for transparency purposes when reporting the profit and 
risk situations of segments within an enterprise. The underlying reason behind this requirement is to assist 
users of the financial information to make better judgments about an entity’s involvement in different activities. 
Segment accounting allows a company to report the performance of their segment’s activities individually. The 
importance of segment reporting is that it places more emphasis on segment performance.
Define a Segment
Problem: Company C900 wants to be able to produce segmental reporting for two divisions 
of their operations. Your task is to define the two segments for Company C900 thus:
1.	 Television and video systems as SEG-A
2.	 Refrigerators and coolers as SEG-B
Figure 1-13.  The main screen for defining business areas
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
16
In the SAP ERP, you can carry out customization that allows you to meet segmental reporting 
requirements. To define a segment, follow this menu path: IMG ➤ Enterprise Structure ➤ Definition ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Define Segment. (Unfortunately, segments do not have transaction codes.) We will 
look at the segment you define in this activity in depth in Chapter 20, in the section entitled “Profit Center.”
The Change View “Segments for Segment Reporting”: Overview screen is displayed. This is the screen 
where you will begin customizing your segments for segment reporting. Click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen to go to the next screen (Figure 1-14).
Figure 1-14.  The main screen for defining segments
You will enter your segments in the system by updating the following fields:
• 
Segment: Enter a segment key in this field. This key will enable you to identify the 
segment in the system. We used segment key SEG-A for Television & Video Systems 
and SEG-B for Refrigerators & Coolers in this activity.
• 
Description: Enter your segment name or description in this field.
When you have updated the segments for segment reporting, click the Enter 
 button at the top of the 
screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your segment configuration. 
The next step in this customizing activity is to create a fiscal year variant for your company code. 
Fiscal Year Variant
The fiscal year represents the accounting year or annual accounting period. A fiscal year variant defines 
your company’s accounting posting periods. A proper business accounting transaction normally covers a 
12-month period. The normal rule is that business transactions are assigned to the period during which the 
transaction took place. The fiscal year variant is customized to match your company’s fiscal year, which does 
not necessarily have to be the same as the normal calendar year (that is, January to December). SAP ERP is 
dynamic enough to fit into your company’s calendar or fiscal year.
Fiscal year variant is defined with posting periods. Posting periods are technical terms used to refer to 
months. In SAP ERP, the fiscal year is made up of 12 posting periods. Besides the normal 12 posting periods, 
you can define up to four special posting periods, which are used for posting year-end adjustments to closed 
periods. For example, if the normal fiscal period is closed, adjustments can still be posted in one of the four 
special periods.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
17
■
■Note  In SAP ERP you cannot exceed a maximum of 16 periods at any given time.
In SAP ERP, posting periods are identified by posting dates. As you can see in Figure 1-15, a fiscal year 
variant can be defined either as:
• 
Year independent
• 
Year specific (dependent)
Year Independent
With year independent, the accounting periods of a company remain the same each year (that is, the 
financial reporting year is constant). For example, an enterprise fiscal year is January to December of each 
year. There are two types of year independent fiscal year variants in SAP:
• 
Calendar year: The posting period is the same as the calendar year, usually  
12 months. The posting period runs 12 months each year. For example,  
the U.S. financial year starts in January and ends in December.
• 
Non-calendar year: These are time periods that start and end any month of the year, 
except January and December. In the UK, for example, the fiscal year starts in  
April and ends in March. Since the non-calendar year did not start in January 1st, you 
use indicator -1 or +1 for the period of the year that belongs to the former or latter 
fiscal year.
■
■Note  February is counted as 29 days irrespective of actual number of days in February in order for the 
system to take leap year into consideration.
The SAP system comes with standard fiscal year variants. We recommend that you use the standard fiscal 
year variants supplied by the system. As examples, the fiscal year variant for the United States (January to 
December) is K4 and the fiscal year variant for the UK (April to March) is V3.
You can copy and modify the standard fiscal year variant.
If you decide to define your own fiscal year variant, use a two-digit alphanumeric identifier of your 
choice as your variant and maintain your fiscal year variant as appropriate.
Fiscal Year
Variant
Year
Independent
Calendar Year
Non Calendar
Year
Year Specific
Figure 1-15.  Types of fiscal year variants 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
18
Year Specific or Year Dependent
Year specific is used when the fiscal year/posting periods vary from year to year. This is uncommon in practice.
An example of a situation when this will arise is when posting periods are either greater than 12 months 
(extended fiscal year) or are less than 12 months (shortened fiscal year). The reason for a shortened fiscal 
year could be as a result of a company winding up or any other special reasons.
Maintain Fiscal Year Variant
Problem: The accounting team has asked you to define a calendar year fiscal variant 
(January–December) for your company code. You were advised by your colleagues to 
copy K4—the standard fiscal year variant supplied by SAP—and modify it to meet this 
requirement.
To access the screen where you will maintain your fiscal year variant, use the menu path: IMG ➤ Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fiscal Year and Posting 
Period ➤ Maintain Fiscal Year Variant (Maintain Shortened Fiscal Year). The transaction code is OB29.
The Change View “Fiscal Year Variants” Overview screen is displayed. This screen is split into two 
sections, the Dialog Structure section and the Fiscal Year Variants section (Figure 1-16), where you can 
customize your fiscal year. Since you want to copy the fiscal year variant K4 supplied by SAP in the system, 
you should use the 
 button at the bottom to search for the fiscal year variant you want to use 
(in this case, it’s K4).
Figure 1-16.  Searching for the fiscal year variant you want to copy
When you click the Position button, a dialog box called Another Entry (Figure 1-17) pops up. This dialog 
box enables you to search for the fiscal year variant supplied by the system (K4) that you want to adapt to 
your fiscal year variant. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
19
Enter K4 in the FI. Year Variant field to call up K4 from the list of variants in the system.
Select K4 from the variant list and click the Enter button 
. The Change View “Fiscal Year Variants”: 
Overview screen is displayed (Figure 1-18). This screen allows you to copy an existing fiscal year supplied  
by the system or create your own fiscal year variant from scratch (see the following tip to create your own). 
To copy a fiscal year variant, select it and click the Copy icon 
 on the top of the screen. When you copy a 
fiscal year variant, you are also copying its dependent settings defined by SAP.
Figure 1-17.  Entering the fiscal year variant
Figure 1-18.  Copying the fiscal year variant
■
■Note  When you copy a fiscal year variant, you have to change the fiscal year variant key to your own. 
Otherwise, you will not be able to save the fiscal year variant you have copied, because the system does not 
allow duplicate fiscal year keys. Once you have copied K4, change the fiscal year variant from K4 to any variant 
of your choice.
If possible, avoid using the letters K or V as part of your fiscal year variant key, because many of the standard 
fiscal year variant keys supplied by the system start with either K or V.
To match the example we’re using in Figure 1-19, change the content of FV to C4 and change the 
Description field to Fiscal Year Variant – C900.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
20
When you click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard, the Specify Object to be Copied 
screen pops up. This screen allows you to copy just the dependent entries or all of the dependent entries of 
the fiscal year variant you have marked for copying.
Since you want to copy all of the dependent entries of the fiscal year variant K4, click the 
 command button.
The Information dialog pops up, telling you the number of dependent entries you have copied from 
fiscal year variant K4.
Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the information pop-up screen or press Enter on your 
keyboard to confirm.
Save 
 your variant. The system will notify you on the status bar that 
.
■
■Tip  If you choose to define your own fiscal year variant, click the New Entries button at the top of the 
screen in Figure 1-16 and update the following fields:
FV: Enter a two-digit character as your fiscal year variant identifier key. It is recommended that you use an 
alphanumeric identifier. In the example in this section, the standard fiscal year variant supplied by SAP in the 
system, K4 (calendar year), was copied and modified to meet our desired requirement. 
Description: This field allows you to describe or name your fiscal year variant. In the example in this section, 
the fiscal year variant C900 was used.
Year Dependent: If the fiscal year/posting periods vary each year, check the Year-Dependent checkbox. This is 
not very common in practice.
Calendar Yr: If the fiscal year is the same as the normal calendar year each year, check the Calendar Year 
checkbox.
Number of Posting Periods: Here you specify the number of posting periods. This will normally be a 12-month 
period.
No. of Special Posting Periods: SAP R/3 system allows up to four special periods for making postings outside 
the normal accounting periods.
Figure 1-19.  Updating the fiscal year variant
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
21
Assign the Fiscal Year Variant to the Company Code
It is mandatory that you assign a fiscal year to a company code in SAP. Since you have defined or copied 
your fiscal year variant, the next step is to assign it to your company code. It is also possible to assign the 
standard fiscal year variant supplied by SAP in the system directly to your company code without having to 
define your own fiscal year variant. Follow this menu path: IMG ➤ Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fiscal Year and Posting Period ➤ Assign Company Code to 
a Fiscal Year Variant or use the transaction code OB37. You will then access the screen where you will assign 
the fiscal year you have defined to your company code (Figure 1-20).
Figure 1-20.  Assigning the company code to the fiscal year variant
The Change View “Assign Comp.Code -> Fiscal Year Variant”: Overview screen is displayed. To assign 
your company code to your fiscal year variant, search for your company code by using the Position button 
 or using the scroll down arrow 
 and assigning your fiscal year variant as appropriate.
Enter C4 in the Fiscal Year Variant column or use the Search function 
 to search for your fiscal year 
variant (in this case, C4). Make sure that your fiscal year is entered into the Fiscal Year Variant column.
Click the Save 
 button to save your fiscal year variant assignment. 
■
■Note  The system may issue a warning message that says, ‘No postings are possible without fiscal year,’ and 
the Save button is suppressed. This normally happens when some company codes are not assigned a fiscal year 
variant. If this happens, click the Enter button or press the Enter key on your keyboard several times until the Save 
button is activated. Then save your work. The system will notify you on the status bar that your data was saved.
Opening and Closing Posting Periods
As mentioned previously, accounting transactions are usually assigned to periods. Posting periods are 
defined in fiscal year variants. The benefit of defining variants to open periods is to avoid the problem of 
posting accounting transactions to the wrong period. This is achieved by opening current periods and 
closing all other periods. At the end of the current period, the period is closed and the next period is opened. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
22
It is compulsory that at least two posting period intervals be open at any given time. On the other hand, you 
can open several posting periods at the same time (that is, more than two posting periods). 
Posting periods are independent of the fiscal year; that is, they are not dependent on nor controlled 
by the fiscal year. Posting periods are defined at the global level in SAP ERP. This makes them accessible to 
several company codes in the system.
In SAP ERP, opening and closing periods are differentiated by account types. This allows you to 
determine which accounts are posted to a specific posting period. For example, posting can be permitted for 
accounts payable but not to accounts receivable. You can specify several account types simultaneously as 
part of your customizing open periods. Figure 1-21 lists the basic account types in SAP R/3. 
In SAP ERP, it is mandatory that for each posting period, you specify the minimum account type ‘+’ for 
each open period. This account type is valid for all account types. The benefit of applying account types to 
an open period is that the system can determine whether a posting period specified in the posting period 
variant you defined can be posted to using the posting date entered in the document header.
As part of customizing opening and closing periods, the following items are defined: 
• 
Define variants for open posting periods
• 
Assign variants to company codes
• 
Specify open and close posting periods
Let’s look at each in turn.
Define Variants for Open Posting Periods
Problem: You need to define the variants for posting periods for company C900 and assign 
the variant you have defined to the company code. 
To define variants for open posting periods, follow the menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fiscal Year and posting Periods ➤ Posting Periods 
➤ Define Variants for Open Posting Periods or use the transaction code OBBO.
■
■Note  Every company code must be assigned its own variant for open posting periods.
Valid for All Account types
Assets
+
A
K
V
M
S
D
Debtors
Creditors
Materials
General Ledger (G/L)
Contract Accounts
Figure 1-21.  Account Types in an open period
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
23
The Change View Posting Periods: Define Variants: Overview screen is displayed. This is the screen 
where you define variants for opening posting periods. Click the 
 button on top of the screen.
The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 1-22). This screen allows you to 
specify your company code variant code and the name of your variant. In practice, the posting period variant 
key is defined using your company code and your company name as the posting variant name. 
Figure 1-22.  Overview of the added entries
Update the following fields:
• 
Variant: Enter four characters as the posting variant key in the variant field. It’s best 
to make it your company code. The code you enter here will be used when assigning 
posting variants later to your company code.
• 
Name: Enter the description or a variant name that best describes your variant in 
this field. In our example, we used Open Period Variant – C900 as our variant name.
Click the Enter button to confirm the variant you entered into the system. If the variant already exists in 
the system, the system will notify you on the status bar that “An entry already exists with the same key.” SAP 
R/3 does not allow duplicate variant keys. All you have to do when faced with this problem is use another 
variant key that the system will accept. Otherwise, the Save icon will be inactive and you will not be able to 
save your variant. Once the system accepts your variant, the Save button is activated and you can save your 
work. Save 
 your posting variant.
The next step is to assign the posting period variant to the company code.
Assign Variants to Company Code
The assignment of posting period variants is a part of customizing variants for opening periods. Every 
company code in SAP R/3 must be assigned a posting period variant. To access the screen where you can 
assign your company code to a posting period variant, use this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fiscal Year and Posting Periods ➤ 
Posting Periods ➤ Assign Variants to Company Code. Or use the transaction code OBBP.
The Change View “Assign Comp.Code -> Posting Period Variants”: Overview screen is displayed. Using 
the Position button at the bottom of the screen, search for your company code and update the variant fields 
by entering the variant for open posting periods that you defined (Figure 1-23). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
24
Enter your four-digit variant—the C900 identifier—in the variant field shown in Figure 1-23 and save 
your customization.
Specify Open and Closing Periods
Problem: You can define your posting periods from scratch or you can copy existing posting 
periods and modify them to meet your requirement. To simplify your configuration, your 
colleagues have asked you to copy posting periods from company code 1000 and modify 
them to meet the client’s requirements. 
As mentioned, posting periods are opened in fiscal year variants. You can open and close several posting 
periods simultaneously in SAP R//3. The advantage of opening and closing periods is that it helps prevent 
you from posting transactions to the wrong period in the sense that only valid periods are open. Any periods 
not relevant for posting are closed. To go to the screen where you can open and close posting periods, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ 
Ledgers ➤ Fiscal Year and Posting Periods ➤ Posting Periods ➤ Open and Close Posting Periods or use the 
transaction code OB52.
The Change View “Posting Periods: Specify Time Intervals”: Overview screen is displayed (Figure 1-24). 
Select all the accounts (+ A D K M S) belonging to company code 1000 that you want to copy from the 
list of displayed variants.
Figure 1-23.  Assigning the company code to the posting period variant
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
25
Click the Copy 
 button at the top-left side of the screen or choose Edit ➤ Copy As from the menu 
bar to copy the selected posting periods in Figure 1-24. The system will paste the variants you copied from 
company code 1000 to a new Change View “Posting: Specify Time Intervals”; Overview screen. 
Update the variant identifiers 1000 by replacing them with your own C900 variants, as shown on the 
screen in Figure 1-25. 
Figure 1-24.  Copying the posting period intervals
Figure 1-25.  Update Posting Period Intervals
■
■Tip  SAP has 12 normal posting periods and up to 4 special periods.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 1 ■ Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP
26
Enter the range of open period intervals and years using the following information:
From Per. 1
Year
To Per. 1
Year
1
2010
12
2015
Periods 1 to 12 represent an accounting periods of 12 months.
The years 2010 to 2015 are specified. Note that the year range 
you specify must include your current fiscal year (i.e., 2012). 
Otherwise, the system will assume that the posting period 
is closed and you will not be able to post any transactions to 
the system.
Four Special posting periods, use the following information:
From Per. 1
Year
To Per. 1
Year
13
2012
16
2013
Periods 13 to 16 represent the special periods of four months 
for posting year-end adjustments to a closed fiscal year.
The years 2012 to 2013 are specified. The current fiscal 
year is January to December 2012. Since you want to allow 
four months after the normal posting period to allow for 
adjustment posting at the end of the year, you should specify 
any year beyond 2012 to allow for the special period.
Click Enter 
 at the top of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard. Once the system has accepted 
your entries, it will notify you that 
 on the status bar. Then save your work.
■
■Note  If your entries are rejected, you are using variant keys that exist in the system. Make sure your variant 
keys are unique to your company code.
Summary
This chapter dealt with the basic elements of financial accounting configuration in Enterprise structure, 
which is fundamental to the configuration of the remaining chapters in this book. As part of the activities 
covered in this chapter, you learned what organizational structure is and how to customize organizational 
units in SAP ERP. As part of your customizing process, the chapter taught you how to define a company code 
and a fiscal year variant and how to assign a fiscal year to a company code. Other topics that were covered in 
this chapter include how to define posting periods and how to apply account types to open periods.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to customize master data, a chart of accounts, and retained 
earnings.
www.it-ebooks.info

27
Chapter 2
Defining the Chart of Accounts
In this chapter, you learn how to define the chart of accounts, create general ledgers, and assign the chart of 
accounts to company codes.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Demonstrate an understanding of the various charts of accounts represented  
in SAP ERP.
• 
Create a chart of accounts.
• 
Assign a company code to a chart of accounts.
• 
Define an account group to the chart of accounts.
• 
Define a retained earnings account.
The Chart of Accounts
A chart of accounts is a fundamental financial tool in SAP ERP. It contains the list of general ledger (G/L) 
accounts used by a company code or several company codes for posting daily financial activities and for 
reporting financial performance to the financial statement and balance sheet. Transactions are classified 
by transaction type in the chart of accounts. It holds basic information about the structure of general ledger 
accounts in the SAP ERP system, such as account numbers and names, as well as other control parameters 
that determine how G/L accounts are created and function in SAP ERP.
The benefits of the chart of accounts are that it:
• 
Defines the basic structure for creating G/L accounts.
• 
Gives you the flexibility to use the same chart of accounts for several company codes.
You can assign an additional two charts—country-specific and group—to the minimum required 
operational chart of accounts in a company code. Add country-specific chart of accounts when you want to 
be able to generate reports to meet country-specific reporting requirements and add group chart of accounts 
for consolidation purposes.
Three steps are involved in configuring the chart of accounts in SAP R/3 (Figure 2-1).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
28
To create a general ledger and assign it to a company code, you must assign an operational chart of 
accounts to each company code in SAP ERP. One operational chart of accounts can be assigned to several 
company codes if those company codes have identical general ledger structures.
There are three charts of accounts in SAP ERP. Figure 2-2 shows the three charts of accounts and their 
purposes in SAP R/3.
Figure 2-1.  Steps involved in the customizing a chart of accounts 
Figure 2-2.  Available charts of accounts in SAP R/3
The functions of the three charts of accounts in SAP ERP are explained here:
• 
Operational chart of accounts: This is also referred to in the industry as a common 
chart of accounts. It is used to post the daily financial accounting and cost 
accounting transactions. Each company code must be assigned an operational chart 
of accounts.
• 
Group chart of accounts: Contains the corporate G/L accounts applicable to all 
company codes in the group. It’s purely for consolidation reporting for the group.
• 
Country-specific chart of accounts: This optional chart of accounts is important when 
a company in a corporate group is required by law to produce a financial report 
specifically to meet a country’s reporting requirements. 
Since you now know what a chart of accounts is and understand the various chart of accounts available 
in SAP ERP, you’re ready to learn how to create a chart of accounts. The sample principle is applicable to 
the three chart of accounts when customizing. The only difference is that they are used to meet different 
reporting requirements.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
29
Create the Chart of Accounts
Problem: Your task as an SAP FI consultant is to create a chart of accounts for company 
C900 Plc and assign it to your company code.
The chart of accounts you create will contain a list of G/L accounts used by your company code for 
reporting and posting activities. The chart of accounts is configured as a global setting. This means that the 
chart of accounts is available to all company codes in the client rather than just one. The following menu 
path will take you to the screen where you can customize your chart of accounts: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Master Data ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ Preparations ➤ Edit Chart of 
Accounts List. You can also use the transaction code OB13.
■
■Note  You can create your own chart of accounts or you can copy the standard ones supplied by SAP.
The Change View “List of All Charts of Accounts”: Overview screen is displayed (Figure 2-3). This screen 
contains a list of all the charts of accounts that exist in the system. You can assign any of these charts to your 
company code or create your own chart of accounts. This is matter of choice or your requirements. This is 
where you create your chart of accounts.
Figure 2-3.  The initial screen where you start defining your chart of accounts for your company code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
30
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Details of Added 
Entries screen (Figure 2-4), where you will enter the information for the new chart of accounts.
Figure 2-4.  The screen where you define the new chart of accounts
Update the following fields: 
Chart of Accts: Enter a four-character ID for the chart of accounts key. This will 
allow you to identify your chart of accounts from the list of chart of accounts in 
the system. This four-character ID is unique to your chart of accounts. It cannot 
be used for any other chart of accounts in the system.
Description: Enter a short description of your chart of accounts in this field. This 
activity uses Chart of Accounts for Company C900 as the description.
General Specifications: In SAP R/3, charts of accounts are maintained in the 
language that you specify. In this section, choose the language that you want to 
use from the language list in the Maint. Language field. Master data can only be 
displayed and maintained in the language you specify here. Secondly, enter the 
length of your G/L account number in the Length of G/L Account Number field. 
There is no hard rule as to the length of the G/L account number. SAP gives you the 
flexibility of using up to 10 digits. The G/L account length is determined by your 
company’s preference. The length you specify here determines the length of G/L 
number of your chart of accounts. This example uses 10 for the G/L accounts length.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
31
Integration: As mentioned, you must assign your company code to a chart of 
accounts. You can also assign a country chart of accounts and/or group chart 
of accounts to meet certain reporting requirements. Country-specific charts 
are assigned to a chart of accounts using alternative account numbers. In SAP 
ERP all accounts, both internal and external, are managed technically by an 
integrated accounting system. The Controlling area uses the corresponding 
company code charts of accounts to manage cost elements. Assigning the 
controlling area to a company code is referred to as integration.
In the Integration section, you can choose whether you want the controlling integration to maintain 
cost elements manually or automatically. Although the system defaults to manual creation of cost elements, 
you can change this to automatic if necessary. I recommend that you use the manual creation of cost 
elements, which you will see in Chapter 18. Here’s what each option permits going forward:
• 
Manual creation of cost element: The system will not automatically create primary 
cost elements when you create your G/L accounts. Instead, you have to manually  
do this.
• 
Automatic creation of cost element: When a new G/L account is saved, the related 
cost elements are automatically created.
Consolidation: Enter the group chart of accounts used by your corporate group. 
The group chart of accounts you enter here will be required when creating 
corporate G/L accounts that are used for consolidating financial statements 
reporting for the corporate group.
Status: This section of the screen allows you to activate the blocked checkbox. 
This function blocks postings to the G/L account unless this checkbox is 
deactivated. For example, you can block your chart of accounts from being 
posted to until you have completed your configuration. We recommend that you 
not activate this function, unless your company or client requires this.
After updating the New Entries: Detail of Added Entries screen, click the Enter 
 button at the top of 
the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your chart of accounts.
The next step is to assign your company code to the chart of accounts you just created. To do this, you 
have to return to the Display IMG screen. Click the Back 
 button at the top of the screen twice to return to 
the Display IMG screen. You will select the next task from the list of displayed IMG tasks in the next exercise. 
Assign Company Code to Chart of Accounts
Several company codes can be assigned to one chart of accounts, but only one operational chart of accounts 
is assigned to a company code (a group chart of accounts for consolidation reporting and a country-specific 
chart of accounts for meeting specific country reporting requirements can also be assignment to a company 
code). In most cases, there are several predefined charts of accounts in the system, which you can assign 
to your company code. To assign your company code to a chart of accounts, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Master Data ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ 
Preparations ➤ Assign Company Code to Chart of Accounts. Or you can use the transaction code OB62.
The Change View “Assign Company Code -> Chart of Accounts Overview screen is displayed. Click 
the 
 button at the bottom of the screen and then search for your company code. You will 
notice that the Chrt/Accts field in Figure 2-5 is blank. Search for the chart of accounts you have defined by 
clicking the Search function button next to the Chrt/Accts field or by typing your chart of accounts in the 
Chrt/Accts field. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
32
■
■Tip  You have the option of assigning additional charts of accounts to your company code based on specific 
reporting needs. For example, if you want to provide a consolidated corporate report, assign a group chart 
of accounts to your company code with the operational chart of accounts. Likewise, if your goal is to provide 
country-specific reporting needs, you can assign a country chart of accounts to your company code.
 Enter your chart of accounts in the Chrt/Accts field and then click the Enter 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen to confirm your entries. Finally, click the Save button 
 to save your chart of accounts.
The next step is to define the account groups for the chart of accounts you just created. Account groups 
allow you to classify the G/L accounts that you will be creating in Chapter 5 into the right categories and 
assign the appropriate number ranges. 
Define Account Group
A chart of accounts holds a large number of account types, and they determine how G/L accounts are 
created in SAP ERP. For proper management, accounts are systematically classified into appropriate account 
groups by grouping accounts with similar tasks together in the same general ledger. For example, all G/L 
accounts related to revenue are grouped together and assigned the same number range (array of numbers 
assigned to an object). G/L accounts belonging to account groups such as Liabilities, Expenditure, and 
Assets are also grouped together in the appropriate group and number ranges.  
Figure 2-6 illustrates how account types are classified into account groups. For example, the number 
range 1–1000 is assigned to the Asset account group, and related account types like Land & Building, 
Furniture & Fittings, and Motor Vehicles are treated as assets in accounting. Likewise, the number  
range 1001–2000 is assigned to the account group Revenue, and it contains related account types like Sales, 
Interest Received, and Other Income. Finally, the number range 2001–3000 is assigned to the account group 
Expenditure, and it contains account types like Salaries, Office Supplies, and so forth.
Figure 2-5.  Assigning a chart of accounts to a company code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
33
Why are account groups important? There are two main reasons:
• 
They determine the number ranges assigned to an account when creating  
a G/L account.
• 
They determine the screen layout for creating G/L accounts in the company  
code area.
In this activity, instead of creating your own account groups, you will copy some of the predefined 
account groups from the INT chart of accounts supplied by the system. INT stands for international chart of 
accounts. These are universal charts of accounts supplied by SAP. They are not company code-specific; you 
can use them across company codes.
■
■Note  You can create your own account groups or copy the account groups that meet your requirements 
from the predefined list and then modify them to meet your needs.
Number Range
Account Group
Asset
1-1000
1001-2000
2001-3000
Revenue
Expenditure
Account Types
Land & Building
Furniture & Fittings
Motor Vehicle
Sales
Interest Received
Other Income
Electricity
Salaries
Office Supplies
Figure 2-6.  How account types are classified within account groups
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
34
 Problem: You need to define the account groups for company C900 Plc by copying 
predefined groups supplied by SAP from the chart of accounts INT and modify them to 
meet company C900 Plc’s requirements.
■
■Tip  It is much easier to copy predefined charts of accounts and modify them to meet your requirements, 
rather than create fresh charts of accounts from scratch.
Whether you want to define an account group or copy an account group, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Master Data ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ 
Preparations ➤ Define Account Group. Or you can use the transaction code OBD4.
The Change View “G/L Account Groups”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you define your 
account group. The system contains several predefined account groups. Search for an account group/chart of 
accounts that you want to copy by clicking the Position button 
 at the bottom of the screen. 
This activity uses the predefined chart of accounts called INT (the international chart of account) supplied by 
the system. When you click the Position button, the Another Entry dialog box (Figure 2-7) pops up. 
Figure 2-7.  The Another Entry dialog box 
Enter INT in the Chart of Accts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom. All the chart of 
accounts for INT and the account groups in the system are displayed, as shown in Figure 2-8. Select the chart 
of accounts that meets your requirements from the displayed list. Table 2-1 contains a list of some of the 
charts of accounts that you can use and customize.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
35
Using the data in Table 2-1, highlight the listed charts of accounts and account groups shown in 
Figure 2-9. 
Figure 2-8.  Lists of charts of accounts and account groups
Table 2-1.  A list of values you can use for your chart of accounts
Chrt/Accts
Acct Group
Name
From Acct
To Acct
INT
AS
Fixed assets accounts
999999999
INT
CASH
Liquid funds accounts
999999999
INT
G/L
General ledger G/L accounts
999999999
INT
MAT
Material management accounts
999999999
INT
PL
P&L accounts
999999999
INT
RECN
Recon. Account ready for input
999999999
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
36
■
■Note  There is no restriction on the chart of accounts you can use. We use the INT charts of accounts in this 
activity, because we believe that these charts of accounts are sufficient for this purpose. 
 Click on each object you want to copy on the screen using the items in Table 2-1 as your model to select 
or highlight them. You will notice that the selected items will turn yellow. Click the Copy 
 button at the  
top of the screen to copy the selected charts of accounts from the list. The system will copy the specified 
charts of accounts INT and ask you to 
 on the status bar at the bottom of the screen. 
Modify the copied chart of accounts by changing the content of Chrt/Accts fields from INT to your own chart 
of accounts that you defined earlier. This activity uses the CA90 chart of accounts, as shown in Figure 2-10.
Figure 2-9.  List of chart of accounts to select from
Figure 2-10.  Updated chart of accounts list
Once you have changed the chart of accounts in Chrt/Accts from INT to your chart of accounts, click 
Enter 
 at the top of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your work.
The final step in this activity is to define the retained earnings account. It will allow the system to 
transfer the net profit or loss in the P&L account at the end of the year to the balance sheet. Considering that 
the P&L account group is defined in the chart of accounts, it is important to also define a retained earnings 
account separately in order to allow profit or loss at the end of the year to be carried forward to the balance 
sheet as retained earnings or loss. Click the Back 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to return to the 
tree structure. From there, you will choose the next task in your configuration (Define Retained Earnings 
Account). You can also use the menu path described in the following section.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
37
Define Retained Earnings Account
In accounting, a portion of the profits is held back at the end of a fiscal year as retained earnings (net profit) 
after distributing dividends to the shareholders in proportion to their investment in a corporation. Normally, 
the net profit or net loss figure is carried forward to retained earnings on the balance sheet. For example, 
Figure 2-11 shows that the retained earnings of $300 on the income statement is carried forward to the 
balance sheet.
Figure 2-11.  Illustration of retained earnings on the income statement and balance sheet
The amount carried forward is either added to the shareholders’ equity, if profit is realized, or deducted 
from the shareholders’ equity, if a loss is incurred. This indicates the profit position of a corporation. 
When you’re customizing, retained earnings are assigned to the profit and loss (P&L) statement 
account type defined in the chart of accounts area of the P&L account. At the end of the year the system 
will automatically carry forward the balance of the P&L account to the retained earnings account. To define 
retained earnings in SAP R/3, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger 
Accounting (New) ➤ Master Data ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ Preparations ➤ Define Retained Earnings Account.  
Or you can use the transaction code OB53.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts code in the Chart of 
Accounts field. Then click the Enter 
 button to call up the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic  
Posting – Accounts screen (Figure 2-12), where you assign the account type for retained earnings to the  
G/L account in your chart of accounts. This account assignment will allow the system to use the automatic 
function to carry forward retained earnings to the balance sheet. A typical account type commonly used in 
SAP R/3 is X. If you have more than one retained earnings to enter in the chart of accounts in the P&L 
Statement fields in your chart of accounts, you can use account types Y and Z to add additional retained 
earnings in your chart of accounts. This activity uses X for the P&L account type and CA90 for the chart of 
accounts, since we are only looking at one retained earnings. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
38
■
■Note  X is a symbol used in SAP to represent an account type for retained earnings in the P&L statement.  
If you have more than one retained earnings, you cannot use account type X again once it has been used.  
You have to assign the next retained earnings account type Y and the next one Z.
 Enter the account type in the P&L statement field and the appropriate G/L account in the Account field. 
This example uses X as the account type and 900000 as the G/L account. Click Enter 
 at the top of the 
screen to accept your entries. 
■
■Note  Since you have not created a G/L account for retained earnings, the system will issue a warning 
message on the status bar that says 
. Click the Enter button twice or press 
the Enter button on your keyboard twice. The system will accept your G/L account temporarily to allow you to 
continue customizing. In Chapter 5, you will learn how to create G/L accounts.
Finally, save 
 your retained earnings. The system will notify you that 
 on the status 
bar at the bottom of the screen.
Figure 2-12.  The screen where you assign a balance carried forward account to the P&L account using the 
appropriate account type
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 2 ■ Defining the Chart of Accounts
39
Summary
This chapter explained what a chart of accounts is and how you define one. You also learned how to create 
a chart of accounts, which will serve as the structure for G/L accounts that you create in Chapter 5. You 
learned how to assign the chart of accounts you created to company codes. In order to complete this activity, 
you copied account groups for the INT (international) chart of accounts, which you then modified to meet 
your needs. Finally, you learned how to define a retained earnings account and an accounts type, which you 
assigned to your P&L accounts. This enables the system to automatically transfer the net profit or net loss 
after the distribution of dividends to the balance sheet as retained earnings.
The next chapter looks at the importance of document control in SAP ERP and explains how it affects 
the documents posted in the system.
www.it-ebooks.info

41
Chapter 3
Document Control
In this chapter, you will be looking at the purpose of document control, the application of important 
document types, and the importance of posting keys in SAP ERP.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Explain what document control is
• 
Define number ranges
• 
Define field status variants
Document Control
Hundreds of documents are created by companies as a result of transactions arising from business 
operations. To manage documents posted in the SAP system, it is important that they are categorized and 
stored sequentially for easy retrieval. Once a transaction is posted, the system generates a document,  
assigns a document number to the generated document, and saves the generated document in the system.
Every posting in the SAP system generates a document, and the document remains open until it 
is cleared and archived. For example, when an invoice is posted in the system, the system generates a 
document and assigns a document number. The invoice remains in the system as an open item. When 
payment is received for the invoice, the amount received is entered into the system and cleared with the 
outstanding invoice.
As mentioned earlier, hundreds of transactions are posted in the ERP system and identifying a 
document among hundreds of documents may become difficult. SAP uses a document-control technique 
that allows the system to structure document storage in a systematic manner using the document number, 
company code, and fiscal year.
The document number assigned to a document is obtained from the number range intervals that you 
will define later in this activity for your company code and your company fiscal year. Hence a document can 
only be identified in SAP ERP using the following items:
• 
Document number: This is a unique number that is assigned to a document 
automatically by the system during document posting or manually by the user 
during data input.
• 
Company code: This is your company’s identification code.
• 
Fiscal year: This is your company’s accounting year code. This is usually a  
12-month period.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
42
During document entry the user must specify the appropriate control keys for each document posted in 
the system. Every document in SAP ERP is controlled by two important keys:
• 
Document type
• 
Posting key
Document Type
Document type plays a very important role in SAP ERP and is defined by two-character values. This two-
character key distinguishes the business transaction to be posted, such as vendor invoice, customer invoice, 
vendor invoice payment, and so on. It also determines document storage and the account to be posted.  
For example, the document type DR indicates a customer invoice posted to a customer account. Figure 3-1  
lists some of the important document types. The importance of the document type is that it determines 
documents to be posted, the document storage type, and the account type to be posted.
Document types are defined at the global level, which makes them available to all company codes 
within the client. Document types are used to control different business transactions in SAP ERP.
Document type controls the following:
• 
Which business transactions are to be posted. The importance of this is that it is 
easier to display line items based on the type of business transactions involved.
• 
Posting to account types when you assign appropriate document types to business 
transactions. For example, the document type DR will post to a customer account; KR 
will post to a vendor account; and so on. During document posting, you enter the 
document type in the document header field. This enables the system to differentiate 
between accounts to be posted.
• 
The number ranges for document numbers. The system assigns a number range to a 
document during posting, using the number range you created. The number range 
allows the system to store documents in the system based on similar number ranges. 
Number ranges therefore control document storage in the system. 
Document Types
KR
KG
DR
DZ
DG
AB
SA
KZ
Vendor Invoice
Vendor Invoice Payment
Vendor Credit Memo
Customer Invoice
Customer Invoice Payment
Customer Credit Memo
Accounting Document
G/L Account Document
Figure 3-1.  Important document types in SAP R/3
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
43
■
■Note  SAP comes with standard document types, which you can use as your document types. Some of the 
standard document types delivered by SAP are listed in Figure 3-1. You can also create your own document 
types, but it’s better to copy the standard document types supplied by SAP instead of creating your own 
document types from scratch. The reason is that when you create your own document types, you also need to 
make modifications to the standard table supplied by SAP, which can be time consuming.
You have two options when defining a document number range in SAP ERP:
Up to a future fiscal year: You define a large number range that the system 
assigns to documents systematically as a document number over one fiscal year. 
The system chooses the number from the number range that comes up next until 
the number range is finished. This method has the drawback of running out of 
numbers once the entire number range is used.
Each fiscal year: You define a number range for each year. You can define 
number ranges for future years in advance. So at the beginning of next year, the 
system starts from the first number in the number range you defined for that 
year. The advantage of this method is that the number range is always sufficient.
Posting Key
Posting keys are defined by a two-digit number. They control the structure of line item entries in SAP ERP. 
Posting keys are defined at the client level, which makes them accessible to all company codes in the system. 
(Put another way, all company codes in the system within the same client can use the same posting keys 
simultaneously.) The importance of the posting key is that it determines the account type (that is,, if the 
account type is debit or credit) and the screen layout in SAP ERP. In order for the system to determine how 
an item is posted in the system, a posting key is entered during data entry. The posting key controls the 
following:
• 
The account to be posted
• 
Whether the line item should be posted as a debit or a credit
• 
How data you entered in the system is updated
SAP comes with predefined posting keys. Some important posting keys with their default posting key 
values are listed in Figure 3-2.
GL Transaction
Debit
Credit
31
50
50
40
01
40
Customer Invoice
Vendor Invoice
Figure 3-2.  Important posting keys
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
44
Defining Number Ranges
Problem: You are to demonstrate to FI junior consultants how to define and copy number 
ranges for document postings.
A document in SAP ERP is assigned a unique number from a predefined number range. You define a 
number range in a sequential order and assign it to a two-character document type during document-range 
customizing. You can define number ranges in two ways in SAP ERP: by creating your own number ranges or 
by copying the standard number ranges supplied in the system.
■
■Note  A document type can be represented by numbers or characters, or it can be alphanumeric.
The number ranges you define in this activity will be assigned automatically to documents by the 
system during document posting. To get to the screen where you define number ranges, use this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Document ➤ Document 
Number Ranges ➤ Documents in Entry View ➤ Define Document Number Ranges for Entry View. Or you 
can use transaction code FBN1.
The Number Ranges for Accounting Documents screen is displayed (Figure 3-3). This screen is where 
you create the number ranges for your company code. Enter your company’s four-digit company code in the 
company code field on the screen, shown circled in red. In this activity, the company code is C900.
To maintain number ranges for your company code, click the 
 button circled in red 
on the screen in Figure 3-3. This will display the Maintain Number Range Intervals screen, where you will 
create your number ranges. Notice that the input fields on the Maintain Number Range Intervals screen are 
inactive. Click the 
 button at the top-left side of the screen to activate the screen input fields for 
number intervals insertion. Now update the following fields on the Insert Interval screen to match those in 
Figure 3-4.
Figure 3-3.  Number ranges for an accounting document
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
45
No: This is the field where you enter your number range identifier. For example, 
you can start with 01, 02, and so on. These numbers allow you to define your 
number ranges in a systematic manner.
Year: The year you enter determines the validity of your number range. It is 
important that you include the current year in your number range. This enables 
the system to assign a number range from the lower limit upward for each fiscal 
year automatically. The advantage of this method is that the number range is 
always sufficient. On the other hand, if you want the system to use a number 
range up to a future fiscal year, enter 9999 in the year field. The system will 
always use the next available number from the predefined number range.
From number: This is the lower limit for your number range intervals (that is, 
the starting point of your number range). You can enter up to 10 numbers in this 
field. For example, 010000000.
To number: This is the upper limit for your number range intervals (that is, 
where your number range ends). You can enter up to 10 numbers in this field. 
For example, 01999999999.
Current number: No entry is needed in this field. This field shows the current 
number range that has been assigned by the system. During configuration, this 
figure always defaults to 0.
Ext: When this checkbox indicator is selected, the system will allow the users to 
assign external numbers to documents during posting. If the checkbox is blank, 
the system will assign numbers to documents automatically from the number 
range intervals you specify here.
Figure 3-4.  Specification of number range intervals
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
46
Click the Insert 
 button circled in red on the bottom-right side of the screen in Figure 3-4 or press 
Enter on your keyboard. The system will accept your number range specification. The number range 
intervals you specified here will be assigned to documents during document posting by the user. In the 
example in Figure 3-4, we used 01 as the number range identifier, 2011 as the year, and 0100000000–
0199999999 as the number range interval.
As part of this exercise, continue to specify number range intervals for the years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 
2016, 2017, and 2018. To do this, click 
 at the top-left side of the screen to specify the number range 
for each year individually (Figure 3-5).
■
■Note  If you want to use the future fiscal year number range method, enter 9999 in the year column.  
The system will then use the available number interval by choosing the current number from the number range 
that comes up next.
When you have completed your number range customizing, save 
 the number ranges you have 
defined. The Transport Number Range Intervals screen pops up, telling you about your number range 
transport. Accept by clicking the Enter 
 button. The system will then notify you that 
 on 
the status bar at the bottom of the screen.
Figure 3-5.  The Maintain Number Range Intervals page
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
47
How to Display Number Intervals
To display the number range intervals you have created—to see what you have done—click the Back 
 
button at the top-left side of the screen to return to the previous screen (Number Ranges for Accounting 
Documents). Click the 
 button on the screen. Your number ranges will be displayed, as 
shown in Figure 3-6.
How to Delete Number Range Intervals
Before you can look at how to copy predefined number ranges provided by SAP in the system, you have to 
first delete the number ranges you just created. That’s because the system will not allow you to create an 
existing number range in the system. So delete the number ranges you created for the years 2011, 2012, 2013, 
2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018.
On the Display Number Range Interval screen in Figure 3-6, click the Back 
 button at the top-right 
side of the screen to return to the Number Ranges for Accounting Documents screen.
The system will automatically default to your company code in the Company Code field. Otherwise, 
enter the company code you desire in the company code field manually and click the 
 
button to call up the number intervals you created earlier. The Maintain Number Range Intervals screen is 
displayed (Figure 3-7).
Figure 3-6.  The Display Number Range Intervals page
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
48
A list of the number range intervals you have created is displayed. Select the number range intervals 
that you want to delete. For this activity, select all the displayed number range intervals—2011, 2012, 2013, 
2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018. Click the Delete 
 button at the top of the screen to delete them.
After deleting all the displayed number range intervals, notice that the Maintain Number Range 
Intervals screen becomes blank and the fields on the screen become inactive, which indicates you cannot 
enter values into these fields. Click the Save 
 button to complete the task.
How to Copy Document Number Ranges
Problem: You need to copy the standard number range intervals from the company code 
1000 and modify them to meet your number range intervals requirement.
Now let’s take a look at how to copy standard number range intervals from a predefined company code and 
then modify them to meet your requirements. In this case, we’ll use 1000, which is supplied by SAP in the 
system. This step is optional, but we’ll go through it so you know how to copy predefined number ranges.
Copied number range intervals work exactly the same way as number range intervals that you create. 
The advantage of copying number range intervals is that it is easier and quicker to copy multiple number 
ranges simultaneously, instead of having to create each individual fiscal year number ranges. To go to 
the screen where you define document number range intervals, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Document ➤ Document Number 
Ranges ➤ Documents in Entry View ➤ Define Document Number Ranges for Entry View. Or, you can use 
the transaction code FBN1.
The Number Ranges for Accounting Documents screen is displayed (see Figure 3-3 earlier in the 
chapter). This is where you copy the predefined number range intervals from another company. Enter the 
company code for which you want to copy number ranges in the company code field, and click the Copy 
 
button at the top right of the screen. The Copy: Company Code dialog box pops up (Figure 3-8). As you can 
see, in this activity we copied company code 1000 containing predefined number ranges. It is not necessary 
Figure 3-7.  Deleting the number range intervals
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
49
that you copy company code 1000 number ranges. This is purely a matter of choice. But we recommend that 
you copy one of the following company codes: 0001, 1000, 2000, or 3000. These are some of the standard 
company codes with predefined number ranges supplied by SAP. On the Copy: Company Code screen, you 
specify both the company code from which you want to copy the number ranges and your company code.
The system will default to the source company code in the From field. Enter your company code in the 
To field. Since you are copying company code 1000’s number range intervals to your company code C900, 
click the Copy 
 button circled in red at the bottom of the Copy: Company screen. The system will copy the 
number range intervals from company code 1000 to company code C900 and issue a notification on the 
status bar as follows: 
.
You can display the number ranges you have just copied by clicking the 
 button
Understand and Manage Field Status Variants
Field status variants are variants that hold the Field Status Groups in SAP R/3. A Field Status Group defines 
the screen layout for a general ledger account entry and controls document creation within a company code. 
Based on your specification, the Field Status Groups determine which fields accept input during document 
entry, as well as whether a field should be inactive, be required, or be optional.
In SAP R/3, field statuses are defined as global settings and are assigned Field Status Groups. Field 
status variants are independent of company codes (that is, they are available to all company codes in the 
client), because they are created at the client level. A Field Status Group is entered in the company code 
section of the GL accounts in the G/L account master records during the creation of a G/L account.
The Field Status Group you define controls the appearance of certain data entry fields in the data screen 
for G/L accounts.
■
■Note  It best to simply copy the standard field status variants supplied by SAP.
Figure 3-8.  The copy company code number range intervals
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
50
Define Field Status Variants
Problem: Copy the predefined field status variants for company code 1000 supplied by the 
system and modify them to meet your requirements.
In SAP R/3, several company codes can use the same field status groups. As part of customizing field status 
variants, you can specify field status variants and assign your company code to the field status variant 
you have defined. To proceed to the screen where you define field status variants, follow the menu path: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fields ➤ Define 
Field Status Variants. You can use the transaction code OBC4 instead, if you want.
The Change View “Field Status Variants”: Overview screen is displayed (Figure 3-9). This screen is 
where you maintain your field status variant and assign field status groups to it.
Search for field status variant 1000, which is the one we’ll use to copy. Then select it and copy it. 
When you copy the field status variants supplied by the system, you also copy any associated tables and 
parameters.
■
■Note  Field status variant 1000 is simply the one we are using for this activity, but you can copy any field 
status variant from the list of variants supplied by SAP, because trying to create your own field status variant 
can be very difficult and time consuming. For example, you can copy field status variant 0001, 2000, and so on 
and get the same result.
Click the Copy 
 icon circled in red at the top of the screen. The Change View “Field Status Variants”: 
Overview of Selected Set screen is displayed (Figure 3-10) showing the field status variants you 
have copied.
Figure 3-9.  Copying the field status variants
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
51
Change the content of the following fields:
FStV: Enter your field status variant key into this field. You can enter up to 
four characters as your key. Since you have copied the field status variant from 
company code 1000, change the field status variant 1000 to your own field status 
variant identifier of C900.
Field status name: This field allows you to provide a short description or a name 
for your field status variant. Replace the content of this field with your own field 
status variant description, for example Field Status Variant – C900.
■
■Tip  It is advisable to use your company code as your field status variant.
Click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard for the system to 
accept your entries. A dialog box—Specify Object to Be Copied—pops up, telling you the number of entries 
and dependent entries that you are about to copy. You can either copy the entry with dependent entries (that 
is, the field status variant with the field status groups it holds) or copy just the entry itself without dependent 
entries. (If you take the latter approach, you will have to define the dependent entries for your field status 
variants; otherwise, your field status variant may not work properly.) If you want to copy the field status 
variants with dependent entries, click the Copy All button on the screen. If you don’t want to copy 
dependent entries with the field status variants, click the Only Copy Entry button on the screen. In this 
activity, the object we are copying includes dependent entries. Click the 
 button to copy 
the object with all its dependent entries. The system will issue an Information screen telling you the number 
of dependent entries copied. Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the Information screen or press 
Enter on your keyboard to confirm that you are satisfied with the copied entries. Then click the Save 
 
button to save your field status variant.
Figure 3-10.  Editing the field status variants
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
52
Display Field Status Variants
It is important to display the Field Status Groups you copied to see if you are satisfied with your  
customizing. To do this, stay on the Change View “Field Status Variants”: Overview screen in Figure 3-10. 
Notice that your field status variant is at the top of the list displayed on the screen. Select or highlight your 
field status 
 from the field status variants list and double-click 
  
in the Dialog Structure section, on the left side of the screen (Figure 3-11) to open the folder. The field status 
groups assigned to your field status variant will be displayed on the right side of the screen. 
Assign Company Code to Field Status Variants
As mentioned earlier, field status variants are company code-independent since they are created at the 
global level. The field variant you just defined—C900—can be assigned to more than one company code. 
The next step in this activity is to assign the field status variant to your company code. The field status variant 
assigned to your company code will control the appearance of the data entry field in the data screen. To go 
to the screen where you can assign a field status variant to your company code, follow the menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Fields ➤ Assign 
Company Code to Field Status Variants. You can use the transaction code OBC5 if you prefer.
The Change View “Assign Company Code ➤ Field Status Variant” Overview screen is displayed 
(Figure 3-12) with list of company codes. Search for your company code by clicking the 
 
button at the bottom of the screen.
Figure 3-11.  The Field Status Groups you copied are displayed
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 3 ■ Document Control
53
Assign your field status variant to your company code. In this activity, we used C900. Save 
 your 
company code assignment. The system will notify you that 
 at the bottom of the screen on 
the status bar.
Summary
This chapter explained document control by looking at document type and posting keys and their functions 
in SAP ERP. As part of the customizing exercise, you learned how to create number ranges, how to display 
the number ranges you created, and how to delete a number range. You also learned how to copy predefined 
number ranges provided by SAP in the system. You also learned the importance of field status variants. 
Finally, you learned how to create your own field status variants by copying predefined field status variants 
provided by SAP and learned how to assign field status variants you created to your company code.
Chapter 4 looks at how to define tolerance groups for GL accounts and define employee tolerance 
groups. Chapter 4 also walks through the various steps involved in customizing tolerance groups by first 
defining them and then assigning users to them to create accounts for clearing differences.
Figure 3-12.  Assigning a company code to a field status variant
www.it-ebooks.info

55
Chapter 4
Defining Tolerance Groups for  
G/L Accounts and Employees
In this chapter, you will learn the purpose of tolerance groups and how to define them in SAP R/3.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Define tolerance groups for G/L accounts
• 
Define tolerance groups for employees
• 
Define tolerance groups for employees with a group key
• 
Assign users to tolerance groups
Tolerance Groups
Tolerance groups determine limits upon which acceptable payment differences are based. During document 
posting, the system will check for any difference and match it against the defined limits to determine if the 
difference is within the specified limits and automatically post the differences to a predefined account. If the 
difference is outside the set limit, the system will automatically reject the posting.
It is a normal business practice for payment differences to occur in a business transaction. The bottom 
line here is, what is the business willing to accept as an acceptable payment difference for a given business 
transaction? This occurs when an invoice amount entered in the system is different from the actual amount 
received to clear the outstanding invoice. For example, an outstanding invoice amount is $1,000 and the 
amount paid to clear the outstanding invoice is $950, leaving you with a difference of $50. If the acceptable 
limit for your tolerance groups is $45, the system will reject your posting because the difference is above 
the acceptable limit. On the other hand, if the payment difference is $45 or less, the system will accept 
your posting and post the difference to a specified predefined account, because the difference is within the 
defined acceptable limit.
There are several reasons why differences occur. A typical example is as a result of goods damaged on 
transit that reduce the value of the goods delivered. This brings up the concept of materiality, which is what 
a business considers to be material or significant differences that cannot be overlooked or ignored. To enable 
the system to perform limit checks, your company must define an acceptable payment difference.
Tolerances are necessary mainly for control purposes. In SAP ERP, maximum amounts deemed 
acceptable by a business are defined in tolerances in a company code and assigned to a tolerance group. 
Tolerances dictate payment difference authorizations (that is, tolerances are company code specific and 
determine the amount accounting clerks are permitted to post to the system per transaction for invoice 
clearing). Tolerances also allow you to specify settings that control the discounts that accounting clerks can 
grant per invoice as well as any tolerances over payment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
56
The advantage of using tolerances is that during posting, the system will automatically determine if 
payment differences are within the acceptable limits you defined. If a payment difference is within the 
payment difference limit, the system will accept the posting. If a payment difference posting exceeds the 
specified limit, the system will reject the posting. Tolerances reduce potential posting errors made by 
accounting clerks during document entry.
Three tolerances are represented in SAP ERP; we will look at each in turn:
• 
Tolerance groups for G/L accounts
• 
Tolerance groups for employees
• 
Tolerances for customers/vendors (discussed in Chapter 14)
The three levels of tolerance represented in SAP R/3 are depicted in Figure 4-1.
Tolerance Groups
G/L Accounts
Employee
Assign Users to Tolerance Group 
Debit/Credit posting
Upper limits for posting
differences
Upper limits for posting
procedures
Tolerance for groups of
G/L accounts in local
currency
Permitted payment
differences
Permitted payment
differences
Customer/Vendor
Figure 4-1.  The three levels of tolerance groups
Define Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts
Tolerance groups for G/L accounts define the limits within which credit and debit differences in local 
currencies are considered acceptable. The accounts’ differences are posted automatically during  
G/L account clearing. The tolerance groups defined for G/L accounts in this activity are eventually assigned 
to the general ledger account’s master record. During the account-clearing process, the system checks the 
tolerance groups to ascertain if the differences are within acceptable limits, as specified by your settings, and 
automatically posts the differences, if any, to the predefined accounts.
Problem: The accounts team at company C900 plc wants you to define acceptable 
payment differences, which will then be posted automatically to appropriate predefined 
accounts during document posting.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
57
In this activity, you will be looking at the two steps involved in customizing tolerance groups for  
G/L accounts. You will learn how to customize default tolerance groups for G/L accounts and how to assign 
a group to the tolerance groups you defined for your G/L accounts.
The two tolerance groups defined in the configuration of tolerance for groups are as follows:
• 
Default Tolerance Group. This is a G/L tolerance without a tolerance group. You 
define this by leaving the Tolgroup blank (this is a default tolerance group and it is 
valid for all G/L tolerance groups in the system).
• 
Tolerance Group. As opposed to default tolerance groups, this is a G/L tolerance 
with a tolerance group. Here, you assign a specific tolerance group to the G/L 
tolerance. Unlike the G/L tolerance without a tolerance group, this tolerance group is 
valid only for the specified G/L tolerance groups. For example, if accounting clerks in 
group A are assigned to certain G/L tolerances, the system will not allow accounting 
clerks in group B to post to these G/L accounts during document entry.
Go to the screen where you will first define the default tolerance group by following this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Open 
Item Clearing ➤ Clearing Differences ➤ Define Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts. You can also use the 
transaction code OBA0.
The Change View “Tolerances for Groups of G/L Accounts in Local Currency”: Overview screen  
appears (Figure 4-2).
A list of existing tolerance groups is displayed on the screen. To create a default tolerance group, click 
 on the top-left side of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is displayed 
(Figure 4-3). This screen is where you specify tolerances for groups of G/L accounts.
Figure 4-2.  Here is where you define tolerance groups for G/L accounts
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
58
Update the following fields:
Company Code: Enter the four-digit character representing your company code 
in this field. The company code you enter in this field must be your company 
code or the company code you want to assign to your tolerance group.
Tolerance Group: This is the field where you specify the tolerance group for 
your G/L accounts. The specification you make in this field will determine 
the acceptable payment differences posted to the G/L accounts. Since you are 
defining a default tolerance groups for G/L accounts, leave this field blank. When 
you leave this field blank, the system will assume that the tolerance group is a 
default tolerance group and is therefore valid for all G/L tolerance groups. Since 
a blank tolerance group is a default tolerance group, it is advisable to describe 
your tolerance group as “Default” in the Tolerance Group description field 
shown in Figure 4-3.
In the Tolerance for Groups of G/L Accounts in Local Currency section on the screen, you can specify 
debit/credit posting differences as absolute amounts or as percentages. The system uses only one of these 
specifications, either amount or percentage. During document posting, the system will check the amount 
and the percentage you specify and automatically use whichever is lower.
After updating the screen in Figure 4-3, click the Enter 
 button at the top-left corner of the screen to 
confirm your entries and save 
 your tolerance for groups for G/L accounts.
The second step in this activity is to define the G/L tolerances with a tolerance group. This is when you 
assign a group to the G/L tolerance. Only the assigned group can post differences within the acceptable limit 
in the system. To go to the screen where you will carry out this configuration, click the Back 
 button at the 
top-left of the screen to return to the previous screen (Change View “Tolerances for Groups of G/L Accounts 
in Local Currency”), shown in Figure 4-2. You will define your tolerance there.
Figure 4-3.  Defining default tolerance groups for G/L accounts
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
59
On the Change View “Tolerances for Groups of G/L Accounts in Local Currency:” Overview screen, click 
the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen (Figure 4-3) 
is displayed. Update the following fields to match those in Figure 4-4:
Company Code: Enter the four-digit company code that you want to apply to 
your tolerance group in this field.
Tolerance Group: Enter a four-digit character of your choice as the tolerance 
group key in this field. You can create as many tolerance groups as required by 
your company. The tolerance group key you define here will be assigned to a 
username. A username could be referred to as the user logon ID assigned to the 
user. In this activity, we used CLK1 as the tolerance group (Figure 4-4).
■
■Note  The relationship of the user ID and the tolerance group is a many-to-one relationship. That means 
that several user logon IDs can be assigned to the same tolerance group, but a user logon ID can be assigned to 
only one tolerance group.
In the Tolerance for Groups of G/L Accounts in Local Currency section of the screen, specify the  
debit/credit postings (in amounts and in percentages) in the appropriate fields.
Click the Save button 
 to save your tolerance group for G/L accounts.
The next step is to define tolerance groups for employees. In this activity, you will define the limits that 
the system uses to determine the amount per document (invoice amount) and per open items (outstanding 
balance) that a user is permitted to post to the system.
Figure 4-4.  Defining tolerance groups for G/L accounts with tolerence group
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
60
Define Tolerance Groups for Employees
Tolerance groups set for employees define what an employee is permitted to post to the system. In order for 
the system to automatically determine the amount an employee can post to the system per document and 
per open items, you need to specify the following settings:
• 
The maximum amount per document the employee is permitted to post
• 
The maximum amount the employee can enter in the system per open item in 
customer/vendor account item
• 
The maximum cash discount per line item that the employee is permitted to grant to 
a customer or vendor
• 
The authorized permitted payment differences
Tolerance groups for employees are part of the global settings and can be accessed by either of the 
following menu paths:
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business 
Transaction ➤ Open Item Clearing ➤ Clearing Differences ➤ Define Tolerance 
Groups for Employees
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings  
(New) ➤ Document ➤ Tolerance Groups ➤ Define Tolerance Groups for Employees
Problem: Your task is to define tolerance groups for employees and assign users to the 
tolerance groups you have defined.
Two employee-related tolerance groups are needed: a default tolerance group for employees (without a 
tolerance group key) and a tolerance group with an employee group key.
Define Default Tolerance Groups for Employees
The default tolerance groups for employees setting is a minimum requirement for clearing differences that is 
valid for all employees in the group. To define the default tolerance groups for employees, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤  
Open Item Clearing ➤ Clearing Differences ➤ Define Tolerance Groups for Employees. Or use the 
transaction code OBA4.
The Change View “FI Tolerance Groups For Users”: Overview screen is displayed. On the top-left side of 
the screen, click the 
 button. You will then go to the screen where you will create default tolerance 
groups for employees.
In the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen (Figure 4-5), update the following fields:
Group: Leave this field blank. Leaving it blank tells the system to treat this 
entry as the default tolerance group. A default tolerance group is a minimum 
requirement for all employee groups in the system. This is applicable when 
employees are not assigned to any specific tolerance group.
Company Code: Enter your company code in this field. The company code you 
enter will serve as the company code for your tolerance groups for employees.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
61
In the Upper Limits for Posting Procedures section of this screen, enter the maximum amount an 
employee can post to the system per document. Fill in the following fields:
• 
Amount per Document: This is the maximum amount per document an employee 
is authorized to post. It is important to note that an employee will not be able to 
exceed the amount entered here during document posting.
• 
Amount per Open Item Account Item: This is the maximum amount per open 
item that the employee can enter in the line item in a vendor/customer account. An 
employee can post only an amount up to the specified amount made here per open 
item. The system will reject anything exceeding the specified amount.
• 
Cash Discount per Line Item: This is the maximum cash percentage discount per 
line item that the employee can grant. When an employee grants a discount during 
document posting, the system will check to make sure that the discount granted is 
within acceptable levels, per the line item you define here.
In the Permitted Payment Differences section of this screen, specify the Amount, Percentage, and 
Cash Discount Adjustment in the Revenue/Expenses fields as the permitted payment differences. During 
payment difference posting, the system will check the amount against the percentage and automatically use 
whichever is less.
Figure 4-5.  The Group item is blank, which sets it as the default tolerance groups for employees
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
62
After updating the screen shown in Figure 4-5, click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen or press 
Enter on your keyboard. The system will accept your settings. Finally, save 
 your configuration.
■
■Note  The dot (.) is used to separate thousands and the comma (,) is used to separate pence/cents. For 
example, 190,222.22 is represented in SAP as 190.222,22.
The next step is to create another tolerance group for employees, this time with a group key. To go to the 
screen where you will carry out this configuration, click the 
 Back button at the top of the screen to return 
to the previous screen.
Define Tolerance Groups for Employees with a Group Key
The group key you define in this activity will be assigned to one or more usernames (logon IDs) in the 
system for a tolerance group. This will be discussed in detail in Chapter 19. The employees you assign to the 
tolerance group in this activity will be restricted to the payment differences specified in the tolerance group. 
In other words, during document posting, these employees will not be able to exceed the permitted payment 
differences you specify.
On the Change View “FI Tolerance Groups For Users”: Overview screen, click the 
 button at 
the top of the screen. You’ll go to the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen, where you can specify the 
settings for tolerance groups for employees. Update the screen in Figure 4-6. Enter a group key in the Group 
field. We used CLK1 as the group key for this activity.
Figure 4-6.  Tolerance groups for employees with a group key
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
63
Click the Enter 
 button at the top-left side of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard to have the 
system accept your specifications. Then save 
 your configuration.
After you’ve completed the configuration of tolerance groups for employees, the next step is to assign 
user IDs to the tolerance groups you just defined.
Assign Users to Tolerance Groups
In this activity, you will assign an employee to a special tolerance group for posting and clearing payment 
differences. To go to the screen where you will assign employees to a tolerance group, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Open 
Item Clearing ➤ Clearing Differences ➤ Assign Users to Tolerance Groups. Or you can use the transaction 
code OB57.
The Change View “Assign Users ➤ Tolerance Group”: Overview screen is displayed. This screen will 
display a list of usernames assigned to tolerance groups. To assign a username to a tolerance group, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The screen in Figure 4-7 is then displayed.
Figure 4-7.  Assign users to tolerance groups
Update the following fields on the screen:
User Name: Enter the user ID you want to assign to a tolerance group in this 
field. The username you enter here is the user’s logon ID. This will allow the user 
to post an amount in the system up to the defined tolerance limit specified in the 
tolerance group you have assigned to that user.
Tolerance Group: Enter the tolerance group key you defined in Figure 4-6. This 
will allow the user assigned to this tolerance group to post an amount within the 
tolerance limit defined for this tolerance group.
■
■Note  The username should be your logon user ID. For example, Student1, Student2, Student3, User1,  
and so on.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 4 ■ Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees 
64
After you have assigned a user ID to the tolerance group, click the 
 Enter button at the top-right side 
of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard and save 
 your configuration.
Summary
This chapter explained how tolerances serve as control mechanisms in SAP ERP. You looked at the steps 
involved when creating tolerances. You also looked at how the system controls payment differences through 
the tolerances you set during the customization process.
We took you through all the customization processes involved in creating tolerance groups for  
G/L accounts. This included defining the limits within which credit and debit differences in local currencies 
are considered by the system during posting. You also learned how to customize settings for tolerance 
groups for employees. You learned how to define default tolerance groups for employees and tolerance 
groups for employees with a group key.
Finally, as part of the customizing exercise, you learned how to assign users to tolerance groups that  
you defined.
In the next chapter, you learn what a G/L master record is and how to create G/L accounts in SAP ERP.
www.it-ebooks.info

65
Chapter 5
Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
In this chapter, you learn how to create G/L accounts, use line items, and open item management in G/L 
accounts.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Explain what a general ledger is
• 
Describe what a master record is
• 
Create G/L account master records
• 
Use a template to copy a G/L account
General Ledger
Business transactions are sorted and stored in G/L accounts that apply the double entry principle—dual 
control (debit and credit). Transactions posted to G/L accounts are classified into assets, liabilities, income, 
and expenditures, from which financial statements are drawn.
All financial transactions with business partners are posted to sub-ledgers in SAP ERP. Financial 
transactions are treated in accounting as debit or credit transactions. Several sub-ledgers are created in SAP 
R/3 to store financial accounting transactions in the system. The summary, or balance of sub-ledgers, is 
automatically posted in real-time to the reconciliation (general ledger) accounts as debit balance or credit 
balance by the system. For example, in Figure 5-1, the amounts of 1,500 and 2,000 were posted to Motor 
Vehicle and the amount of 5,000 was posted to Furniture & Fittings in the sub-ledger accounts. The system 
automatically posted the balances of both sub-ledgers to the G/L account in real-time.
Sub-ledgers are a subset of the general ledger used for recording individual items and transactions in 
accounting. Sub-ledgers include individual accounts payable, accounts receivable, assets, and bank account 
information. They hold accounts payable details such as the vendor’s name, number of transactions, dates, 
discounts, and payment terms Transactions are posted in the system as they arise in the sub-ledger. The 
summary or balance of sub-ledgers is posted to reconciliation accounts. In other words, balances in the 
sub-ledger are posted to the reconciliation accounts. The reconciliation accounts hold the balances of sub-
ledgers from which a financial statement is drawn. The advantage of a reconciliation account is that it gives 
you a snapshot of the sub-ledger.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
66
■
■Note  Reconciliation accounts are G/L accounts that hold sub-ledger balances. Reconciliation accounts 
could be referred to as G/L accounts containing sub-ledger totals. The system automatically posts all postings 
to sub-ledgers to G/L reconciliation accounts. Therefore, reconciliation accounts are G/L account summaries 
of sub-ledgers in SAP R/3. Reconciliation accounts are assigned to business partners in the business partners’ 
master records.
Users don’t manually post to reconciliation accounts. The system automatically posts to the reconciliation 
accounts in real-time.
Next, you need to know what a general ledger master record is and how it controls accounting 
transactions in the general ledger accounts.
What Is a Master Record?
A master record contains vital information held in a business system database that remains relatively 
unchanged over a long period of time. This is the case when sets of data are commonly accessed, used, 
and shared by different individuals for different purposes across an organization in order to fulfill 
business processes in real-time. For example, a vendor’s details held in the system may be used by various 
departments. The sales team needs the vendors’ details in order to send them sales offers; the marketing 
department needs this information to send out marketing promotions; the accounting department needs 
the information for invoices and other accounting purposes; and so on.
Information that aids efficient business processes and tends not to change frequently (such as a 
customer/vendor name and address) is held in the system database. The idea behind maintaining a master 
record is to avoid having to re-enter the same information multiple times, thereby saving input time and 
avoiding unnecessary waste of system resources and redundancies (to free storage space and improve 
system speed). It’s better to not have to enter or store the same data in the system database several places.
Figure 5-1.  Automatic posting of sub-ledger balances to a reconciliation account
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
67
Some typical examples of master data in a SAP R/3 database include customer data, vendor data, bank 
data, G/L accounts, material data, and so on.
• 
Transaction Data: Data triggered as a result of events arising from day-to-day 
business transactions. A typical transaction data is time-driven with a numerical 
value and often refers to one or more objects in the system. Examples of transaction 
data in SAP R/3 include invoices, payments, credit memos, and goods receipts.
• 
Table Data: Sets of tables containing data about objects, such as payment terms, 
tolerances, pricing conditions, and so on.
Now that you know what a master record is, let’s look at how to create G/L account master records in 
SAP ERP. A G/L master record contains data relating to a G/L account that remains in the system relatively 
for a while. The data held in the G/L master record controls the general ledger account behavior. The G/L 
master record also governs the treatment and posting of accounting transactions to the G/L accounts in the 
system.
Creating G/L Account Master Records
Various options are available when creating G/L master records in SAP ERP:
• 
Create G/L accounts with reference: This allows you to copy existing G/L accounts 
from another company code to yours. The company code you are copying the G/L 
accounts from is referred to as the “source” company code and your company code 
is the “target” company code. SAP comes with a standard chart of accounts and 
company codes in the system, along with sets of G/L account master records that can 
be copied when creating your G/L account master records. The benefit of copying 
existing G/L account master records is that your G/L account master records will 
inherit their properties, which saves time.
• 
Data transfer workbench: This is when you transfer G/L account master records from 
a legacy system. This function is ideal when you want to transfer G/L accounts from 
another system into SAP.
• 
By copying: The system allows you to copy G/L account master records already in the 
system. This is possible only when you have an existing chart of accounts that meets 
your requirements. For example, a chart of accounts that has a structure that matchs 
your G/L account master record could be copied in this manner.
• 
By creating manually: This is when you have to physically create G/L account master 
records individually. The drawback to this method is that it is time consuming, 
especially when you have to create large numbers of G/L accounts.
Let’s look at how to create G/L accounts in SAP ERP. In this activity, you will create your G/L accounts 
manually. This will give you the fundamental understanding of how to create G/L accounts step-by-step. You 
will also be looking at how to copy G/L accounts using existing G/L accounts as a template.
■
■Note  All transactions in SAP FI work with G/L accounts. In the remaining chapters in this book, you will be 
creating G/L accounts, which you will assign to objects in your subsequent configurations.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
68
Problem: You’ve been asked to create G/L accounts for the following items:
• 
Office supplies
• 
Misc. office expenses
• 
Sales revenue
• 
Share capital
Create a G/L Account: Office Supplies
Let’s start by creating a G/L account for office supplies. To create your G/L accounts, follow this menu path: 
SAP Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Master Records ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ 
Individual Processing ➤ Centrally. Or use the transaction code FS00.
The Edit G/L Account Centrally screen is displayed (Figure 5-2). The G/L accounts you create here are 
available to all company codes in the system. This means that all the company codes in the system with the 
same operational chart of accounts and same G/L structure can use the same G/L account (that is, several 
company codes can use one G/L account).
Figure 5-2.  Edit a G/L account centrally 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
69
Update the following fields:
G/L Account: Every G/L account in SAP ERP must be assigned a number, which 
serves as the G/L account number. Enter your G/L account number in the  
G/L Account field. The G/L account number that you enter here is restricted 
to the length of the G/L account number you specified when customizing the 
“Create Chart of Accounts” section in Chapter 2. The G/L account number is 
used to reference the G/L account. See the following note.
Company Code: Every company represented in SAP ERP must be assigned a 
company code. Company codes are assigned to G/L accounts in the system. 
Enter your company code in the Company Code field. The company code you 
enter in this field will allow you to assign a G/L account to your company.
■
■Note  The number you enter in the G/L Account field must be within the number range intervals you defined 
for your account group in Chapter 2.
Notice that only the company code and general ledger fields are open for data entry on this screen, 
while the remaining fields (circled in red) on the screen are inactive. This means the fields are not ready for 
data input.
■
■Note  The Edit G/L Accounts Centrally screen has four important buttons that will help you create and 
navigate your G/L account:
Display 
. This button is used to display a G/L account in the system.
Change 
. This button is used to change or edit G/L account details.
Create 
. This button is used to create a new G/L account.
 This button allows you to copy an existing G/L account in the system using a template.  
This can be very handy if you are copying similar G/L accounts, because it allows the system to classify similar 
G/L accounts into the same account group and number range intervals.
The next step is to update the Control in the Chart of Accounts section of the screen (Figure 5-3).  
To activate the fields for data input, click the Create 
 button on the right side of the screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
70
Update the following fields:
Account Group:  As explained in Chapter 2, the account group is a tool in the 
SAP ERP that determines how master records are created. The importance of 
the account group is that it classifies G/L transactions into the same account 
groups you specified in Define Chart of Account in Chapter 2. When you click the 
drop-down arrow next to the Account Group field on the Control in the Chart of 
Accounts section, a list of the account groups you defined earlier is displayed. 
Select the account group appropriate for your G/L account. For example, if your 
G/L account is for posting transactions relating to assets, select Fixed Assets 
Accounts from the Account Group list displayed. All postings relating to assets 
will be classified as such, and the system will automatically assign a number to 
the item from the number range interval belonging to this account group. For 
this activity, we used General G/L Accounts as the Account Group.
Figure 5-3.  Create G/L account centrally—the Type/Description tab
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
71
P&L Statement Account: This has a radio button. When activated, transactions 
posted to this G/L account will allow the system to treat the G/L items as P&L 
statement account items when generating financial statement reports. In this 
activity, we are creating a G/L account for office supplies. In accounting, office 
supplies are an expense so they are treated as a P&L item. Hence, you should 
select P&L Statement Acct.
Balance Sheet Account: Likewise, if the radio button for Balance Sheet account 
is clicked, items posted to the G/L account are treated as balance sheet account 
items during financial statement reporting.
Short Text: When creating a G/L account, you need to give a descriptive name to 
your G/L account. This will allow you to identify individual G/L accounts in the 
system. Since we are creating a G/L account for office supplies, we’ll use Office 
Sup as our short text description.
G/L Account Long Text: Likewise, the G/L account long text field will allow you 
to use more detailed, descriptive text as your G/L account description or name. 
For example, general office supplies.
■
■Note  In the Consolidation Data in the Chart of Accounts section in Figure 5-3, you can enter a trading 
partner and group account number for your G/L account. This is necessary if your company prepares 
consolidated financial statements for its corporate group. In that case, you should enter the company code 
responsible for the preparation of the consolidation account for the corporate group in the Trading Partner’s field 
and enter the consolidated G/L account number in in the Group Account Number field. The consolidated G/L 
account allows you to prepare consolidated financial statements for your corporate group in SAP ERP.
The next step is to update the field in the Control Data section of the screen. This section of the screen 
contains the account control in the company code. Click the 
 tab circled in red in Figure 5-3.  
The Control Data section will come to the forefront (Figure 5-4).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
72
Figure 5-4.  Create G/L account centrally—the Control Data tab
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
73
Update the following fields on the Control Data tab:
Account Currency: This is the Company Code section of the G/L account master 
record data where you specify the currency of your G/L accounts. It is important to 
use the local currency for your G/L accounts for each company code. The advantage 
of using local currency is that it allows postings to be made to the G/L account in any 
currency and then converted. Postings made in foreign currency are translated into 
local currency. However, you can also choose to specify foreign currency as your G/L 
account currency. The drawback to this approach is that posting to the G/L account 
can only be made in this currency. The system automatically defaults to the local 
currency of your company code when creating a G/L account. This project examines 
a UK-based company, so the company code currency is GBP (Great Britain Pounds).
Only Balances In Local Currency: Click the Only Balances In Local Currency 
checkbox if the transactions posted to this account must be maintained in 
local currency only. When you click this checkbox, the system will display and 
manage all currencies in the G/L master record in local currency (that is, the 
company code currency). This is important when you do not want the system to 
post any exchange rate differences that may occur, but you want to clear several 
currencies arising from transactions with your company code currency (local 
currency). It is important to note that you do not click the Only Balances In Local 
Currency checkbox for Accounts Payable (AP) and Accounts Receivable (AR) 
reconciliation accounts, because most transactions posted in AP & AR are in 
various currencies. Only Balances In Local Currency is clicked for balance sheet 
accounts without open item management, cash discount account clearing, or 
Goods Received (GR)/Invoice Receipts (IR) clearing accounts.
Tax Category: This field allows you to specify if the G/L account is tax relevant. 
Using the Search Function button next to the Tax Category field, select the 
appropriate tax symbol that you want to use in your G/L account from the 
displayed tax list. The Tax Category could either be input tax or output tax. For 
example, if input tax is selected, every posting to this G/L account must contain 
input tax. In this activity, we used input tax “-” as the tax category.
Posting Without Tax Allowed: This allows postings without tax to be posted in 
the G/L account, even though the tax category indicator is set.
Reconciliation Account for Account Type: In the G/L master record, you use 
the Reconciliation Account For Account Type drop-down to specify that the 
G/L account is a reconciliation account. This function allows you to select 
from a list of reconciliation account types, for example, Assets, Customers, 
Vendors, and so on. Once this option is set, the G/L account will be considered 
a reconciliation account by the system. It is advisable that you maintain at least 
one reconciliation account in the general ledger. Every posting in the sub-ledger 
in SAP ERP is automatically posted to a corresponding reconciliation account. 
The reconciliation accounts are updated with sub-ledger balances as soon as 
transactions are posted in sub-ledgers. This procedure allows you to generate 
financial statements at any time from the general ledger.
Open Item Management: By clicking this checkbox in the G/L master record, when 
you display line items in an account, the system will display all line items in the account 
marked as open or cleared. This option is ideal if you want to see items not cleared, or 
outstanding balances at any given point in time in an account. This makes it possible 
for you to determine if a posting exists in the G/L account that needs offsetting against a 
particular business transaction (that is, clearing an open item with payment).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
74
Use open item management for the following accounts: 
• 
Bank accounts
• 
GR/IR accounts
• 
Salary accounts 
Line Item Display: This selection allows you to display or view business 
transactions posted to the account line-by-line.
Line item can lead to data redundancy (this is where same the data is stored 
twice or more in the system) and takes additional system resources. Therefore, 
line items should not be activated for the following items: 
• 
Reconciliation accounts—If you need further breakdown of these accounts,  
you can view them in the respective sub-ledgers.
• 
Sale or Turnover accounts—You can view further details of these accounts in 
Sales Order Management.
• 
Material accounts—Further details on these accounts can be obtained from 
Material Management.
• 
Tax accounts—Detailed tax information can be obtained from related tax 
documents. 
Sort Key: When this indicator is set in the G/L account master record, it allows 
you to set the sort key according to the sort key number you assigned. SAP comes 
with a list of standard sort keys you can choose from. The most commonly used 
sort keys are the first nine.
Sort Key
Description
001
Posting date
002
Doc. no, fiscal year
003
Document date
004
Branch account
005
Local currency amt
006
Doc. currency amount
007
Bill/exch. due date
008
Cost center
009
External document no.
 
The system automatically fills the assignment field in the line item based on the 
sort key you assigned to your general ledger master (this is done in the company 
code segment of your company code). When you assign a document number as 
your sort key and then display line items, the system will automatically sort your 
line items based on your selection criteria according to the document number. 
You can access the sort item list by using the search function on the Sort Key field.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
75
The final step in creating the G/L account master record is to update the field in the Control of 
Document Creation in the Company Code section of the screen. Click the 
 tab (Figure 5-5). 
You then need to update the Field Status Group field.
The Field Status Group field determines whether a field should be suppressed, required, or optional during 
document entry. If a field is set to suppressed, users will not be able to enter data into it during document entry. 
If the field is set to required entry, users are required to enter data into the field during document entry. If optional 
entry is set for a field, users can either input data in the field or leave it blank. Field status groups are entered in 
the Field Status field of the general ledger master record in the company code-specific area of each G/L account.
A field status variant contains a field status group, and a field status group is assigned to a company 
code in SAP ERP. SAP comes with a predefined field status group, which you can use for your field status 
variant. It is also possible to create your own field status groups, but we recommend that you use the 
predefined field status group provided by SAP in the system. When you create your own field status group, 
you also have to define the associated tables. This is beyond the scope of SAP FI.
Figure 5-6 shows some of the predefined field status groups in SAP ERP. You can access the list by 
clicking the Search Function key by the Field Status group.
Figure 5-5.  Create G/L account centrally—the Create/Bank/Interest tab
Figure 5-6.  Some of the standard SAP-supplied field status groups
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
76
In the example in Figure 5-5, the G004-Cost Accounts field status group is assigned to the G/L master 
record. The reason we chose G004-Cost Accounts is because office supplies is an expense, and when you 
post entries in the G/L accounts, the system will automatically ask for the cost center, which you have to 
enter in the cost center field of the document entry screen before you can post the document.
As circled in red in Figure 5-5, enter G004 (Cost Accounts) in Field Status Group. Then save 
 your  
G/L account.
The next step in this activity is to learn how to copy G/L accounts using a template. You’ll do this by 
copying the office supplies G/L account and changing it to office expenses.
Create a G/L Account (Called Office Expenses) Using a Template
Problem: You need to create an office expenses account using the G/L account 477000. 
You’ll do this by copying the G/L account 476000 (office supplies) that you created earlier.
To go to the Display G/L Account Centrally screen (Figure 5-6), where you will copy the office supplies 
G/L account and use it as a template to create an office expenses G/L account, follow this menu path: SAP 
Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Master Records ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ 
Individual Processing ➤ Centrally. Or you can use the transaction code FS00.
The Display G/L Account Centrally screen appears (Figure 5-7).
In the G/L Account field, enter your proposed G/L account number for expenses. This number must be 
within the range you defined for your account group in Chapter 2. In this activity, we used 477000. Also, 
enter your company code in the Company Code field. Then click the 
 button on the 
top-right side of the screen, circled in red in Figure 5-7. The Reference Account dialog box pops up, as shown 
in Figure 5-8. Enter the G/L account number that you want to copy (office supplies) in the G/L Account field 
and update the Company Code field as well.
Figure 5-7.  Create a G/L account with a template
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
77
Enter the reference G/L account you want to copy in the G/L Account field, and the reference Company 
Code you are copying in the Company Code field. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your action. The 
system will then paste details of the G/L account you have copied into your new G/L account.
Change the contents of the Short Text field to a short G/L account name, and change the G/L Acct Long 
Text field to Office Expenses, as shown in Figure 5-9. Save 
 your G/L account.
Figure 5-8.  Reference Account dialog box
Figure 5-9.  Creating an G/L account centrally with a template—the Type/Description tab
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
78
G/L accounts are a fundamental configuration in SAP ERP, so you will be creating several G/L accounts 
during the course of this book. As part of this exercise, follow the steps in the preceding section to create an 
account for Administration Cost Accounting using the data in Table 5-1.
■
■Note  Appendix A contains the others G/L accounts that you will need later during your configuration. Go to 
Appendix A – Chapter 5 now to create the following accounts for this exercise: 
••
Water supplies
••
Electricity
••
Gas
••
Sale Revenue – Domestic
••
Sales Revenue – Foreign
••
Share Capital
••
Retained Earnings
Display G/L Accounts
Finally, let’s look at the G/L accounts you have created so far in this activity. To do so, go to the Display  
G/L Account Centrally screen by following this menu path: SAP Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Financial 
Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Master Records ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ Individual Processing ➤ Centrally.  
Or you can use the transaction code FS00.
Leave the G/L Account field blank and enter your company code in the Company Code field. Click the 
Search 
 button next to the G/L Account field. It’s circled in red in Figure 5-10.
Table 5-1.  Administration Cost Accounting
Field
Input
G/L Account
Company Code
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Tax Category
Field Status Group
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 5 ■ Creating a General Ledger (G/L)
79
The G/L Account Number screen pops up. Notice that your Company Code and Chart of Accounts is 
entered by default. If they are not inserted for any reason, you should enter them yourself and click the  
Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your action. The G/L accounts that you have created 
so far will be displayed (Figure 5-11).
Summary
This chapter explained what a general ledger is and also described what a master record is. You went 
through the configuration steps involved in creating a G/L account master record and learned how to copy 
a G/L account using an existing G/L account as a template. You also looked at the relationship among G/L 
accounts, sub-ledgers, and reconciliation accounts.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to set automatic open item clearing and how to define the 
exchange rate and foreign exchange rate valuations.
Figure 5-10.  Displaying the G/L account
Figure 5-11.  List of G/L accounts
www.it-ebooks.info

81
Chapter 6
Clearing Open Items
In this chapter, you learn how to prepare automatic clearing for open items, define a maximum exchange 
rate difference, and perform foreign currency valuation.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Prepare automatic clearing
• 
Create accounts for clearing differences
• 
Define a maximum exchange rate difference
• 
Check company code settings
• 
Define valuation methods
• 
Prepare automatic postings for foreign currency valuations
Clearing Open Items
In SAP R/3, posted transactions with business partners are said to be open or partially complete until 
full payments are made and the related accounts are cleared. For example, a business partner sends in 
an invoice; the invoice is posted in the system. At this point, the transaction remains an open item in the 
account until payment of an equivalent amount of the invoice is made and the account is cleared.
Once payment is made and cleared with the associated open item, the system generates a document 
number. Only then is the transaction complete. Figure 6-1 illustrates how open item clearing is treated in 
SAP ERP.
Figure 6-1.  Open item clearing in SAP R/3
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
82
Assume that on January 1, 20XX, a customer ordered 1,000 items, the accompanying invoice was 
generated, and the invoice was entered into the system immediately.
The amount of 1,000 remains in the account as an open item. At this point the transaction is unfinished, 
because payment has not been received.
On February 1, 20XX, payment of $1,000 is received. The incoming payment is matched with the open 
item of 1,000 and cleared. The net effect of this transaction will be a nil balance. At this point, the transaction 
is complete.
Account clearing can be carried out for an individual item or for collective items in the system. The SAP 
ERP system documents clearing can be carried out manually or automatically using automatic payment 
programs. Clearing open items manually means that the user performs the clearing process, whereas the 
system performs automatic clearing. For the system to perform automatic clearing of open items, you have 
to specify certain settings during customizing.
In this chapter, you will complete an exercise on how to set up automatic clearing. Later, in Chapter 19,  
you will look at how to perform manual clearing of open items in detail. But before I walk through an 
automatic clearing configuration, I’ll briefly describe the two options in manual clearing.
Manual Clearing Overview
There are two ways to clear open items in the system manually: posting with clearing and account clearing.
Posting with Clearing
Posting with clearing occurs when an open item on an account is matched against payment and cleared 
to bring the account balance to nil. It is also possible to group open items, match them with payments, 
and clear them simultaneously. The system will mark them as cleared items, assign a clearing document 
number, and enter the date that the items are cleared in the system.
In SAP ERP, posting with clearing can be performed on an individual open item or on a group of open 
items (that is, several open items in the system are cleared with a payment simultaneously). Posting with 
clearing can also be performed on an account type and several currencies at the same time by assigning 
payment to open items. When you’re using the posting with clearing option, the net effect should be that the 
business transactions end up with a zero balance. Open items and payment included in the clearing must be 
equal. For example, the balance on an account of £1000 must be equal to a payment receipt of £1000.
On the contrary, if the open items and payment are not equal, it is still possible to post the difference in 
the system. The system will treat the posting as a payment on the account and not as a cleared item. Payment 
on account is when the item remains in the system as an open item.
Account Clearing
G/L accounts and sub-ledgers managed in open items are cleared using an account clearing procedure. 
With account clearing, you don’t need to post an item. All you need to do is select the items in the account 
that balance out to zero. When you post them, the system flags the selected items as cleared and enters a 
clearing document number and clearing date for the cleared items.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
83
Prepare Automatic Clearing
Problem: The accounting staff wants to clear open items using the Automatic Clearing 
function. Your task is to maintain settings that will allow the system to clear open items 
using the Automatic Clearing function. 
In SAP ERP, you define account types for customers, vendors, and general ledger accounts, and set the 
criteria for the assignment number (used in relation to the sort key, which enables the automatic clearing 
process in FI), business area, and trading partners (used to control vendor/customer payment/transaction) 
for grouping an account with open items for automatic clearing. Once these settings are made, the system-
clearing program will look for open items in local and foreign currency that equal a zero balance, group 
them together, and clear them simultaneously. The system then generates a clearing number and date and 
enters them into the cleared document.
In order for the system to perform automatic clearing, you need to customize certain specifications. As 
part of your customization, you specify several criteria, including account type and number. You can also 
define up to five additional criteria.
To customize automatic clearing programs, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤  
General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Open Item Clearing ➤ Prepare Automatic 
Clearing. Or you can use the transaction code OB74.
The Change View “Additional Rules For Automatic Clearing”: Overview screen appears and displays the 
list of existing automatic clearing criteria in the system. To create your own automatic criteria, click the 
 button at the top-left of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears 
(Figure 6-2).
Figure 6-2.  Defining additional rules for automatic clearing
Update the following fields:
Chart of Accounts: Enter your Chart of Account in this field. This is the four-digit 
character you defined in Chapter 2.
Account Type: Enter the account type in this field. In SAP ERP, account types are 
represented by letters, such as D (customer), V (Vendor), and S (General Ledger).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
84
From Account/To Account: Specify the account range for each activity type 
for internal and external number range assignments. For internal number 
assignments, use the range 0 to 99999999999. For external number range 
assignments, use the range A to Z.
Criterion 1-3: Define the criteria for open item clearing in the Criterion 1, 
Criterion 2, and Criterion 3 fields.
■
■Note  Criterion 1 is the technical field ZUONR for an assignment number. Criterion 2 is the technical field 
GSBER for a business area. Criterion 3 is the technical field VBUND for a trading partner.
Click the Enter 
 button at the top-left of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard to confirm that 
the system accepts your entries. Then click save 
 to save your customizations. 
In the next activity, you will look at how to assign G/L accounts for automatic clearing. This is an 
important aspect of the customization process, as it gives you the opportunity to see how the G/L accounts 
you have created are assigned in the system to automatic posting.
Create Accounts for Clearing Differences
Chapter 4 looked at the three levels of tolerance represented in SAP ERP, namely:
• 
Tolerance groups for G/L accounts
• 
Tolerance groups for employees
• 
Tolerances for customers/vendors
You have also defined limits for acceptable payment differences during posting by setting the maximum 
amount per document that is permitted for posting, the maximum amount employees are authorized to 
post per open item in a customer/vendor account item, and the maximum cash discount an employee 
is permitted to grant to business partners. During account clearing, the system will check the tolerance 
groups to ascertain if the differences are within acceptable limits and automatically post the difference to 
predefined accounts.
■
■Note  Refer to “Appendix A - Chapter 6 - Accounts for Clearing Differences” for the G/L accounts you need 
in order to complete this activity’s customizations.
In this activity, you will create and assign G/L accounts’ posts payment differences. To begin the 
customization process, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger 
Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Open Item Clearing ➤ Clearing Differences ➤ Create 
Accounts for Clearing Differences. You can also use the transaction code OBXZ.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops-up. Enter your chart of account key in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click Enter 
 at the bottom of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard. The 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen is displayed (Figure 6-3). This is where 
you set the automatic posting rules to determine if accounts are posted as debits or credits and also where 
you include tax codes with your account assignment. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
85
Click the Debit/Credit checkbox circled red in the Accounts Are Determined Based On section. This 
function allows you to assign G/L accounts for both debits and credits to automatic posting. If you click the 
Tax Code field, you will also need to specify your tax code. The tax code you specify will be applied to the G/L 
account. The Tax Code checkbox is blank in this example. This means that all tax codes can be posted in the 
G/L accounts you assign in this activity for payment differences. Click the Save 
 button. The Maintain FI 
Configuration: Automatic Posting – Accounts screen appears (Figure 6-4). This is where you assign the 
predefined G/L accounts for posting payment differences for automatic posting.
Figure 6-3.  Specifying debits/credits for account determination
Figure 6-4.  Account determination for automatic posting
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
86
Enter the G/L account you created for G/L Clearing Differences for any debit transactions (this is 
230110 in the Debit column in the Account Assignment section). Likewise, enter the G/L account you 
created for G/L clearing differences (this is 280110 in the credit column in the Account Assignment section) 
See Figure 6-4.
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard so the system to confirm if your entries are 
accepted. Then save 
 your work.
The next step in this activity is to look at how to specify a maximum exchange rate in SAP ERP. 
Define a Maximum Exchange Rate Difference
In SAP R/3, it’s possible to set a maximum exchange rate difference for each type of foreign currency. 
This setting specifies the maximum exchange rate deviation allowed between foreign currency and local 
currency, in percentage terms. Maximum exchange rate differences are performed at the company code 
level and are therefore company code dependent.
When you enter a foreign currency manually into the system and specify the appropriate exchange 
rate in the document header, the system will perform a validation check for the exchange rate difference, 
calculate the percentage exchange rate deviation, and compare it to the defined maximum exchange rate 
difference. If the exchange rate difference exceeds the maximum exchange rate difference you defined, the 
system will issue a warning. This measure ensures that any errors are identified and rectified early.
For example, if 10% is specified as the maximum exchange rate difference, when the exchange rate 
exceeds this specified rate, the system will automatically identify this problem and issue a warning message. 
Figure 6-5 illustrates how the system performs checks in SAP ERP using a flowchart.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
87
Now let’s set the maximum exchange rate difference in SAP ERP. To define the maximum exchange rate 
difference, follow this path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings  
(New) ➤ Global Parameters for Company Code ➤ Currencies ➤ Maximum Exchange Rate Difference ➤ 
Define Maximum Exchange Rate Difference per Company Code. You can also use the transaction code OB64. 
The Change View “Maximum Differences Between Exchange Rates”: Overview screen appears 
(Figure 6-6). This screen contains the list of company codes defined previously in the system. 
A document with a foreign
amount is entered manually
into the system
An exchange rate is entered
in the document header
The system performs a validation
check for an exchange rate
difference
Is the exchange
rate deviation > 10%?
The system issues a warning
message
Yes
No
The system posts the payment
and generates a document
number
The system calculates the
percentage difference and
compares it to the defined
maximum exchange rate
difference
The system compares the entered
exchange rate with the exchange
rate stored in the system’s
exchange rate table
Figure 6-5.  A flowchart diagram depicting how maximum exchange rate is processed in SAP R/3
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
88
Click the 
 button at the bottom of the screen to search for your company code from 
the list of company codes displayed. Assign a maximum exchange rate difference to your company code by 
entering the percentage rate in the Max.exch.rate.dev box. In this activity, we used 10 (10%) as the maximum 
exchange rate. 
Save 
 your settings.
Figure 6-6.  Specifying the maximum exchange rate difference
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
89
Checking the Company Code Settings
Although it is not mandatory, it is recommended that you check your company code settings to see the 
customizations you have made so far. You can check your company code settings in the global parameters  
by following this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings 
(New) ➤ Global Parameters Company Code ➤ Enter Global Parameters. Or you can use the transaction 
code OBY6.
The Change View “Company Code Global Data:” Overview screen is displayed (Figure 6-7). From the 
list of displayed company codes, search for your company code. Select your company code from the list of 
company codes by clicking on it. 
Figure 6-7.  The Company Code Global Data Overview screen
Click the Details 
 button at the top-left side of the screen (circled in red in Figure 6-7). The Change 
View “Company Code Global Data”: Details screen is displayed (Figure 6-8). This screen displays all the 
global settings in your company code. You can specify other important settings here.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
90
Update the following items:
VAT Registration No.: Entering data in this field is optional. Do this only if your 
company requires it. When you enter your company’s VAT registration number, 
the system will automatically use this number for VAT correspondence.
Propose Fiscal Year: This field is optional. When you click this checkbox, the 
system will automatically propose a fiscal year during document entry.
Figure 6-8.  The Company Code Global Data Details screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
91
Define Default Value Date: This setting is also optional. When you select it 
during document entry, the system will automatically propose a current date 
when entering a document into the system.
Negative Postings Permitted: When this checkbox is clicked, this will allow you 
to reverse transactions in the system without posting the reversed document and 
the associated reversal document. In other words, the original transaction figures 
in the system will stay the same as before.
When you have updated the Change View “Company Code Global Data”: Details screen as shown in 
Figure 6-8, click the Enter 
 button at the top-left side of the screen and then save 
 your work.
The next step in this configuration exercise is to customize foreign currency valuation in SAP ERP. As 
part of this customization process, you will also define valuation methods and learn how to specify the 
automatic posting settings for foreign exchange valuation.
Foreign Currency Valuation
Problem: The accounting staff wants to be able to maintain foreign currency and valuate 
open items in foreign currencies. Your task is to explain to the accounting staff what 
exchange rate type is, to define the valuation methods, and to perform other settings that 
will allow the accounting staff to achieve their objectives.
In order to create financial statements at a key date in SAP ERP, you need to define foreign currency 
valuation. The importance of defining foreign currency valuation is that foreign currency balance sheets and 
open items are valuated using it.
Once you have defined your foreign currency valuation and specified the appropriate accounts, the 
system will consider the following accounts and items during foreign currency valuation:
• 
G/L accounts in foreign currency related to foreign currency balance sheet accounts
• 
Open items posted in foreign currencies
In SAP ERP you have the option of performing currency valuation in group currency (that is, parallel 
currency) or in company code currency. You’ll look at how to define foreign exchange valuation methods in 
SAP ERP. But before defining these valuation methods, let’s take a quick look at exchange rate types in SAP ERP.
Exchange Rate Types
The different exchange rates for each currency pair are defined in the system and are differentiated by exchange 
rate type. The following exchange rate types are represented in SAP ERP using the following symbols:
• 
Bank selling rate – B (bank selling rate between currency pair)
• 
Bank buying rate – G (bank buying rate between currency pair)
• 
Average rate – M (average between selling rate and buying rate). You can obtain 
selling rate or buying rate using average rate and the spread. This is done by adding 
or deducting the spread from the average rate.
Exchange rate types are discussed further in Chapter 7. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
92
Define Valuation Methods
Valuation methods determine the method used to perform foreign currency valuation, which constitutes 
part of the closing procedures in SAP ERP. During customizing, you can define valuation methods for open 
items such as bank balance, customer, and vendor. With valuation methods, you can perform specifications 
for balances and for individual valuation. You have a list of valuation procedures to choose from. For 
example, the lowest value principle, the strict lowest value, and so on.
Let’s explore how to create foreign currency valuation methods for open items related to  
customers/vendors maintained in foreign currency. To do this, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Valuate ➤ Define 
Valuation Methods. Or you can use the transaction code OB59.
The Change View “Foreign Currency Valuation Methods”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen will appear 
(Figure 6-9).
Figure 6-9.  Foreign currency valuation methods for a customer/vendor
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
93
As part of customizing the valuation method, you need to update the following fields on the screen:
Valuation Method: Enter a four-digit code as the key for your valuation method. 
This identifies your valuation method.
Description: Enter a short text description that best describes your valuation 
method.
Lowest Value Principle: The valuation calculation is carried out per item total. 
When this valuation procedure is set, the valuation is displayed only if exchange 
loss occurs (when the difference between local currency amount and the valued 
amount is negative).
Strict Lowest Value Principle: Valuation calculation is carried out per item total. 
The valuation is displayed only if the new valuation has a greater devaluation 
and/or revaluation for credit entries than the previous valuation.
Always Evaluate: Allows revaluation to be taken into consideration.
Revalue Only: With this procedure, revaluation is considered when there is 
exchange loss.
Document Type: Enter an appropriate document type in this field. This is the 
key that distinguishes business transactions in SAP ERP. For example, SA is the 
G/L document type. 
ExchRate Type for Debit Bal: Enter B (the standard transaction at bank selling 
rate) in this field. This exchange rate type takes into consideration the valuation 
of foreign currency items having a positive balance.
Exch.Rate Type for Credit Bal: Enter G (the standard transaction at bank 
buying rate) in this field. Unlike the standard transaction at bank selling rate, this 
exchange rate type takes into consideration the valuation of foreign currency 
items having a negative balance.
Exchange Hedging: By clicking this checkbox, it means that you want the 
system to value your foreign exchange items at a hedged exchange rate. Hedging 
is a procedure employed to eliminating risk that may arise from business 
transactions in foreign currencies.
Exch.Rate Type from Invoice Reference: When you click this radio button, 
currency valuations are conducted based on currency valuation based on 
balance with reference to invoice reference. 
When you have updated the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left corner of the screen to 
confirm your entries. Then save 
 your specification.
This next step in customizing foreign currency valuation is to create another foreign currency valuation 
method for the bank balance maintained in foreign currency. Use this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Valuate ➤ Define 
Valuation Methods. Or use the transaction code OB59. You will be returned to the Change View “Foreign 
Currency Valuation Methods”: Overview screen. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen. Update the screen as shown in Figure 6-10.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
94
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries; then click Save 
.
Prepare Automatic Postings for Foreign Currency Valuation
Exchange rate differences normally arise when you’re valuating open items in foreign currency. The settings 
you carry out here will allow the system to automatically post exchange rate differences arising from open 
items valuation and foreign currency balances to the accounts you specify.
Preparing automatic postings for foreign currency valuation is nothing other than simply assigning 
accounts to G/L accounts where you want the exchange rate differences to be posted.
■
■Note  Before you proceed with this activity, refer to “Appendix A- Chapter 6, Prepare Automatic Postings for 
Foreign Currency Valuation” to create the G/L accounts you will need for your configuration.
Figure 6-10.  Foreign currency valuation methods for a bank balance
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
95
To customize automatic postings for foreign currency valuation, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing➤ Valuate ➤ Foreign 
Currency Valuation ➤ Prepare Automatic Postings for Foreign Currency Valuation. Or you can use the 
transaction code OBA1.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedures screen is displayed (Figure 6-11). This 
screen contains a list of exchange rate procedures and transaction keys that you assign to accounts.
Figure 6-11.  Maintaining an automatic posting for an exchange difference using an exchange rate key
In this activity, you will assign accounts to the following automatic procedures:
• 
Exchange rate difference using the exchange rate key (KDB)
• 
Exchange rate difference for open items—accounts receivable
• 
Exchange rate difference for open items—accounts payable
Exchange Rate Difference Using the Exchange Rate Key (KDB)
When valuating open items, such as business transactions, foreign exchange rate differences can be losses 
or gains. Exchange rate difference loss is an expense and is posted to the Foreign Exchange Loss account. 
Likewise, foreign exchange differences realized are posted to the Foreign Exchange Gain account and to a 
Balance Sheet Adjustment account.
The Exchange Rate Difference Using Exchange Rate Key (KDB) process allows you to assign exchange 
rate loss and gain accounts to your valuation method. It also allows the system to automatically post losses 
or gains arising from exchange rate differences during open item valuation to the accounts you specify when 
you customize the exchange rate difference for open items in the G/L account later. Let’s look at how to do 
this. Select Exch.Rate Diff. Using Exch.Rate Key – KDB from the list of exchange rate procedures in Figure 6-11 
and click the Details 
 button at the top-left side of the screen. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
96
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box will appear. Enter your chart of accounts ID (CA90) in the Chart 
of Accounts field. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entry. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: 
Automatic Posts – Accounts screen is displayed (Figure 6-12). This is where you assign automatic posting 
procedures to the appropriate G/L accounts. Enter the appropriate G/L account for exchange rate difference 
losses in the Expense Account field and the exchange rate difference gains (E/R gains) in the E/R Gains 
Account field.
■
■Note  Leave the first column (the Exchange Rate Difference Key column) blank. If you enter a key here, 
you have to specify this in the related G/L account master record; otherwise, your foreign currency valuation 
account will not work.
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. The system will confirm your entries.  
Save 
 your work.
The next step is to assign the accounts to the exchange rate difference for open items (G/L account). To 
return to the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedure screen (shown in Figure 6-11), 
click the Back 
 button at the top-left of the screen. 
Exchange Rate Differences for Open Items/GL Accounts
In this and the next activity, you will define exchange rate differences for open items for one Accounts 
Receivable and one Accounts Payable account. You can define several accounts for exchange rate differences 
for several open items in the system, but we are restricting our definition of exchange rate difference for 
open items to only two items in this exercise. This will give you a feel of how to customize exchange rate 
differences for open items. In your spare time, you can define more accounts.
First, let’s look at how to define an exchange rate difference for accounts receivable open items. The 
settings you configure will allow the system to automatically post exchange rate differences to the assigned 
G/L accounts when valuating open items and foreign currency balances for accounts receivable.
Figure 6-12.  Maintaining FI configuration automatic posting for account determination
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
97
Figure 6-13.  Maintaining an automatic posting procedure for an exchange rate difference: Open  
Items/G/L Accounts
You define the exchange rate difference for open items for account receivable using foreign trade debtor 
as the example. Select Exch.Rate Dif. Open Items/G/L Acct–KDF from the list of exchange rate procedures in 
Figure 6-13 and click the Details 
 button on the top-left corner of the screen.
The Change View “Acct Determination for OI Exch. Rate Differences”: Overview screen is displayed. 
This is where you customize automatic posting procedures for the appropriate G/L accounts, assign the  
G/L accounts for exchange rate differences realized for losses and gains, and assign the G/L accounts for 
losses and gains arising from the exchange rate valuations. To input data, click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 6-14). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
98
Figure 6-14.  Specifications for automatic posting procedures for G/L accounts
Update the following fields:
Chart of Accounts: The chart of accounts you enter in this field will allow you to 
assign the G/L accounts created in this chart of accounts to the appropriate fields 
(G/L account, Loss, Gain Val.loss1, Val.gain1 and Bal.sheet adj.1) and allow the 
system to carry out automatic postings to the specified G/L accounts.
G/L Account: Enter a G/L account for account receivable. This is the G/L account 
to be updated. In this activity, we used a G/L account for Trade Debtor (Foreign).
Loss: Assign the G/L account where losses arising from exchange rate differences 
are realized and posted.
Gain: Assign the G/L account where gains arising from exchange rate differences 
are realized and posted.
Val.loss 1: Assign the G/L account where you want losses arising from foreign 
currency valuation to be posted.
Val.gain 1: Assign the G/L account where you want gains arising from foreign 
currency valuation to be posted.
Bal.sheet adj.1: Open items valuation of foreign currency adjustments of 
receivables and payables are posted in the G/L account you enter in this field.
Table 6-1 lists the G/L accounts used in this activity. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
99
Table 6-1.  List of G/L Accounts for Automatic Posting Procedures—Account Receivable
Field
Value
Description
Chart of Accounts
CA90
This is defaulted by the system. You can overwrite the content of 
this field manually.
G/L Account
119000
G/L account for Trade Debtor (Foreign)
Exchange Rate Difference Realized
Loss
450000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Gain
450000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Valuation
Val.loss 1
451000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Val.gain 2
451000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Bal.sheet adj.1
119002
G/L account for Bal. Sheet Adj. (trade debtors)
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button at the top-left corner of the screen or press Enter on 
your keyboard. The system will accept your entries. Save 
 your configuration.
Next, you will assign accounts to an exchange rate difference for open items–account payable. You need 
to return to the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedure screen in Figure 6-13, 
where you will continue customizing. To do so, click the Back 
 button on the top-left corner of the screen. 
Exchange Rate Difference for Open Items–Account Payable
Settings you configure here allow the system to automatically post exchange rate differences to the assigned 
G/L accounts when valuating open items and foreign currency balances for accounts payable.
On the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedure screen shown earlier in 
Figure 6-13, select Exch.Rate Dif. Open Items/G/L Acct–KDF again from the list of exchange rate procedures 
and click the Details 
 button at the top-left corner of the screen. The Change View “Acct Determination for 
OI Exch. Rate Differences”: Overview screen is displayed. To input data, click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen; the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is displayed. Using the data in Table 6-2, 
update the screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 6 ■ Clearing Open Items
100
Table 6-2.  List of G/L Accounts for Automatic Posting Procedures—Account Payable
Field
Value
Description
Chart of Accounts
CA90
This is the default; otherwise, enter it manually.
G/L Account
213000
G/L account for exchange rate expense
Exchange Rate Difference Realized
Loss
450000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Gain
450000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Valuation
Val.loss 1
451000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Val.gain 2
451000
Foreign exchange valuation G/L account
Bal.sheet adj.1
219003
G/L account for Bal. Sheet Adj. (trade creditors)
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. The system will accept your entries.  
Then save 
 your configuration. 
Summary
This chapter explained how to clear open items in SAP ERP. As part of the discussion, you learned how 
business transactions are generated and posted in the system as open items, and how open items are cleared 
with payments. You learned about various ways of clearing open items in SAP ERP.
These included posting with clearing (when payments are matched with open items in the system 
to achieve a nil balance) and account clearing (by selecting group of items and matching them against a 
payment results in nil balance). We went on to show you how to customize settings for automatic clearing. 
As part of the automatic clearing configuration, you learned how to define account types for customers, 
vendors, and G/L accounts and set criteria for assignment, business areas, and trading partners for grouping 
an account with open items for automatic clearing. You also looked at maximum exchange rate difference 
settings per foreign currency in a company code. You saw how the maximum exchange rate differences you 
specify are executed in the system.
You also learned how to check your company code settings in the global parameters to ensure that you 
did not omit important settings. The process you used was the Negative Posting Permitted checkbox.  
It allows you to reverse transactions in the system without altering the original transaction figures.
Before creating a financial statement, it is important that you define foreign currency valuation, so 
that the foreign currency balance sheet and open items in foreign currencies are valuated as part of foreign 
currency valuation. You also learned how to define foreign currency valuation and specify the appropriate 
accounts the system will use during that valuation.
Finally, you looked at how to prepare automatic postings for foreign exchange valuation that will allow 
the system to post exchange rate differences to appropriate G/L accounts automatically.
The next chapter looks at how to maintain an exchange rate in SAP ERP that will allow you to translate 
amounts into the appropriate currency. In the process, you will maintain the relationship between a 
currency pair using appropriate ratios.
www.it-ebooks.info

101
Chapter 7
Maintaining Currency Types and 
Currency Pairs
In this chapter, you learn how to customize local and foreign currencies for company codes.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Maintain exchange rate types
• 
Define a standard quotation for exchange rates
• 
Enter prefixes for direct/indirect quotation exchange rates
• 
Define translation ratios for currency translation
Currencies
In SAP ERP accounting, transactions are measured in monetary terms. Therefore, it is necessary to specify 
a currency for each transaction you enter in the system. In order for the system to manage the currency 
ledgers, you must specify a standard currency code during data entry. The International Organization 
Standardization (ISO) sets these currency codes, such as GBP for British Pound sterling, USD for the U.S. 
Dollar, and so on. The company code currency is usually referred to in SAP R/3 as the local currency; other 
currencies are called foreign currencies.
SAP R/3 is very dynamic in that it allows you to simultaneously maintain ledgers in parallel currencies 
in conjunction with the company code currency (local currency), for example, in group currency or hard 
currency.
As part of your customizing exercise, you will define the following items:
• 
Standard quotation for exchange rates
• 
Prefixes for direct/indirect quotation exchange rate
• 
Translation ratios for currency translation
SAP ERP uses two major currency quotations for currency translation: direct and indirect quotations.
In addition to translating amounts into appropriate currencies, exchange rates can also be used for 
valuation, conversion, transactions, and planning.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
102
Exchange Rate Types
In SAP R/3 several exchange rates are defined and stored for each currency pair. Several exchange rates are 
held in the system, so it’s important that the rates be adequately differentiated. An exchange rate type serves 
as the mechanism by which exchange rates are differentiated (Figure 7-1).
When you are maintaining an exchange rate, you can use one of the following tools:
• 
Inversion: Used to calculate an opposite rate from a given exchange rate.  
The drawback with inversion is that the calculation based on an opposite rate  
is inadequate. Therefore, it is recommended that you not use it for the average  
rates (M) exchange rate type.
• 
Base currency: The currency type (for example, USD) that you use in a currency pair 
for foreign currency translation for a given exchange rate type. This is ideal when 
you have to translate between several currencies. By using a base currency, you can 
simplify the problems involved in maintaining several exchange rates.
• 
Exchange rate spread: The constant difference between exchange rate types.  
For example, the difference between the average rate and bank selling rate or bank 
buying rate.
In SAP you can use direct or indirect quotations as standard quotations for exchange rates. A standard 
quotation is the universal quotation used for managing exchange rates in foreign currency. You have the 
choice of defining direct or indirect quotations for each currency pair in an exchange rate. You will look at 
this in detail in the next section.
Exchange Rate
Types
Historical Rate
Bank Selling Rates (B)
Bank Buying Rates (B)
Average Rates (M)
The Rates on 
Certain Key Dates
Figure 7-1.  Available exchange rate types
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
103
Define a Standard Quotation for Exchange Rates
Problem: Your client wants to be able to maintain exchange rates in a SAP R/3 system. 
To meet this requirement, you have been asked to define direct and indirect quotations for 
each GBP/USD currency pair.
In SAP ERP, exchange rates are quoted as direct or indirect. In this activity you will maintain a direct 
quotation and an indirect quotation for each currency pair that you want to use as the standard quotations 
for your exchange rate:
• 
Direct quotation: When one unit of foreign currency is expressed as one unit of your 
company code currency. For example, one unit of the foreign currency USD 1.00 is 
displayed in the local currency as GBP 0.56120.
• 
Indirect quotation: When one unit of local currency (your company code) is quoted 
for one unit of foreign currency. For example, one unit of the local currency GBP 1.00 
is quoted as the foreign currency USD 1.63120.
You can define a direct or indirect quotation in the exchange rate table, which becomes available to the 
users during data input. The exchange rate table contains a list of all exchange rates between various currencies 
for a range of dates in the system. To display the exchange rate table, use this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Account Payable ➤ Environment ➤ Current Settings ➤ Enter Exchange Rate.
Let’s look at how to define a standard quotation for exchange rates. To go to the screen where you will 
do this, follow this menu path: IMG: SAP NetWeaver ➤ General Settings ➤ Currencies ➤ Define Standard 
Quotation for Exchange Rates. You can also just use the transaction code ONOT.
The Change View “Maintenance View TCURN”: Overview screen is displayed. To begin customizing 
your currency quotation, click the 
 button. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is 
displayed (Figure 7-2). This is where you define the settings for your currency quotations.
Figure 7-2.  Quotation for exchange rates
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
104
■
■Note  This activity uses GBP/USD as the currency pair. You can use any currency pair of your choice.  
The choice of currency pair you ultimately use will be based on your client’s requirements.
Update the following input fields:
Valid From: Enter the date you want your exchange rate quotation to start. The 
system will consider the date you entered in this field as the start date for your 
exchange rate quotation.
Quotation: Enter the quotation type your company is using as an exchange 
rate quotation (whether you want your currency pair to be direct or indirect 
quotation).
■
■Tip  Use today’s date in the Valid From field as the start date for your exchange rate quotation.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and then save 
 
your exchange rate quotation.
During exchange rate quotation, it is possible for users to enter a direct quotation as an indirect 
quotation mistakenly, and vice versa. To avoid this from happening, prefixes are used to differentiate 
between direct and indirect quotations. In the next activity, you will assign prefixes to exchange rate 
quotations.
Enter Prefixes for Direct / Indirect Quotation Exchange Rates
You can differentiate indirect quotations from direct quotations by maintaining prefixes for exchange rates, 
which you can use during document entry and display. If no prefix is maintained, the SAP standard setting 
is applied. To demonstrate how to affix prefixes to exchange rate quotations, you’ll first look at three setting 
scenarios and then assign a prefix to the direct/indirect quotation exchange rates.
In scenario 1, the direct quotation exchange rate is frequently used and the standard setting is 
frequently used as the exchange rate. To set this up, leave the exchange rate setting for the direct exchange 
rates field blank and append a prefix to the indirect exchange rate field. Here are the prefixes used for 
indirect quotation exchange rates:
Fields
Values
Descriptions
D (Direct)
Leave blank
This is without a prefix for direct quotation exchange rates.
I (Indirect)
/ (forward slash)
For indirect quotation exchange rates.
This setting will allow the users to enter frequently used direct quotation exchange rates without a 
prefix. The rarely used indirect quotation exchange rates must be entered with a prefix.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
105
In scenario 2, indirect quotation exchange rates are frequently used and direct quotation exchange rates 
are rarely used. In this case, you can leave the exchange rate setting for indirect quotation for exchange rates 
blank and assign a prefix to the rarely used direct quotation exchange rates. Here are the prefixes used for 
direct exchange rate quotations:
Fields
Values
Descriptions
I (Indirect)
Leave blank
This is without prefix for indirect quotation exchange rates.
D (Direct)
* sign
For direct quotation exchange rates.
This setting will allow the users to enter indirect quotation exchange rates without a prefix.
In scenario 3, indirect and direct quotation exchange rates are used equally, so you need to assign a prefix 
to both individually. Here are the prefixes to use for both the direct and indirect quotations exchange rates.
Fields
Values
Descriptions
D (Direct)
* sign
For direct quotation exchange rates.
I (Indirect)
/ (forward slash)
For indirect quotation exchange rates.
This way, the system will always request that the users enter a prefix when a quotation for exchange 
rates is entered. The prefix the user enters allows the system to determine whether to use a direct or indirect 
quotation exchange rate.
Problem: Your client uses direct quotation exchange rates frequently and seldomly  
uses indirect quotation exchange rates. You have been asked by your team to define  
indirect quotation exchange rates with a prefix. (This will help users enter the correct 
quotation rate.)
This activity assumes that indirect quotation is rarely used and that direct quotation exchange rates are 
frequently used. To assign a prefix to direct/indirect quotation exchange rates,  follow this menu path: IMG: 
SAP NetWeaver ➤ General Settings ➤ Currencies ➤ Enter Prefixes for Direct/Indirect Quotation Exchange 
Rate. Or you can use the transaction code OPRF.
The Change “Direct/Indirect Quotation Prefixes for Exchange Rates” Overview screen is displayed. To 
assign a prefix, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The New Entries: Overview 
of Added Entries screen is displayed. Since this scenario uses the direct exchange rate frequently and 
rarely uses indirect exchange rate, you leave the D (Direct) field blank and enter / into the I (Indirect) field 
(Figure 7-3). Click Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
106
Because SAP ERP translates currency by using ratios for each currency type and currency pair, the next 
step is to define the ratios that will be used for currency translation.
Define Translation Ratios for Currency Translation
You specify the ratios for each currency pair and for each exchange rate type. For example, you specify 
that on 14/04/2013 the exchange rate for GBP to USD is calculated as a 1:1 ratio. This translation ratio will 
apply during currency translation and will be displayed during exchange rate translation. Go to the screen 
to define your translation ratios for currency translation by using this menu path: IMG: SAP NetWeaver ➤ 
General Settings ➤ Currencies ➤ Define Translation Ratios for Currency Transaction. Or you can use the 
transaction code OBBS.
A Warning screen pops up with a message that changes made may cause inconsistencies (Figure 7-4).
Figure 7-3.  Assigning a prefix for an indirect exchange rate quotation
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
107
Click the 
 button at the bottom-left side of the pop-up screen to confirm your action. The 
Change View: “Currencies: Translation Ratios”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you define the 
translation ratios. To enter data in the system, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. 
The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears (Figure 7-5). This is where you specify the 
settings for the translation ratio.
Update the following fields:
ExRt: This field allows you to specify an exchange rate for your currency pair.  
For example, M is the standard translation at average rate. Enter the exchange 
rate that you want to use in this field. This activity uses M (average rate).  
When you use exchange rate type M, you can easily determine the bank selling 
or bank buying exchange rate by adding or subtracting the exchange rate for the 
average rate.
There is no hard rule about the exchange rate type you use here. You can use any 
of the three exchange rate types (G-bank buying rate, B-bank selling rate, and 
M-average rate), but we advise that you stick to your company’s standard.
From/To: Enter your currency pair. This activity uses GBP/USD as the  
currency pair.
Valid From: This is the date you want your exchange rate translation to be valid 
from. It is recommended that you use the current date.
Ratio (From): Enter the ratio you want to use for your currency translation.  
This example uses a ratio of 1:1.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and then  
click Save 
.
Figure 7-4.  Warning that changes may cause inconsistenies in the system
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
108
The next step is to enter an exchange rate that will be applicable to the translation ratios you defined for 
your currency translation in Figure 7-5.
Enter Exchange Rates
Exchange rates are used to translate one currency to another and are defined on a period basis (the Valid 
From field). The rates play an important role during posting and clearing because they are used to translate 
foreign amounts posted and cleared to your company code’s currency (the local currency). Secondly, 
exchange rates determine the gain or loss arising from exchange rate differences and valuate open items and 
balance sheet accounts in foreign currency during the closing process.
The exchange rate setting is applicable to all company codes. Exchange rate types are supplied by 
SAP. We recommend that you use the M exchange rate type for your foreign currency translation during 
document posting or clearing in exchange rate field (ExRt). An exchange rate type must exist in the system, 
and the M type exchange rate is applicable to all company codes.
You will specify the following conversion objects for:
• 
Exchange rate type
• 
Valid from
• 
Currency key
To enter your exchange rate, use this menu path: IMG: SAP NetWeaver ➤ General Settings ➤ 
Currencies ➤ Enter Exchange Rates. Or use the transaction code OB08.
The Change View “Currency Exchange Rates”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you enter 
your exchange rate. To enter your exchange rate in the system, click the 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears (Figure 7-6).
Figure 7-5.  Define translation ratio for currency pair
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
109
Update the following fields:
ExRt: Enter the exchange rate that you want to use in this field. We recommend 
that you use M (average rate) as your exchange rate type.
Valid From: This is the date you want your exchange rate to be valid from. We 
recommend that you use current date (today’s date).
From/To: Enter your currency pair. This activity uses GBP/USD as the currency 
pair.
Dir.quot.: Since you are using direct quotation for your exchange rate, enter the 
exchange rates for GBP and USD in this field.
Once you have updated the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and  
save 
 your settings. Upon saving, note that the exchange rate ratio you specified is displayed in the ratio 
fields (Figure 7-7).
Figure 7-6.  General settings for the exchange rate
Figure 7-7.  The completion of the general settings for exchange rate 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 7 ■ Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs
110
Summary
This chapter explained how to maintain currency types and currency pairs in SAP ERP. You learned the 
necessities for specifying currency for each transaction entered in the system. This must be done so that the 
system can manage the currency ledgers properly. You looked at various exchange rate types represented by 
SAP and learned the various steps involved in maintaining exchange rate for each exchange rate type.
You learned how to maintain direct and indirect quotations and how to append prefixes to exchange 
rate quotations. You also walked through the steps involved in setting prefixes in SAP ERP using three 
scenarios. You learned how to define translation ratios for currency translation and how to specify 
translation ratios necessary for currency translations.
Finally, you read about the importance of the exchange rate and the role exchange rate plays when 
posting or clearing transactions in foreign currencies. You also went through the steps involved in 
customizing exchange rates and exchange rate ratios.
Chapter 8 looks at how to maintain goods receipt/invoice receipt (GR/IR) clearing and looks at how to 
maintain accounts for automatic postings during GR/IR clearing.
www.it-ebooks.info

111
Chapter 8
Defining Adjustment Accounts  
for GR/IR Clearing
In this chapter, you learn about the Goods Receipt/Invoice Receipt (GR/IR) and learn how to define 
adjustment accounts for GR/IR.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Understand how GR/IR clearing accounts are posted in the system using a double 
entry procedure.
• 
Customize GR/IR settings for good that have been invoiced but not yet delivered.
• 
Customize GR/IR settings for goods that have been delivered but not yet invoiced.
• 
Customize GR/IR settings for posting offsets to a GR/IR clearing account.
GR/IR Clearing
It’s normal in some business settings for goods to be delivered before the associated invoice arrives and 
is paid. This type of transaction is referred to in SAP ERP as delivered but not yet invoiced. Likewise, it is 
possible for an invoice to arrive before the goods do. This is referred to in SAP ERP as invoiced but not yet 
delivered.
To account for the movement of invoices and goods in the system, provisional accounts (clearing 
accounts) are used. They offset any timing differences between invoice receipt and goods delivery. To 
account for these differences, you define adjustment accounts (clearing accounts for goods that have been 
received but not yet invoiced) and target accounts (clearing accounts for invoices received when goods have 
not been delivered). This is used for automatic posting of GR/IR to offset postings (this is an account that 
writes off the balance of another account). So that the system can reflect these temporary discrepancies, 
transfer postings are made on the balance sheet date. The system analyzes the transactions in the GR/IR 
clearing accounts. It then posts the outstanding balances to adjustment accounts and subsequently posts 
any differences to offsetting accounts.
Differences in quantity between goods delivered and the invoice receipt result in a debit balance in the 
GR/IR clearing account. When you receive an invoice for part of a delivery, the invoice amount is posted to 
the inventory account and to the GR/IR clearing account based on your settings on the balance sheet date. 
Transfer postings are performed to identify the part of goods delivered but not yet invoiced to the relevant 
adjustment account. The program then posts an offsetting entry to the goods delivered but not yet invoiced 
adjustment account (the target account). After the financial statement has been generated at a given key 
date, these postings are reversed.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 8 ■ Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing 
112
Figure 8-1 illustrates how GR/IR clearing accounts are posted in the system using a double entry 
procedure. For example, goods worth $1500 were delivered to you, but you got an invoice for $1000.
Figure 8-1.  Accounting transaction showing differences between goods delivered and the invoice receipt
The $1500 
 of goods is posted as a debit item in the Inventory Account (B) and the corresponding 
credit posting of $1500 
 is carried out by the system to the GR/IR Clearing Account (A). The balance of 
$500 
 (the $1500 goods delivered less the partial delivery invoice of $500) is posted to the credit side of the 
Vendor Account (C). A corresponding debit balance of $500 
 is posted to the GR/IR Clearing Account (A). 
The system will then post the $500 
 and 
 difference between goods delivered and invoice receipt to the 
GR/IR Adjustment Account (D), and post an offsetting entry to the Received but not Invoiced Account (E). 
Upon the creation of financial statements, the 
 and 
 postings are reversed at a balance sheet date.
■
■Note  Before you proceed with the settings in this activity, go to “Appendix A, Chapter 8, GR/IR Clearing” to 
create the GL accounts for your configuration.
The next section looks at the steps involved in customizing the GR/IR clearing accounts when an 
invoice is received but goods have not yet been delivered.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 8 ■ Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing 
113
Invoiced But Not Yet Delivered
Problem: You have been asked to define clearing accounts for offsetting goods that have 
been invoiced but not yet delivered. This is when an invoice has been received but the 
goods have not been delivered. When the invoice is posted in the system, the inventory 
account is credited and the GR/IR clearing account is debited.
You will define the clearing account for offsetting a posting in the system. Go to the screen where 
you will perform the setting for GR/IR clearing account in the system by following this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Reclassify ➤ 
Define Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing. Or you can use the transaction code OBYP.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedure screen is displayed (Figure 8-2). 
This is where you define adjustment accounts for GR/IR clearing.
Figure 8-2.  Defining automatic postings for GR/IR clearing
Select the Invoiced But Not Yet Delivered option from the displayed list of items in Figure 8-2 and click 
the Details 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the next screen where you will enter your 
settings. The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. The Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen is displayed (Figure 8-3), where you will assign accounts for 
your GR/IR clearing.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 8 ■ Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing 
114
You will now assign the reconciliation accounts, adjustment accounts, and target accounts for the 
automatic posting of GR/IR. Do this by assigning the GL accounts in Table 8-1. 
Figure 8-3.  Account determination for automatic posting of invoiced but not yet delivered GR/IR accounts
Table 8-1.  List of Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing for Invoiced But Not Yet Delivered
Account Assignment
GL Accounts
Reconciliation
219910 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Own Production)—in-house production
219915 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Third Party)—from customers
Adjustment
219911 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Own prod. Adj. Acc.)—an adjustment 
account for in-house production
219916 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Acqrd. Externally)—from vendors
Target
119010 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—not yet delivered
119010 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—not yet delivered
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or press Enter on 
your keyboard. The system will accept your entries. Save 
 your account assignment.
It is a common business practice for customers to receive goods they ordered and then be invoiced 
for the goods at a later date. The next step in this activity is to look at how to assign accounts for automatic 
posting when goods are delivered to the customers but have not yet been invoiced.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 8 ■ Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing 
115
Delivered But Not Yet Invoiced
Problem: You have been asked to define clearing accounts for offsetting postings for goods 
delivered but not yet invoiced.
When goods are received but not yet invoiced, the inventory account is debited and the GR/IR clearing 
account is credited.
In order for the system to carry out automatic postings to various accounts that are affected by this 
transaction, you must assign appropriate accounts to your GR/IR clearing. You need to go to the screen 
where you will carry out account assignment for GR/IR clearing for offsetting postings. Follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ 
Reclassify ➤ Define Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing. Or you can use the transaction code OBYP.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedure screen appears (Figure 8-2). To 
define goods delivered but invoice not received adjustment accounts, select Delivered But Not Yet Invoiced 
from the list of items displayed on the screen and click the Details 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen. The Chart of Accounts screen pops up. This screen will take you to your chart of accounts. Enter your 
chart of accounts in the Chart of Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the 
screen. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen is displayed. Here, you 
specify the accounts for automatic posting for your GR/IR clearing for goods delivered but not yet invoiced. 
Assign the accounts using the information in Table 8-2 (Figure 8-4). 
Table 8-2.  List of Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing for Goods Delivered But Not Yet Invoiced
Account Assignments
GL Accounts
Reconciliation
219910 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—(Own Production)
219915 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—(Third Party)
Adjustment
219911 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—(Own Prod. Adj. Acc.)
219916 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—(Acqrd. Externally)
Target
119015 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—not yet delivered
119015 – Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd—not yet delivered
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 8 ■ Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing 
116
The accounts you assign here will allow the system to perform automatic postings to these accounts. 
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button at the top-left side of the screen or press Enter on your 
keyboard to confirm your entries. Then save 
 your account assignment.
Summary
When accounting for invoices and movement of goods in the system, you must define provisional accounts 
(clearing accounts) that offset postings when goods and invoices aren’t simultaneously delivered and paid. 
This chapter illustrated how GR/IR clearings are posted in the system using the double entry procedure. You 
then learned how to define adjustment accounts, reconciliation accounts, and target accounts for automatic 
posting for GR/IR clearing in SAP ERP.
You also learned how to assign various accounts to GR/IR clearing and learned how this works in 
SAP ERP during posting of transactions whereby goods are received and not yet delivered and whereby an 
invoice is received and the goods are not yet delivered.
Chapter 9 defines a house bank and explains how it’s configured in SAP ERP. You will also be looking 
how SAP ERP supports bank statements. As part of that chapter, you will learn how to define posting keys 
and posting rules for bank statements and check deposits, respectively.
Figure 8-4.  Account determination for automatic posting for GR/IR for delivered but not invoiced 
www.it-ebooks.info

117
Chapter 9
Defining the House Bank
In this chapter, you learn how to customize the house bank in financial (FI).
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Describe what a house bank is
• 
Identify the components of a master record in a house bank
• 
Define a house bank
• 
Use a house bank ID and an account ID
• 
Identify bank statements supported by SAP
• 
Assign global settings for an electronic bank statement
• 
Configure a manual bank statement
• 
Define posting keys and posting rules for check deposits
• 
Define variants for check deposits
House Bank
The banks that hold your company code bank account are referred to as house banks in SAP ERP (for example 
City Bank, Bank of America, etc.). A company code can have more than one house bank assigned to it. Figure 9-1 
shows how house banks are structured in SAP ERP.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
118
Each house bank has its own master record that’s stored centrally in the bank directory. The master data 
that’s stored in the bank directory is made up of the following sections:
• 
Bank Account Data section: This section contains your company code bank account 
number, which is a unique account number issued by your bank to you. Your 
company code IBAN (International Bank Account Number) is an internationally 
recognized account number used for international transaction payments. Your 
company code local currency is the currency used by your company code. A G/L 
account number is assigned to your bank’s G/L account.
• 
House Bank Data section: Contains bank currency, which is the currency used by 
your bank. A bank key, which is sometime referred to as your bank sort code, is a 
unique identification code for your bank.
• 
Communication Data section: Contains telephone and contact persons at your bank.
• 
Address section: Contains your bank address details, including your bank name, 
region, street, and city.
• 
Control Data section: Contains a Bank Account Number, SWIFT (Society for  
World-Wide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) code, and so on. The SWIFT 
code is used for identifying banks in international payment transactions. The first 
four characters contain the bank code (alphabetical characters only). The next two 
characters contain the ISO (in numeric digits) and two alpha digits for the country code.
• 
EDI section: EDI stands for Electronic Data Interchange and is used to process 
electronic business transactions between different applications.
• 
Data Medium Exchange (DME) section: Enter general data for data medium 
exchange in this section. These are predefined file formats that meet the 
requirements of your financial institution. DME allows the system to send and 
receive data in DME format. 
.  A Company Code can have more than one House Bank.
.  A house Bank has its own unique House Bank ID and Bank
    Account Key.
Company Code
House Bank 1
Master Record
.  Bank Data
.  Control Data
.  Communication Data
.  House Bank Data
.  Bank Data
.  Control Data
.  Communication Data
.  House Bank Data
Master Record
House Bank ...
House Bank 3
House Bank 2
.  A Bank Account is represented in SAP R/3 as a House Bank.
Figure 9-1.  The structure of a house bank in SAP R/3
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
119
A combination of the house bank ID and the account ID makes up the bank account in the SAP R/3 
system. You enter the house bank ID and the account ID in the G/L account so that the system can recognize 
the appropriate G/L account during bank transactions. The bank group is used for classifying banks. The 
concept of an account group is helpful when you use the same bank as your business partners. For example, 
all the business partners might belong to the HSBC bank group. The aim of the classification is to group 
banks together in such a way that payment transactions within a group can be carried out as fast as possible 
(this is referred to as payment optimization).
■
■Note  When a business partner (customer/vendor) has more than one bank account for payment, the bank 
type in the customer master record is used to distinguish between different banks. During invoice processing, 
the SAP ERP user can decide which bank to use by choosing a matchcode in the partner bank field in the 
partner’s master data. The matchcode is a user-friendly tool in SAP that assists you in searching for data stored 
in the system. Matchcode maintenance is outside the scope of this book, as it requires technical knowledge of 
the ABAP4 (the programmers).
Before proceeding with your house bank configuration, go to “Appendix A, Chapter 9, House Bank” to create the 
appropriate G/L accounts needed for your house bank configuration.
The next section explains how to define house banks for your bank accounts in SAP ERP.
Define House Banks
As mentioned, banks used by company codes in the SAP ERP system are called house banks. A combination 
of the house bank ID and the account ID makes up the bank account in SAP R/3 system. The house bank 
ID and the account ID you define are used by the payment program to determine the banks to use during 
invoice payment.
■
■Note  The SAP ERP system comes with examples of standard house banks. If you are not confident in 
configuring a house bank, take a look at them as a guide. 
Problem: Company C900 Plc has two bank accounts (Barclays Bank and HSBC Bank). 
You need to define the house banks for both bank accounts.
To define house banks, use the menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting 
Global IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank Accounting ➤ Bank Accounts ➤ Define House Bank.  
Or you can use the transaction code F112.
The Determine Work Area: Entry screen pops up and requests your company code. When you enter 
your company code in the Company Code field, the system will automatically determine your company 
code house bank work area. Enter your company code in the Company Code field on the screen and click 
the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen or press Enter on your keyboard. The Change View “House 
Banks” Overview screen, where you start the customizing your house bank, is displayed (Figure 9-2).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
120
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen (circled red in Figure 9-2). This will take you 
to the screen in Figure 9-3, where you will define the house bank for your company code.
Figure 9-2.  The initial screen where you start customizing your house bank
Figure 9-3.  The screen where you create the house bank for your company code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
121
Update the following fields:
Company Code: Since you have entered it when you determined work area 
for your company code earlier, the system will enter your company code as the 
default.
House Bank: Enter your house bank ID in this field. You can enter up to five 
digits as your house bank ID. This ID will enable you to identify this bank 
account, especially when you have multiple house banks. The house bank ID is 
also entered in the bank account G/L account master data and customer/vendor 
master record for the automatic payment program.
Bank Country: Enter your country ID (for example, for Great Britain, you 
would enter GB). This is a predefined key supplied by SAP in the system. The 
importance of the bank country ID is that it allows you to identfy your house 
bank country. The country ID also forms part of the IBAN and SWIFT numbers 
for international payments.
Bank Key: Enter your bank sort code. This helps identify your bank and the 
branch. This key is very important as it forms part of the IBAN and SWIFT 
numbers used for international payments.
Telephone: Enter the bank’s telephone number.
Contact Person: Enter your account manager or other bank staff member who is 
designated by the bank to your account.
After updating the preceding fields, click the 
 button on the right side of the screen. 
This will call up the Bank Data screen, where you can enter more information about your house bank. 
For example, you can enter your bank address, region, and so on. Once you have added your entries, click 
Continue 
 on the bottom-right side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your house bank.
The next step in this activity is to define your bank account. This is found in the on the left side of the 
screen in Figure 9-3, circled in red.
Define Bank Accounts for Your House Banks
Since you want to define the bank account for your house bank, double-click the 
 folder on 
the left side of the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen (see Figure 9-3). The Change View “Bank 
Accounts”: Overview screen is displayed; this is the initial screen where you will select the house bank you 
want to define a bank account for. If this is the first house bank you have created, the screen will be blank.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added Entries 
screen is displayed (Figure 9-4). This is where you specify your bank account data.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
122
Update the following fields using your company’s bank data, or you can use the data on the screen for 
this activity:
Company Code and House Bank: The system automatically uses the data you 
entered when you defined your house bank earlier.
Account ID: This is a unique account ID that you enter in your G/L account for 
your bank account. You can enter up to five digits as your account ID.
Description: Enter a short text describing your bank account. This is usually the 
name of your bank.
Currency: Usually, companies use different bank accounts for different 
currencies. Enter the currency that your company uses for this bank account.
G/L: Enter the G/L account for your bank account in this field. This is the  
G/L account you created for your bank account in “Appendix A, Chapter 9,  
House Bank” before you started your configuration. 
■
■Note  When you want to enable e-banking, click the EDI partner profiles (see Figure 9-3) to attach the 
EDI partner to your house bank. EDI provides standard formats that allow business partners to exchange data 
electronically.
You have just created your house bank. You can now save it by clicking the Save 
 button.
Following the steps in Define Bank Accounts for your House Banks section earlier and using the 
information in Table 9-1, define another bank account and house bank for the HSBC bank.
Figure 9-4.  The bank details entry screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
123
Bank Statements
A bank statement is a summary of financial transactions, such as incoming and outgoing payments that took 
place during a given period on an account. This is the state of your cash position. SAP ERP supports two 
types of bank statements: electronic bank statements and manual bank statements.
Before you create your electronic and manual bank statements, it is recommended that you first 
create the following clearing accounts (refer to “Appendix A, Chapter 9, House Bank”), which your bank 
transactions will be posted to:
Main Bank Account: As the name suggests, this is the general bank account 
entered in the house bank master data. This account serves as a reconciliation 
account that holds the bank account balance.
Checks Received: The checks you received for invoice amounts from your 
customers or business partners for supplying them goods or for providing 
services are posted to this account.
Other Interim Posting: Reconciliation items are posted to this account.
Check Issued out: Check payments made by your company to its creditors or 
business partners for goods/services received are posted to this account.
Outgoing Wire Transfer: This is an electronic method of funds transfer from 
your company to a business partner to mitigate due invoice(s). This is a very fast 
way of transferring money from one person to another or from one company to 
another.
Incoming Cash: Cash received by your company from business partners for a 
business transaction are posted to this account.
Outgoing Cash: Cash payments made by your company relating to business 
transactions to business partners are posted to this account.
Table 9-1.  Data to Define the HSBC Bank Account and House Bank
Field Name
Bank Data
Company Code
Enter your company code in this field.
House Bank
HSBC1
Bank Country
Enter your country code in this field. For example, for Britain use GB or for 
Germany, use DE.
Bank Key
Enter your bank unique sort code in this field.
Address Section
Enter your bank address.
Account ID
HSBC
Description
HSBC Bank
Bank Account Number
Enter your bank account in this field.
Currency
Enter your country currency code in this field. For example, the currency code 
for United States is USD and for Germany, it’s EUR. 
G/L
Enter the G/L account you want to post your bank transactions in this field. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
124
■
■Note  We have provided information in “Appendix A, Chapter 9 Bank Statement” that will enable you to 
create the G/L account that you will need to customize your bank statement. We recommend that you first 
create the necessary G/L account before creating your bank statement.
The next section defines an electronic bank statement and explains how to set up an electronic bank 
statement (EBS) framework. Later in this chapter, you will define manual bank statements. 
Electronic Bank Statement
An electronic bank statement is simply a bank statement generated by your bank in an electronic format. It 
provides detailed information about the movement of funds in your bank account created at the house bank 
during any given period. With SAP R/3 it is possible to retrieve bank statements electronically using bank 
communication management. Bank communication management manages multiple bank communication 
interfaces that allow you to connect to your bank using a defined standard protocol. When a bank statement 
is uploaded to SAP ERP, it can serve the following purposes:
• 
Clears all bank clearing accounts in the system to the bank main account (this is the 
general bank account entered in the house bank master data).
• 
Uses the bank statement to perform automatic bank reconciliations in the system.
SAP R/3 supports various electronic bank statement formats, including Multicash, SWIFT, BAI, BAI2, 
and others:
• 
Multicash: Invented by Omikron a German Company, Multicash is an electronic 
bank statement format that allows the SAP ERP system to communicate with the 
bank system. The format is split into two file formats. AUSZUG.TXT holds the 
bank statement header information and UMSATZ.TXT contains the bank account 
transactions information.
• 
SWIFT (Society for World-Wide Interbank Financial Telecommunication): This is a 
computer-based switching system used by banks for making payments related to 
international transactions.
• 
BAI (Bank Administration Institute): This is a standardized electronic file format 
used for cash management between the bank and the account holder. The bank 
transmits BAI file formats to the account holder who in turns downloads or 
inputs the file into the system, generates a bank statement, and performs bank 
reconciliation.
• 
BAI2: This is the latest release of a cash management balance report. It is very similar 
to BAI in functionality. The only difference is that BAI2 contains more detailed 
information.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
125
Make Global Settings for Electronic Bank Statements
In this activity, you will configure seven global settings for your electronic bank statement. The list of these 
settings is displayed on the left side of the Change View “Create Account Symbols”: Overview screen.
Four of the settings that you will be customizing are also applicable to manual bank statements, so you 
don’t need to define them again during the manual bank statement configuration:
Create Account Symbols: The accounts symbols that you create as part of your 
electronic bank customizing will specify the G/L accounts and subledgers that 
the bank statement transactions are posted to.
Assign Accounts to Account Symbols: This allows you to assign or map account 
symbols to appropriate G/L accounts and subledgers.
Create Keys for Posting Rules: Posting keys determine the posting rules 
applicable to the general ledger and subledgers.
Define Posting Rules: Posting rules represent how business transactions in 
the bank statement use appropriate posting keys, document types, and posting 
types. For example, incoming checks, checks out, bank transfers, bank charges, 
and so on.
Problem: The accounting team at company C900 Plc wants to upload their bank 
statements electronically using the defined bank communication standard. SAP supports 
various electronic bank statement formats, including Multicash, BAI, BAI2, SWIFT, 
and so on. It is your responsibility to define the appropriate settings needed to allow the 
accounting team to upload bank statements electronically so they can clear several bank 
clearing accounts and carry out automatic bank reconciliation.
To go to the screen where you will customize the electronic bank statement, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank Accounting ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Payment Transactions 
➤ Electronic Bank Statement ➤ Make Global Settings for Electronic Bank Statement. Or you can use 
transaction code OT83.
The Determine Work Area: Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your company code in the Company Code 
field on the screen and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen or press enter on your keyboard. 
The Change View “Create Account Symbols:” Overview screen is displayed (Figure 9-5). This is the initial 
screen for customizing electronic bank statements. The left pane of this screen shows all the nodes you will 
need to customize. 
Figure 9-5.  The initial screen for global settings for an electronic bank statement—Create Account Symbols
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
126
■
■Tip  To ensure that your configuration is complete, work through the folders on the left side of the screen 
systematically from the top down.
Step 1: Create Account Symbols
The first step in this activity is to create account symbols for these accounts. Notice that the Create Account 
Symbol folder on the left pane of the screen is open. This is the first item on the list.
■
■Note  An open folder indicates that this is the current item you want to customize; all other folders remain 
closed. If the folder you want to work on is not open, double-click it.
Click the 
 button. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed  
(Figure 9-6). This screen will allow you to create your own account symbols for your electronic bank 
statement. Update the New Entries screen with your account symbol. 
Figure 9-6.  The input screen for global settings for an electronic bank statement—Create Account Symbols
■
■Tip  If New Entries button is not displayed, it means that screen is set to display mode. Click the  
Display/Change 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to set the screen to change mode. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
127
There is no hard rule for creating account symbols. You don’t necessarily have to use the account 
symbols used here. You can formulate your own. If you are using your own account symbols, make sure 
that you use meaningful descriptions. The account symbols you create in this activity will be assigned to the 
subledgers and the general ledger you created in your house bank in Step 2.
■
■Note  Once someone else has used an account symbol, the system will not allow you to use that same 
symbol, so you might have to get creative.
Once you have updated the screen in Figure 9-6 with your account symbols, click the Enter 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to ensure that the system accepted your entries. Save 
 your account symbols. 
The next step is to assign the G/L accounts to the accounts symbols you just created. 
Step 2: Assign Accounts to Account Symbols
By assigning accounts to the account symbols, the system will automatically map the subledgers and the  
G/L account that transactions are posted to when users retrieve bank statements electronically. For example, 
checks received are posted to the Incoming Checks account, charges are posted to the Bank Charges 
account, and so on. 
To go the next screen where you will assign accounts to account sysmbols, double-click the 
 folder on the left side of the screen. The Change View “Assign Accounts to 
Account Symbol”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you will assign accounts to account symbols. 
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to display the New Entries: Overview of 
Added Entries screen. This is where you assign the account symbols to your system account.
Enter each of your account symbols in the Acct. Symbol fields. If you cannot remember your account 
symbols, you can look for them using the Search function 
 button. The Bank Statement: Account Symbol 
screen contains lists of all the account symbols in the system, including the ones you created for your 
electronic bank statement (Figure 9-7).
Figure 9-7.  Global settings for an electronic bank statement—the list of account symbols
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
128
Click the Scroll 
 button to search for your account symbols and assign them to the system account 
symbols appropriately on the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 9-8). 
Figure 9-8.  Global settings for an electronic bank statement—Assign External Transaction Types
In order to avoid defining separate account symbols for each house bank account, enter a plus sign (+) 
in the Account Modification and Currency fields. Also, if you want to avoid having to define separate account 
symbols and different G/L accounts for every house bank in the system, we advise that you mask the G/L 
account field.
By masking your G/L accounts with + signs, you won’t have to keep defining a symbol for every house 
bank when a new G/L is defined. When you mask your G/L accounts with ++++++++++, the system will 
automatically recognize the G/L account for your house bank. Masking also helps you avoid input errors 
when you’re maintaining G/L accounts.
Enter the last number of each G/L account at the end of the account sign ++++++++n in the G/L account 
fields in Figure 9-8. n is the last number of your G/L account. For example, the G/L account for Check 
Issued with Account Symbol C900-CHECK-OUT is 111412, so the masking for your G/L account would be 
+++++++++2. This same principle applies to all your G/L accounts, with the exception of your main house 
bank G/L account, as shown in Figure 9-8.
When you have updated the screen with the appropriate account symbols and G/L accounts, click the 
Enter 
 button to confirm that the system accepted your entries. Save 
 your work. 
The next step is to create keys for posting rules. The posting keys are handy when you are defining 
posting rules in Step 4. 
Step 3: Create Keys for Posting Rules
To create keys for posting rules, double-click the 
 folder. This is the third item on the 
Dialog Structure. Create Keys for Posting Rules Overview screen. This is the initial screen for creating the keys 
for posting rules. To proceed to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 9-9), where you will 
define the keys for posting rules, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
129
Figure 9-9.  Global settings for an electronic bank statement—Create Keys for Posting Rules
■
■Note   You can use the posting keys supplied by SAP or you can create your own posting keys from scratch. 
In this activity, we recommend that you create your own posting keys so you’ll know how to do so.
Using the data on the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen, create posting rules for each of 
your account symbols. In this activity, we created six keys for posting rules and described the keys for posting 
rules in the Text section (see Figure 9-9). 
■
■Tip  The system allows a maximum of six digits for a posting rule key.
Update the screen as shown in Figure 9-9. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to 
confirm your entries and save 
 your keys for posting rules.
■
■Note  The posting keys for posting rules used in this activity are for illustration only. You can use any keys 
and any descriptions of your choice. 
In Step 4, you will define the posting rules that are assigned to related external transactions.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
130
Step 4: Define Posting Rules
To go to the screen where you will define posting rules for your electronic bank statement, double-click the 
 folder. This is the fourth item on the list of displayed nodes. The Define Posting Rules 
Overview screen comes up. Click the 
 button to go to the screen (Figure 9-10) where you specify the 
definitions of the posting rules. Figure 9-10 defines posting rules for incoming checks.
Figure 9-10.  Global settings for an electronic bank statement—Define Posting Rules for Check-In
Update the following fields:
Posting Rule: Enter the keys for posting rules that you defined in Step 3 in the 
Posting Rule fields. Posting rules are used by the system to determine which G/L 
accounts and subledgers to post transactions to. For example, the key S003 was 
created for incoming checks.
Posting Area: The SAP ERP system comes with two standard values for the 
posting area (1-Bank Accounting and 2–Subledger Accounting). The posting 
area allows the system to post to either of the specified areas based on your 
specification.
Posting Key: Enter the appropriate posting key in this field. Posting key allows 
the system to determine whether a line item should be treated as debit or credit 
and the account type to post transactions to. It also controls the field status for 
document entry.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
131
Acct Symbol: You have already defined a number of accounts symbols. Enter the 
appropriate account symbol in this field. The account symbol you enter here will 
allow the system to determine which account the related transaction is posted to 
when users retrieve bank statements electronically.
Document Type: Allows you to differentiate between transactions and allows the 
system to determine which business transaction to be posted to.
Posting Type: It is mandatory that you enter one posting type in the Posting Type 
field. The posting type is used during account clearing. For example, Posting 
Type 5-clears the credit G/L account. This can be found by using the Search icon 
next to the posting type field (see Figure 9-10).
■
■Note  This configuration is for incoming checks. The accounting entries for check receipt is to debit your 
bank account using the Debit Posting key 40, since money is coming in. Likewise, it will credit a corresponding 
incoming check clearing account.
Similarly, the configuration for outgoing checks is the reverse. They credit your bank account using posting key 
50 and debit the corresponding outgoing check clearing account.
After updating the screen in Figure 9-10, click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries. Save 
  
your work.
Next, you need to define the posting rules for the remaining business transactions (S004-Check in, 
S005-Wire Transfer-out, S002-Bank Charges, and S006-Other Interim Post).
Click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen, called Change View “Define Posting Rules”: 
Overview, where you will define more posting rules.
Follow Step 4 to define posting rules for the remaining business transactions for your electronic bank 
statement, but this time use the information in Tables 9-2 through 9-5.
Table 9-2.  Define Posting Rules for Issued Checks
Field Name
Data to Enter
Posting Rule
Enter the key for the posting rule you defined for checks (S004).
Posting Area
Enter the bank accounting (1).
Acct Symbol
Debit
Enter the account symbol you defined for checks issued (C900-CHECK-OUT).
Posting Key
Credit
Enter the posting key (50) for credit posting.
Acct Symbol
Enter the account symbol you defined for your main bank account (C900-BANK).
Document Type
Enter the bank statement document type (SA) for the G/L account posting.
Posting Type
Enter the bank statement posting type (4) for the debt clearing G/L account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
132
Table 9-3.  Wire Transfer Out
Field Name
Data to Enter
Posting Rule
Enter the key for the posting rule you defined for the wire transfer-out (S005).
Posting Area
Enter the bank accounting (1).
Acct Symbol
Debit
Enter the account symbol you defined for the wire transfer-out  
(C900-BANK TRANS).
Posting Key
Credit
Enter the posting key (50) for credit posting.
Acct Symbol
Enter the account symbol you defined for your main bank account  
(C900-BANK).
Document Type
Enter the bank statement document type (SA) for G/L account posting.
Posting Type
Enter the bank statement posting type (4) for the debt clearing G/L account.
Table 9-4.  Bank Charges
Field Name
Data to Enter
Posting Rule
Enter the key for posting rule you defined for bank charges (S002).
Posting Area
Enter the bank accounting (1).
Acct Symbol
Debit
Enter the account symbol you defined for bank charges (C900- BANKCHGS).
Posting Key
Credit
Enter the posting key (50) for credit posting.
Acct Symbol
Enter the account symbol you defined for your main bank account  
(C900-BANK).
Document Type
Enter the bank statement document type (SA) for the G/L account posting.
Posting Type
Enter the bank statement posting type (1) for post to the G/L account. 
Table 9-5.  Other Interim Posts
Field Name
Data to Enter
Posting Rule
Enter the key for the posting rule you defined for INTERPOST (S006).
Posting Area
Enter the bank accounting (1).
Acct Symbol
Debit
Enter the account symbol you defined for Other INTERPOST  
(C900- BANKCHGS).
Posting Key
Credit
Enter the posting key (50) for credit posting.
Acct Symbol
Enter the account symbol you defined for your main bank account  
(C900-BANK).
Document Type
Enter the bank statement document type (SA) for the G/L account posting.
Posting Type
Enter the bank statement posting type (1) for posting to the G/L account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
133
The next step is to create transaction types to customize your electronic bank statements. This 
transaction type will be assigned to the external posting rules in Step 6.
You’ll create the names and descriptions of the various transaction types you require. House banks 
that use identical lists of business transaction codes (external transactions) can be assigned to the same 
transaction type in Step 6.
Step 5: Create Transaction Type
When creating transaction types, you define the transaction type key and provide a name that describes your 
transaction types. The transaction types you create are assigned to external transactions. The benefit of a 
transaction type is that it will allow you to group house banks with the same lists of external transaction keys 
and assign them to the same business transaction. The idea behind this concept is that you assign external 
transaction codes of house banks once per transaction type rather than doing this individually per house 
bank.
Before assigning external transaction types to posting rules, you must first create the transaction type. 
Double-click on the 
 button to call up the Define Posting Rules Overview screen, where 
you will create your transaction type. Then click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to 
create a transaction type. Update the following fields (Figure 9-11):
Trans. Type: Enter a code of your choice in this field as your transaction type. 
This field can accept up to eight digits. In this activity, we used the company code 
C900 to make it easy for us to identify the code.
Name: Enter a short description for your transaction type.
Figure 9-11.  Global settings for an electronic bank statement—Create Transaction Type
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your 
configuration.
In the next step, you assign external business transaction codes to the internal posting rules you created 
in Step 4.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
134
Figure 9-12.  Assigning external transaction types to posting rules initial screen
Figure 9-13.  Assigned external transaction types to posting rules
Step 6: Assign External Transaction Types to Posting Rules
You assign external business transaction codes to internal posting rules so you can use the same 
specifications you configured for different business transaction codes in house banks.
To go to the screen where you will assign business transactions to posting rules, select the 
transaction type (Electronic Bank Statement) you created (Figure 9-12) and double-click the 
 folder.
The Change View “Assign External Transaction Types to Posting Rules” Overview screen is displayed. 
Click the 
 button on the top-left of the screen to assign external transaction types to posting rules 
(Figure 9-13).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
135
Update the following fields: 
External Transaction: Enter your external transaction codes in this field. This 
can be up to four digits for each transaction type using the system-posting rule. 
Use meaningful transaction codes, preferably in sequence to avoid ambiguity, 
such as 0002, 0003, 0004, 0005, and 0006.
+/- Sign: Use these signs to further differentiate external transactions. The plus 
(+) sign in the front of external transaction code indicates receipt and the minus 
(-) sign indicates payment.
Posting Rule: Enter the posting rules you defined in Step 4.
Click the Enter 
 on the top-left side of the screen to confirm that the system accepted your entries and 
save 
 your work.
Finally, you’ll assign the transaction types you just created to the bank account you defined for your 
house bank.
Step 7: Assign Bank Accounts to Transaction Types
It is not uncommon when you have multiple house banks to use individual transaction types to differentiate 
business types. In this case, each house bank must be assigned its own transaction type. In this activity only 
one transaction type was created (C900 in Step 5). You can define more than one transaction type on your 
own. The number of transaction types you create depends on your client’s requirements.
On the left side of the screen, double-click the Assign Bank Account to Transaction Types folder to call 
up the Assign Bank Account to Transaction Types Overview screen. This is where you assign bank accounts 
to transaction types. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to assign bank accounts to 
transaction types (Figure 9-14).
Figure 9-14.  Assigning bank accounts to transaction types
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
136
Update the following fields:
Bank Key: Enter your bank key in this field. This is your bank key or sort code 
that you created when you customized your house bank.
Bank Account: Enter your bank account number in this field. This is your house 
bank account number and your company’s real bank account number.
Transaction Type: Enter the transaction type you created in Step 5.
■
■Note  Although you created two house banks—Barclays Bank and HSBC Bank—in this activity, you will be 
assigning only one house bank (Barclays Bank) to your transaction type. However, there is no restriction to the 
number of banks you can assign to a transaction type.
The bank key and the bank account used here are obtained from the house bank you created earlier.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your specifications and save 
 your work. 
You have now customized an electronic bank statement. Next, you’ll configure a manual bank 
statement.
Configure a Manual Bank Statement
Most of the settings you configured as part of your electronic bank statement are applicable to a manual 
bank statement, so you will not be creating them again. Hence you will customize only the following nodes:
• 
Create and assign business transactions
• 
Define variants for manual bank statements
Create and Assign Business Transactions
In this activity, you will create business transactions, assign them to individual posting keys, and allocating 
them to posting rules for the following items:
• 
Bank charges
• 
Bank transfers
• 
Incoming checks
• 
Outgoing checks
• 
Reconciliation items
■
■Note  You don’t need to create new posting rules for the manual bank statement; you can use the posting 
rules you created for the electronic bank statement.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
137
Follow this menu path to customize your manual bank statement: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Bank Accounting ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Payment Transactions ➤ Manual Bank Statement ➤ Create and 
Assign Business Transaction. Or use transaction code OT52.
The initial screen where you will specify the manual bank statement, called Change View: Manual Bank 
Statement Transactions”: Overview, appears. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The 
New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 9-15). This is where you create new business 
transactions for your manual bank statement and assign them to the posting rules you defined previously.
Update the following items: 
Transaction: Enter the transaction codes that you want to use for your manual 
bank statement. You can enter a maximum of four digits for each transaction 
type for the system-posting rule. For example, in this activity we used MCHG 
for Manual Bank Charges, MTRN (Manual Transfer for Bank Transfer), MICK 
(Manual Incoming Checks for Incoming Checks), MOCK (Manual Out Going 
Checks) for outgoing checks, and MRIT (Manual Reconciliation Items) for 
reconciliation Items.
■
■Note  You can use any transaction code as long as it makes sense to you. 
 +/- Sign: This field allows you to further differentiate your business transactions. 
The plus (+) sign in front of a business transaction code indicates receipt and the 
minus sign (-)indicates payment.
Int algthm: Enter 011 in the outgoing check field only.
Text: Enter short texts that describes each item transaction here.
Figure 9-15.  Creating and assigning business transactions
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
138
■
■Note  The algorithm you can use for outgoing checks are listed here: 
• 
011 – This algorithm is used for outgoing checks when the check number is 
different from the payment document number. This is the case when the bank uses 
prenumbered checks. The check numbers are therefore obtained from the bank 
statement in the house bank, and the appropriate document numbers are identified by 
the algorithm using the check number.
• 
012 – This algorithm is used when the same document number is used as a check 
number. Check forms not containing numbers are printed with the document numbers 
in the system when making check payments. This number is therefore used to 
reference the payments. 
• 
013 – This algorithm can be used in both cases described in the preceding 011 and 
012 items.
After updating the fields, click Enter 
 to confirm and then click save 
 to save your work.
In the next activity, you will define variants for manual bank statements by copying the standard variant 
supplied by SAP and modifying it to meet your requirements. In SAP ERP, only one variant can be activated 
at a time. You will learn how to deactivate the variant you are not using and then activate a variant you want 
to use. 
Define Variants for Manual Bank Statements
SAP supplies a standard variant (SAP01) as the default. A variant allows you to adapt the selection of 
account assignment fields supplied by SAP to your company code-specific requirements. Only minimum 
modification is allowed for this standard variant, but you can use it for your manual bank statement. 
You can copy the standard variant (SAP01) and modify it to meet your company’s specific requirements. 
To customize these variants, follow this menu path: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank Accounting ➤ 
Business Transaction ➤ Payment Transactions ➤ Manual Bank Statement ➤ Define Variants for Manual 
Bank Statement. Or you can use transaction code OT43.
■
■Note  If you choose not to use the standard variant supplied by SAP, but instead decide to create your 
own, you must deactivate the standard variant SAP01 and then activate your own variant. You will learn how to 
activate and deactivate variants later in this chapter.
The Maintain Screen Variant: List screen is displayed. This is where you define variants for manual 
bank statement. Since you are copying the standard variant supplied by SAP in the system, click the Copy 
 
button at the top of the screen. The Copy Variant screen pops up (Figure 9-16). Enter the variant you want to 
copy (SAP01) in the From Variant field and enter your own variant identifier key in the To Variant field. Then 
click the Enter 
 button to confirm your request. This action will allow you to copy the properties of the 
standard variant (SAP01) to your variant (C900). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
139
An information screen with a warning (“Field FEBMKA-MEHRW is Missing on Reference Screen”) pops 
up. Ignore this warning and confirm the copy by clicking the Enter 
 button. Once the copy is confirmed, 
the system will automatically copy the standard variant’s properties to your variant code. The Maintain 
Screen Variant Fields screen is displayed (Figure 9-17) showing the inherited properties of the standard 
variant that you copied. Modify the items on this screen to meet your requirements by deleting the items that 
you do not need.
Figure 9-16.  The Copy Variant dialog box
Figure 9-17.  Maintain variants for manual bank statement with all properties copied
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
140
As part of the customizing process in this activity, delete the following items not needed in your manual 
bank statement:
• 
Document number
• 
Customer matchcode
• 
Foreign currency
• 
Foreign currency amt
Click on the item you want to delete from the list—for example, select Document Number to mark it for 
deletion—and click the Delete 
 button on the top-left side of the screen (circled in red in Figure 9-17).
After clicking on Delete button, the document number disappears from the list of items on the screen. 
Repeat the same steps to delete the other items (that is, Customer Matchcode, Foreign Currency, and 
Foreign Currency Amt). Your variant will then look like the one shown in Figure 9-18. 
Figure 9-18.  Maintain variants for manual bank statement after deleting unneeded properties 
Next, you need to move Allocation Number and Bank Reference from the Possible Fields list to 
the Current Fields list. The Allocation Number field will record incoming check numbers and the Bank 
Reference field will record outgoing checks.
To include the Allocation Number in the Current Fields section of the screen, double-click on 
 in the Possible Fields list on the right side of the screen. The Specify Output Length 
dialog box pops up with the default output length for recording incoming checks (Figure 9-19). Replace the 
default length with your desired length.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
141
Click the Continue 
 button to confirm your output length specification. The Allocation Number (Ass) 
will now appear in the Current Fields list under Amount (Figure 9-20).
Figure 9-19.  Output length for allocation number
Figure 9-20.  Maintaining variant for manual bank statements— recording incoming checks
Next, include the Bank Reference in your Current Fields list. Double-click Bank Reference in the 
Possible Fields list. The Specify Output Length dialog box pops up with a default length. Enter the desired 
length in the Output Length field and click the Enter button to confirm your changes. Your variant screen 
will now look like the screen in Figure 9-21.
Figure 9-21.  Maintaining variants for manual bank statements—recording outgoing checks
Save 
 your work. The next step is to change the variant name to your own. Click the Back 
 button 
to return to the Maintain Screen Variant List screen (Figure 9-22). Search for your variant (C900) among the 
displayed variant names and change the copied variant name to your own. In this activity, we used Manual 
Bank Statement – C900 as our variant name.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
142
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your changes and save 
 your variant.
Now you need to activate the variant for your manual bank statement for it to work effectively. Make 
sure that your variant is selected. You will notice that your variant name turns red. Click the Activate 
 icon 
on the top-left corner of the screen to activate your variant.
■
■Note  After you activate your variant, the Act. (activate) checkbox will be selected, indicating that your 
variant is active. The system will notify you on the status bar at the bottom of the screen.
Save 
 your variant.
Check deposit is the last configuration you need to make when customizing your house bank. 
Normally, a business receives checks as forms of payment on a daily basis, and these checks are logged or 
deposited into the company’s bank account. In the next activity, you will look at the various steps involved in 
customizing check deposits for check management in the SAP ERP.
Check Deposits
Check deposit customization is useful in an environment where large volumes of checks are deposited and 
processed simultaneously in the system. The settings carried out here will allow checks received by your 
company to be entered and processed in the SAP ERP system.
Figure 9-22.  Changing the copied variant name to your own variant name
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
143
When customizing check deposits, the following steps are involved:
	
1.	
Define posting keys and posting rules for check deposits.
	
2.	
Create and assign business transactions.
	
3.	
Define variants for check deposits.
■
■Note  The reason you define posting keys and posting rules for check deposits before you create and assign 
business transactions to posting rules is that the accounting symbols needed to specify business transactions 
are defined in posting keys and posting rules for check deposit customizing.
Define Posting Keys and Posting Rules for Check Deposits
You will go through the following four steps as part of this activity:
	
1.	
Create account symbols.
	
2.	
Assign accounts to an account symbol.
	
3.	
Create keys for posting rules.
	
4.	
Define posting rules.
To customize these options, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank 
Accounting ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Check Deposit ➤ Define Posting Keys and Posting Rules for Check 
Deposit.
The Determine Work Area Entry dialog box is displayed. Enter your chart of accounts in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button. The Change View: “Create Account Symbols”: Overview screen 
is displayed. This is where you will customize the settings. You will work through the displayed nodes on the 
left side of the screen using a top-down approach from Steps 1 to 4 to avoid missing anything.
Create Account Symbols
Account symbols are useful for grouping similar business transactions such as check receipts/deposits 
together and they determine which accounts transactions are posted based on the criteria you specify in 
your house bank. 
On the Change View: “Create Account Symbols” Overview screen, notice that a list of nodes is displayed 
on the left side of the screen and that the Create Account Symbols yellow folder is open. This indicates the 
item you want to customize.
■
■Tip  Make sure that the folder of the item you are customizing is open. If that folder is not open,  
double-click on it to open it.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
144
Click the 
 button to go to the screen where you will create account symbols for your check 
deposits (Figure 9-23). Update the following fields:
Account: Enter your account symbol identifier key in the account field and 
enter a description of your account symbol in the text field. There is no hard rule 
about the account symbol/description to use. It’s best to use meaningful account 
symbols and descriptions here. 
Text: Enter a short text description that best describes your account symbol.
Figure 9-23.  Creating an account symbol for check deposits
Figure 9-24.  The inital screen for assigning accounts to an account symbol
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your account symbols. 
Assign Accounts to an Account Symbol
To assign G/L accounts to the account symbol, select the account deposit symbol that you just created from 
the list of account symbols displayed and then double-click on the Assign Accounts to Account Symbol 
folder (Figure 9-24).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
145
You don’t need to create another account symbol. You have already done this when customizing your 
electronic bank statement. When you double-click Assign Accounts to Account Symbol on the left side of 
the screen in Figure 9-25, the system will automatically display the accounts and the account symbols you 
created for your check deposits. 
Figure 9-25.  Assigned accounts to an account symbol for check deposits
Save 
 your work. 
■
■Tip  If the system did not assign your accounts to the account symbols, you have to assign them manually.
Create Keys for Posting Rules
Posting rules are representations of business transactions related to check deposits. This includes 
check receipts to clear accounts, check clearing for customers, and so on. The key you define here will 
automatically determine the posting rule applicable to the general ledger and subledgers.
On the Change View “Assign Accounts to Account Symbol”: Overview screen, double-click the 
 folder. The Create Keys for Posting Rules Overview screen appears.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added 
Entries screen (Figure 9-26) to create posting keys for posting rules. Enter a new key of your choice in the 
Posting Rule field and enter a short text in the Text field that best describes the posting rule for your check 
deposits.
After updating the screen, click Save 
 to save the key for posting rules.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
146
Define Posting Rules
You define posting rules that determine how transactions are posted to your G/L account and subledger.
To go to the screen where you will define posting rules for your check deposits, select the key for posting 
rule you defined in Step 3 and double-click 
. The Change View: “Define Posting Rules”: 
Overview screen is displayed. This screen contains a list of defined posting rules in the system. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen 
(Figure 9-27), where you will define the posting rules.
Figure 9-26.  Defining your posting rules
Figure 9-27.  Specifying the settings for the posting rules
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
147
Update the following fields: 
Posting Rule: Enter the posting rule for your check deposits that you defined  
in Step 3.
Posting Area: Specify the posting area for your check deposits. For example,  
1 - Bank accounting for posting transactions that affect the general ledger only or 
2 - Subledger Accounting for posting transactions to the subledger.
Posting Key: The standard posting keys in SAP ERP are 40 – Debit Posting and 
50 – Credit Posting. The posting key you specify here will determine whether, for 
example, incoming checks are posted to the debit or credit side of the general 
ledger account or subledgers.
Account Symbol: Enter your check deposit account symbol. The specification 
made here groups together similar business transactions.
Document Type: Determines document storage in the system and the account 
types to be posted. For example, document type DZ is for customer payments.  
A document type can be found using the Search function in the document type field.
Posting Type: Allows you to specify how postings should be treated by the 
system. For example, when you click the Search icon in the Posting Type field, 
the standard list of posting type is displayed, as shown in Figure 9-28.
Figure 9-28.  A list of standard posting types supplied by SAP
■
■Note  SAP comes with predefined standard posting rules that you can copy and modify. You can also create 
your own posting rules from scratch. Standard posting rules can be found on the Change View: “Define Posting 
Rules”: Overview screen. 
After updating the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen to confirm. Save 
 your posting rules.
Now you can create and assign business transactions, which will assign your account symbol for  
check deposits.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
148
Create and Assign Business Transactions
In this activity, you will create and assign business transactions by specifying indicators for your check 
deposits and allocating the indicators to the defined posting rules. To go to the Change View “Check 
Deposit Transactions”: Overview screen, follow the menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank 
Accounting ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Check Deposit ➤ Create and Assign Business Transactions. Or you 
can use the transaction code OT53.
The Change View “Check Deposit Transactions”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 
button to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 9-29). To specify the account 
symbol and business transaction for your check deposits, update the following fields:
Transaction Indicator: In this field you specify a transaction indicator for 
check deposits and allocate it to a posting rule. You can use a maximum of four 
characters as your transaction indicator.
+/-: Specify whether your business transaction is a positive (+) value or a 
negative (-) value using the plus and minus signs (the + sign indicates an 
incoming payment and the - sign indicates an outgoing payment). 
Post. Rule: Assign your predefined posting rule to the transaction indicator you 
defined earlier in the “Define Posting Rules” section. 
Figure 9-29.  Check deposit transactions
Click the Enter 
 button and save 
 your check deposit transactions.
Finally, as part of customizing the check deposits, you will define variants for check deposits.
Define Variants for Check Deposits
SAP comes with standard variants so you don’t have to define another variant. On the other hand, you can 
create your own variant if you choose not to use the standard variant supplied by SAP.
In this activity, you will use the standard variant supplied by SAP for check deposits, which you will 
modify to determine the input fields for check deposits during data entry.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
149
You will define variants for check deposits by copying the standard variant (SAP01), because it is easier 
to copy a standard variant and modify it to meet your requirements. This will save you the time of having 
to create your variant afresh. To go to the screen where you will define variants for check deposits, follow 
this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank Accounting ➤ Business Transactions → Check 
Deposit ➤ Define Variants for Check Deposit. Or use the transaction code OT45.
The Maintain Screen Variant: List screen is displayed. This screen contains a list of exisitng variants. 
Since you are copying the standard variant, click the Copy 
 icon at the top of the screen. The Copy Variant 
dialog box pops up. Enter the variant you want to copy (SAP01) in the From Variant field and the key you 
want to use for your variant in To Variant field. We advise that you use your company code as your variant 
key or code. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm that you want to copy the variant. An information dialog 
box with a warning (Field FEBMKA-MEHRW is Missing on Reference Screen) pops up. Ignore the warning 
and click the Enter 
 button to copy. The system will automatically copy the standard variant to your 
variant code.
Next, the Maintain Screen Variant Fields screen for the variant you copied is displayed. Modify the 
content of this screen to meet your company’s requirement. Delete the items you do not need and include 
the items you want to include in your variant. 
The items in the Current Field section of the screen are active and the items in the Possible Field section 
are items you can include in your variant as input fields.
Delete the following items, as you don’t need them in your check deposit variant. You do this by 
selecting the item you want to delete in the Current Field section and clicking the Delete 
 button on the 
top of the screen.
• 
Three-digit check number
• 
Eight-digit bank key
• 
Bank account number
• 
Document number
As part of this process, you should include the 10-digit check number in the Possible Field section as an 
input field for the check deposits. Double-click on that item to move it from the Possible Field section to the 
Current Field section (Figure 9-30).
Figure 9-30.  Maintaining variants for check deposits
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 9 ■ Defining the House Bank
150
The Specify Output Length dialog box pops up with a default output length. Enter 10 in the Output 
Length field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm the changes. The 10-digit check number will appear in 
the Current Fields List under Customer Number. Save 
 your variant. Click the Back 
 button on the  
top-center of the screen to return to the Maintain Screen Variant: List screen. Search for the variant you 
copied among the displayed variants. Change the default variant name (Check Deposit) to your own variant 
name. We used Check Deposit-C900.
The final step is to activate your check deposit variant. To do this, click the Activation 
 icon on the 
top-left side of the screen. 
The final aspect of the house bank customization is the cash journal, which is covered in Chapter 11.
■
■Note  Cash journal configuration is deliberately covered in Chapter 11 so that you can first complete the 
configuration for tax on sales/purchases in Chapter 10. You will need the sales and purchases tax code in order 
to customize the cash journal.
Summary
This chapter explained what a house bank is and demonstrated how house banks are maintained in SAP 
ERP. You learned about each specification when configuring your house bank and learned what each does. 
As part of customizing the house bank, you defined a bank ID and an account ID, which are the key aspects 
of your house bank configuration, and learned how to apply them to the G/L account where your bank 
account transactions are posted.
You went on to learn about various house banks represented in SAP ERP. You defined the accounts 
that bank statement transactions are posted to and learned how to customize electronic and manual bank 
statements. You went through the stages involved in customizing global settings for electronic and manual 
bank statements. In doing so, you created account symbols that the system uses to determine the G/L 
accounts and created subledgers, where the bank statement transactions are posted. You then looked at how 
to assign accounts to account symbols and how to create keys for posting rules. You learned how to define 
posting rules that are assigned to appropriated transactions (for example, for checks in, checks out, bank 
transfers, and bank charges). You then learned how to define variants to meet your company code-specific 
account requirements.
You learned how to customize settings for check deposits. You also learned how to create account 
symbols, create keys for posting rules for check deposits, and assign accounts to the account symbols 
you created.
Chapter 10 looks at how to define taxes on sales and purchases in SAP ERP. As part of those exercises, 
you will look at the basic settings, learn the calculation procedures, and define tax codes for sales and 
purchases.
www.it-ebooks.info

151
Chapter 10
Defining Tax on Sales and 
Purchases
In this chapter, you learn various forms of taxes as they are represented in SAP ERP and learn how to define 
taxes on sales and purchases.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Describe what a tax on sales/purchases is
• 
Create a sales/purchases tax code
• 
Specify a tax category in the G/L accounts to which taxes will be posted
• 
Identify basic tax codes for sales and purchases
• 
Specify the accounts to which different tax types are posted
• 
Assign tax codes to non-taxable transactions
Sales and Purchases Tax
SAP supports various tax codes for different countries. This chapter covers only sales and purchases taxes. 
Sales/purchases taxes are referred to VATs (value added taxes) in most countries. These are taxes are levied 
on invoiced goods and services payable by the consumer and are held on behalf of the tax authority. There 
are two major VATs—input taxes and output taxes. Input taxes are levied on purchases of goods and services 
received from vendors. Output taxes are charged on the sale of goods and services provided to customers. 
For example, Company A buys goods from Company B and charges a 20% VAT on the invoice price of the 
goods. Company A sells goods to company Y and charges Company Y a 20% VAT. Company A reconciles its 
VAT account and the difference is sent to the tax authority. Figure 10-1 illustrates this scenario.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
152
VAT is split into input and output taxes. A tax category is specified in the G/L accounts so the system  
can determine and post the correct tax to the appropriate account. SAP ERP comes with the following  
tax categories: 
• 
< is the input tax
• 
> is the output tax
The tax category specification is very important, because it allows the system to determine whether the 
tax posted is an input tax or output tax and make postings to the appropriate accounts. If you do not want to 
post your taxes manually (you want the system to automatically post the taxes during document posting), 
you must select Post Automatically Only in the appropriate general ledger where the taxes are posted.
Figure 10-1.  How taxes on sales/ purchases (VATs) work
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
153
Several steps are involved in customizing sales and purchase taxes in SAP ERP. Now that you know what 
sales and purchase taxes are, let’s look at the steps involved in customizing them.
Basic Settings
SAP R/3 comes with standard settings for sales and purchase taxes for most countries. It is recommended 
that you stick with the standard settings, because they are up to date and typically adequate for most tax 
requirements. The only time you should define the basic settings is when your taxes are not included in 
the standard settings. In this activity, you do not need to configure any settings, but it’s a good idea to look 
at the basic settings to make sure that they meet your needs. As part of this exercise, check your company’s 
calculation procedure to make sure that it is covered in the system and make sure that your country is 
assigned to the appropriate calculation procedure.
The standard Calculation Procedures setting comes with the basic specifications for sales/purchases 
taxes and contains the calculation and account postings for various countries. To check the condition types 
and procedures for every tax procedure group and the applicable calculation rules, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases 
➤ Basic Settings ➤ Check Calculation Procedure. Or you can use transaction code OBYZ.
Once you have checked your country calculation procedure, the next step is to assign your country to 
the calculation procedure. Follow this menu path to check your country: IMG: Financial Accounting  
(New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases ➤ Basic Settings ➤ Basic 
Settings ➤ Assign Country to Calculation Procedure. Or you can use transaction code OBBG.
Make sure your country tax procedure is assigned to the appropriate calculation procedure  
(Figure 10-2). If your country code is not assigned to your country’s calculation procedure, you have to 
assign it manually.
Table 10-1.  A List of Tax Categories in SAP ERP 
Value
Description
Blank
Non-tax relevant postings (bank postings)
-
Postings that require an input tax code (reconciliation accounts 
payables from goods and services)
+
Postings that require an output tax code (reconciliation accounts 
receivables from goods and services)
*
Postings that require any tax code
XX
Postings with the predefined tax code
Figure 10-2.  Assigning a country to a calculation procedure
All other G/L accounts can have one of the entries in Table 10-1 in the Tax Category field.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
154
In this example, the target country is Great Britain. Therefore, you should make sure that the country tax 
code (Great Britain’s is TAXGB) is assigned to the tax procedure, which is circled in red in Figure 10-2. You 
can click the Search button to call up the list of all the country tax procedures. Search for your country tax 
procedure and assign it. Save 
 your tax procedure.
■
■Note  Before you move to the next step, go to “Appendix A, Chapter 10, Tax on Sales/Purchases” to create 
the G/L accounts for input tax and output tax, which you will need when configuring the tax postings.
You need to define separate tax codes for sales and purchases. In the next activity, you will define the tax 
code for sales specific to your company based on your country’s requirements.
Define Tax Codes for Sales 
A tax code contains one or more tax rates that are applicable to different tax types represented in SAP ERP. 
It is recommended that you define different tax codes for different tax types and rates. If your company has 
operations in more than one country, you should define separate sales/purchase tax codes for each country. 
Secondly, in some countries, you must report tax-exempt or non-taxable items to the tax-governing bodies. 
Hence, you should define a 0 value tax code to report tax-exempt or non-taxable sales.
Problem: In the UK, the output sales tax (VAT) is 20%. Company C900 Plc wants you to 
define a 20% sales tax code, which users will apply to sales during document entry, and to 
specify the G/L account that output sales tax will be posted to.
To define tax code for sales, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases ➤ Calculation ➤ Define Tax Codes for Sales 
and Purchases. Or you can use transaction code FTXP. 
The Country dialog box pops up. This screen allows you to determine the country-specific settings that 
you want to use for your tax code. Enter your country code in the Country field. In this activity, for example, 
we used the GB (Great Britain) country code. Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to go to 
the initial screen, called Maintain Tax Code: Initial Screen, where you define your tax code (Figure 10-3).
Figure 10-3.  Maintaining a tax code for output/sales tax
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
155
■
■Tip   You can define more than one tax code, such as 5%, 10%, 20%, and so on. There is no restriction to 
the number of tax codes you can create.
To define a tax code for output/sales for your company’s country code, simply enter two digits as your 
tax code into the Tax Code field. Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. The Properties 
screen (Figure 10-4) pops up. This screen allows you to specify the properties for your tax code.
Figure 10-4.  Specifying the tax code properties
Update the following fields: 
Tax Code: Enter the tax code you want to use for your sales or output tax in this 
field and also provide a short description.
Tax Type: SAP ERP comes with two tax types—A is for output tax and V is for 
input tax. Since you are defining the tax code for an output tax, enter tax type A in 
this field.
■
■Note   You cannot use the same tax code twice when defining another tax code with different tax rate. Since 
you have already used A2 for a 20% tax code, you cannot use it again for another tax rate. You have to choose 
another tax code. For example, for a tax rate of 5%, use A5 as your tax code, A10 for 10%, and so on. Once you 
have entered the appropriate data in the Properties screen, click Enter 
 to confirm your entries. The Maintain 
Tax Code: Tax Rates screen is displayed (Figure 10-5). This screen allows you to enter the tax percentage for the 
output tax. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
156
This activity assumes that 20% is the tax rate. Since you are creating an output tax, enter 20 in the Tax 
Percentage Rate field for the output tax. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entry and then save 
 
your configuration. 
The next step is to define the tax account for your tax type. This determines the G/L accounts where the 
tax amounts arising from tax calculations are posted. The system will apply the 20% tax code you specified 
to the total invoice and calculate the tax amount for the output tax. It will then post this amount to the G/L 
account you assigned.
Define Tax Accounts for Sales
In this section, you’ll specify the G/L account for tax types that output taxes are posted to. The system will 
automatically determine the G/L account that your tax types are posted to based on your specifications. The 
system will calculate the tax amount based on the percentage rate entered in your tax code and the specified 
tax type and automatically post the tax amount to the account you assign to your tax code. Follow this menu 
path to go to the screen where you will assign the account for your tax code: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases ➤ Posting ➤ Define Tax 
Accounts. Or you can use transaction code OB40. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic  
Posts - Procedures screen is displayed. At this level, you will specify the account that you want your account 
type to post your taxes to. Since you need to define the account you want output sales tax to be posted to,  
click the scroll 
 buttons on the left side of the screen to search for Output Tax – MWS in the Procedures 
section (Figure 10-6). 
Figure 10-5.  Specifying the tax percentage rate for a tax code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
157
To go to the screen where you will assign the account that output taxes are posted to, select 
 from the Procedures section and click the Detail 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen. The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your entry. The 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts Rules screen is displayed. On this screen, you can 
specify posting rules for automatic posting. When you click the Save 
 button at the top of the screen, the 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Post- Accounts screen is displayed (Figure 10-7). This is 
where you assign the account for your output or sales tax code. The system calculates the tax amount based 
on the percentage you assigned to your tax code and the account type and automatically posts it to the 
account you assign in this activity.
Figure 10-6.  Automatic posting procedure screen for output tax
Figure 10-7.  Assigning the G/L account to a tax code for automatic posting
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
158
To assign the account you want the tax amount for output taxes to be posted to, enter the account in the 
Account field. Click the Enter 
 button and save 
 your account assignment. 
The same steps you used to define output tax are applicable to input tax, with slight modifications to  
the tax type and to the account to post the tax amount. For example, the tax type for output tax is A, whereas, 
the tax type for input tax is V. In the next activity, you will define tax codes for inputs or purchase taxes in  
SAP ERP. 
Define Tax Codes for Purchases
Just like when you’re customizing the tax code for sales, you have to define the tax code for purchases using 
a different tax code, tax type, and G/L account. It is important to create different tax codes for purchases 
in different countries (if your company operates in more than one country), because each country’s tax 
requirements and specifications differ. Now let’s define a tax code for purchases.
Problem: Company C900 Plc’s accounting team wants you to define a 20% purchase tax 
code that users can apply to purchases during document entry and specify the G/L account 
purchase taxes are posted to.
To define a tax code for purchases, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases ➤  Calculation ➤ Define Tax codes 
for Sales and Purchases. Or you can use transaction code FTXP.
The Country dialog box pops up. This screen allows you to assign your country tax specification to your 
tax code. Enter your country code in the Country field. We used GB (Great Britain) in this activity 
Click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box to go to the next screen, called Maintain 
Tax Code: Initial Screen, where you will customize your tax code (Figure 10-8).
Figure 10-8.  Maintaining a tax code for input/purchases
■
■Tip  There is no restriction to the number of tax codes you can create.
You define the tax code for input/purchase taxes for your company’s country code by simply typing a 
two-digit tax code in the Tax Code field. There is no hard rule on the tax code that you must use here. It is 
purely a matter of choice.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
159
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. The Properties screen pops up. This screen 
allows you to specify your tax code and add a description of it. Update the following fields on the Properties 
screen:
Tax Code: Enter your tax code and short description of your tax code.
Tax Type: Enter the tax type V for input tax. The tax type you define here allows 
the system to determine whether the tax is an input or output tax.
■
■Note  You cannot use the same tax code twice when defining another tax code with a different tax rate. 
Since you have already used B2 for a tax code of 20%, you cannot use it again for another tax rate. You have to 
choose another tax code. For example, for a tax rate of 5%, use B5 as your tax code, B10 for 10%, and so on. 
After updating the Properties screen, click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The 
Maintain Tax Code: Tax Rates screen is displayed (Figure 10-9). On this screen, you specify the percentage 
rate for your tax code.
Figure 10-9.  Maintaining a percentage tax rate for the tax code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
160
This activity assumes a 20% tax rate. Since you are creating an input tax, enter 20 in the tax percentage 
rate field for input tax. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your tax code.
The next step is to assign an account to your tax code. In the next activity, you will do just that. Account 
assignment allows the system to automatically post the input tax to the account you assign. 
Define Tax Accounts for Purchases
In this activity, you specify the G/L account for posting taxes. The system will automatically determine the 
G/L account that your tax types are posted to based on your specifications. Follow this menu path to assign 
accounts to your tax code: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) 
➤ Tax on Sales/Purchases ➤ Posting ➤ Define Tax Accounts. Or you can use transaction code OB40.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Procedures screen is displayed. It contains a 
list of tax types you can choose from (Figure 10-10).
Figure 10-10.  The automatic posting procedure screen
Since you want to assign the account where the purchase tax will be posted, search for purchase tax 
(circled in red in Figure 10-10). Select it and click the Detail 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The 
Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts in the Chart of Accounts field and 
click the Continue 
 button to confirm your entry. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic 
Posts Rules screen appears, which is where you specify the automatic posting rules.
To assign accounts for automatic posting of purchase taxes, click the Save 
 button at the top of the 
screen. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automate Posts - Accounts screen is displayed  
(Figure 10-11). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
161
The next step is to assign the G/L account for automatic postings of purchase taxes. Enter the account 
for output tax in the Account field (circled in red in Figure 10-11) and save 
 your account assignment.
To complete the customization process for your tax code, you should define another code for a  
non-deductible input tax. This is handy when you’re posting non-deductible input tax items, such as  
down payment requests. You can use the non-deductible tax NAV option and the information in Table 10-2 
to complete this customization process.
Figure 10-11.  Assigning a G/L account to a tax code for automatic posting
Table 10-2.  Specifications for a Non-Deductible Tax Code
Field
Value
Description
Country
GB
Use your country code
Tax Code
B3
Non-deductible input tax
Tax Type
V
Tax type for input tax
Non-Deduct. Input Tax – NAV
20
Tax rate in percentage
G/L Account
154000
The account to be posted tax
The next activity, which rounds up this exercise, explains how to assign taxable codes for non-taxable 
transactions in SAP ERP. In some countries, you must report tax-exempt or non-taxable items to the  
tax-governing bodies. To do this, you have to assign tax codes to non-taxable transactions. 
Assign Taxable Codes to Non-Taxable Transactions
When you have to report tax-exempt or non-tax sales/purchases to a tax authority, it’s best to define a 0 value 
tax code to track these types of transactions.
In this activity, you specify tax codes for input and output taxes, which are used to post non-taxable 
transactions to the relevant G/L accounts. To assign taxable codes for non-taxable transactions, follow this 
menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Tax on Sales/
Purchases ➤ Posting ➤ Assign Tax Codes for Non-Taxable Transactions. Or you can use transaction code OBCL.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 10 ■ Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases
162
Summary
This chapter explained sales and purchase taxes and gave examples of sales and purchase taxes in practice. 
You looked at how sales and purchase taxes are reconciled and how the differences are passed on to the 
tax authority. You also looked at the various tax categories in SAP and learned how they are applied in the 
system. Thereafter, you looked at the basic settings involved in customizing taxes and learned about their 
relationship to country-specific settings. You learned how to assign a country to the calculation procedures.
You created two tax codes for sales and purchases taxes using two-digit codes. You went on to look at 
how to define tax accounts so that the system will automatically post them where you specify.
Finally, you learned how to assign taxable codes to non-taxable transactions using the standard  
non-taxable codes.
In Chapter 11, you will look at the final aspect of bank customizing—the cash journal. You will learn 
how to set up a new cash journal, define a company code for the cash journal, and assign G/L accounts 
where cash transactions are posted.
Figure 10-12.  Assigning tax codes to non-taxable transactions 
■
■Tip  SAP comes with standard non-taxable input/output tax codes for most countries. SAP also allows you 
to create your own codes if you choose to. However, we recommend that you use the standard non-taxable 
codes instead of creating your own, as this will save you time. The only time you should create your own codes 
is when the standard codes provided by SAP do not meet your requirements.
The Change View “Allocate Co. Cd. -> Non-Taxable Transactions” Overview screen comes up  
(Figure 10-12). It contains a list of company codes. Search for your company code by clicking the scroll 
 
buttons or the 
 button. Assign V0 (exempt from input tax) to input tax and A0 (exempt 
from Output tax) to output tax for your company code (circled in red). Save 
 your efforts.
www.it-ebooks.info

163
Chapter 11
Customizing a Cash Journal
In this chapter, you learn what a cash journal is and how to customize the required settings for one.
At the end of the chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Set up a cash journal
• 
Create G/L accounts for your cash journal
• 
Specify the amount limit for your cash journal
• 
Define number range intervals for your cash journal
• 
Create, change, and delete business transactions
• 
Set up print parameters for your cash journal
Cash Journal
Cash receipts and cash payment transactions are managed in SAP ERP using a cash journal. A cash journal 
is a sub-module in bank accounting that serves as a cash-management tool for companies using SAP to 
manage their cash transactions. The importance of using the SAP cash journal tool is that it displays opening 
and closing balances, calculates total cash receipts and total cash payments, and reconciles the cash balance 
at any time. You can maintain separate cash journals for each company code and for each currency and 
make postings to customers, vendors, and G/L accounts in FI.
When you’re setting up a new cash journal, the following items must be defined:
• 
The company code that will use the cash journal
• 
Identification key (usually a four-digit code) that identifies your cash journal
• 
The name of the cash journal (short text describing your cash journal)
• 
The general ledger accounts where the cash transactions are posted
• 
The currency used in your cash journal
• 
The document type for the following items:
• 
General ledger postings
• 
Outgoing payments to vendors
• 
Incoming payments from vendors
• 
Outgoing payments to customers
• 
Incoming payments from customers
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
164
The first step is to create the G/L accounts that you will assign to the cash journal and to which all cash 
transactions will be posted.
■
■Tip  We recommend that you create different cash journals for each currency and each company code you use.
Create G/L Accounts for a Cash Journal
Cash transactions are posted to the G/L accounts assigned to the cash journal. You will learn how to assign 
G/L accounts to your cash journal later in the “Set Up the Cash Journal” and “Create, Change, and Delete 
Business Transactions” sections.
Problem: Company C900 Plc has large cash transactions and wants you to set up a cash 
journal for them that will post to the following accounts in FI:
• 
Petty cash
• 
Cash transfers from the bank
• 
Cash transfers to the bank
• 
Cash purchases
• 
Cash sales
To create the G/L accounts for your cash journal, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ Bank Accounts ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Cash Journal ➤ Create G/L Account for Cash Journal. Or 
you can use transaction code FS00.
Because you learned how to create G/L accounts in Chapter 5, refer back to that chapter for a refresher. 
We specify how to create the five G/L accounts you need for this exercise in Appendix A. Go to “Appendix, A, 
Chapter 11, (Cash Journal)” to create the G/L accounts. The G/L accounts you create are assigned to the cash 
journal in the sections “Set Up Cash Journal” and “Create, Change, and Delete Business Transactions” later 
in this chapter. 
Next, you need to specify the amount limit for your cash journal. This limit will restrict the amount you 
can post in a single transaction. 
Specify the Amount Limit for a Cash Journal
The function of the amount limit is to set a cash limit for your cash Journal in FI. The limit you set for your 
cash journal serves as a control mechanism, because it allows the system to determine the maximum 
amount that can be posted per transaction to the cash journal. You’ll define the company code, the currency, 
and the amount limit. The currency is automatically set to your company code’s currency. When limits 
exceed the system settings, you’ll get an error message. To set the amount limit for your cash journal, use this 
menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Bank Accounts ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Cash Journal ➤ 
Amount Limit.
The Change View: “Cash Journal: Amount Limit ”: Overview screen is displayed. This screen contains 
the amount limits already defined in the system. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen, which is where you specify the amount 
limit for your cash journal (Figure 11-1).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
165
Update the following fields:
CoCd: Enter the company code you are using for your cash journal.
Crcy: Enter the currency key that you want to use for the amount limit. If this field 
is blank, there will be no restriction to the amount you can post to the system.
Valid From: This is the date you want your amount limit to be valid from.
Amount: This is the maximum amount that can be posted per transaction in the 
cash journal.
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or press Enter on 
your keyboard to confirm that the system accepted your entries. Save 
 your efforts. 
■
■Tip  Specifying the amount limit on the cash journal is optional. Do this only when your company wants to 
set a limit that users can post to the cash journal per transaction.
In the next activity, you will define number range intervals for your cash journal. The system will 
automatically assign a unique number from the defined number range interval to each document posted to 
the cash journal.
Define Number Range Intervals for Cash Journal Documents
When a cash journal transaction is posted, a cash journal document is generated and assigned a  
unique document number from the number range intervals that you define. The document number 
assigned to the posted cash journal transaction coupled with your company code will allow you to identify 
the given document within a fiscal year.
Problem: To save time and to ensure that number range intervals for the cash journal 
are accurate, you have been asked to define a cash journal number range by copying the 
number range intervals of company code 1000 supplied by SAP and modifying them to 
meet your requirements.
Figure 11-1.  Cash Journal: Amount Limit entry field
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
166
To define the number range intervals for your cash journal, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Banking ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Cash Journal ➤ Define Number Range Intervals 
for Cash Journal Documents. Or you can use transaction code FBCJC1.
The Document Numbers for Cash Journal Documents screen is displayed. This is where you define or 
copy your number range intervals. Since you want to copy an existing interval, enter the company code that 
you want to copy in the Company Code field and click the Copy 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. 
For example, to copy the number range interval for company code 1000, enter the company code 1000 in the 
Company Code field and click the Enter button. Company code 1000 is the source company code (the 
company code number range intervals you are copying) and your company code is the target company code 
(the company code you are copying to).
The Copy Company Code dialog box pops up when you click the Copy button. The system will enter 
company code 1000 in the From field. If it doesn’t, enter it manually. Enter the target company code (your 
company code) in the To field. Click the Copy 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The system will 
copy the number range intervals from the source company code to the target company code (your company 
code).
The Transport number range intervals screen pops up with a message. Ignore the message by clicking 
the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The document number range for the Cash Journal screen 
appears with a notification on the status bar at the bottom of the screen that 
. This 
means that you have successfully copied the number range intervals. The advantage of copying intervals 
defined by the system is that it’s adequate and meets your requirements. This saves you time because you 
can copy it and make any necessary changes as compared to defining your own number range interval. 
It is recommended that you verify the number range you defined. To display the number range you 
copied from company code 1000 to your target company code, follow these steps.
On the Document Numbers for Cash Journal Documents screen, make sure your company code is 
entered in the Company Code field. Click the 
 button immediately below the company code 
field. The number range you copied will be displayed (Figure 11-2).
Figure 11-2.  Displaying the number range interval
The next step is setting up the cash journal.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
167
Set Up the Cash Journal
In this section, you will specify the settings for your cash journal. This includes the company name that you 
want to use for your cash journal, the number that will identify the cash journal, the G/L accounts where 
the cash journal transactions are posted, and so on. To set up the cash journal, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Banking ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Cash Journal ➤ Set Up Cash Journal. Or 
you can use transaction code FBCJC0.
The Change View “Maintain View for Cash Journals”: Overview screen appears. This is where you 
establish settings for your cash journal. Click the 
 button on the top of the screen to go the 
Change View “Maintain View for Cash Journals”: Overview screen (Figure 11-3), where you’ll configure the 
appropriate settings.
Figure 11-3.  Setting up the cash journal
Update the following fields:
CoCd: Enter your company code. This is the company code that you want to 
use for the cash journal you defined in this activity. It is important to define 
individual cash journals for each company code. You can define a cash journal 
per transaction or per currency.
CJ Number: You can enter a maximum of four digits of your choice in this field. 
If you are creating more than one cash journal, make sure that the numbers you 
use are logical and sequential (for example, 0001, 0002, 0003, and so on). This 
number will identify your cash journal. This is important when you have more 
than one cash journal in the system.
G/L Account: Enter the G/L account number 10000 (for petty cash) you created 
earlier. When cash journal transactions are entered in the system, they are 
automatically posed to the G/L account you assign for your cash journal.
Crcy: Enter the currency you want to use in your cash journal. This is usually the 
company code’s currency. On the contrary, if you choose to run your cash journal 
in a different currency, you must make sure that the option Only Balances in Local 
Crcy in your cash journal G/L account master data is not checked.
Cash Jnl Closed: Leave this checkbox blank. Leaving the checkbox blank indicates 
that your cash journal is active. If you click this checkbox, the cash journal will be 
closed. Click this checkbox only when you want to close your cash journal.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
168
DT: Specify the document types for your cash journal postings. Document type 
determines the business transaction and account to post your cash journal 
transaction to. SAP comes with several document types to choose from. For 
example:
AB – G/L account
KZ – Outgoing payment to vendor
KZ – Incoming payment from vendor
DZ – Incoming payment from customer
DZ – Outgoing payment to customer
You can access these document types by using the matchcode or clicking the 
Search 
 button. This button is displayed when you click on the input field of 
your document type. When you click on the matchcode, a list of document types 
is displayed, from which you can select the appropriate document type. 
Cash Payment/Cash Receipt: Leave these fields blank. Leaving these fields blank 
enables you to post both cash payments and cash receipts to your cash journal.
Check Split: The specification you make here will determine whether the line 
items of the total posting are split when processing check deposits. You have 
three options to choose from:
• 
Offsetting Item of Total Document Split: When you specify this item, only the 
offsetting item of the total posting is split.
• 
All Items of Total Document Split: When this item is specified, the checks 
posted to the cash journal and the offsetting totals are split.
• 
No Split of Line Items of Total Document: No splitting is performed.
For this activity, select No Split of Line Items of Total Document. This will allow 
the user to carry out the split manually.
Cash Journal Name: Enter a name that best describes your cash journal. For 
instance, Petty Cash.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your cash journal.
In the next activity, you will specify the company code, the transaction number, the business 
transaction, the G/L accounts, the tax code, and the cash journal business transactions for your cash journal. 
Create, Change, and Delete Business Transactions
The Create, Change, and Delete Business Transactions function enables you to specify the business 
transactions for your cash journal. You can create your own business transactions or copy the standard 
settings provided by the system and modify them to meet your requirements.
So that you gain a thorough understanding of how to customize business transactions in the cash 
journal, this exercise takes you through the detailed steps, rather than having you simply copy the 
predefined business transactions supplied by SAP. To maintain your business transactions, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Banking ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Cash Journal ➤ Create, 
Change, Delete Business Transactions. Or you can use transaction code FBCJC2.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
169
The Change View “Maintain View for Cash Journal Transaction Names”: Overview screen is displayed. 
This screen contains the list of existing business transactions in the system. (If you chose to copy the 
standard business transactions supplied by SAP, you can do so by selecting the business transactions for 
company code 1000, for instance, and clicking the Copy button on the top-left side of the screen. You can 
then modify them to meet your requirements.) Click the 
 button to go to the New Entries: 
Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 11-4), where you will specify your cash journal business 
transactions.
Update the following fields: 
CoCd: Enter the company code that you are using for your cash journal 
transactions.
Tran.no: The transaction number is determined by the system. It usually starts at 
1, 2, 3, and so on.
Bus.Tran.Type: Enter the business transaction type. SAP comes with predefined 
business transaction types:
C – Receipt from bank account
B – Payment to bank account
R – Revenue
E – Expense
D – Customer posting
K – Vendor posting
Figure 11-4.  The maintain view for cash journal transaction names
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
170
You can access these transaction types by using the matchcode or by clicking the Search 
 button.
G/L Account: Enter the G/L accounts that you want to post your cash journal 
transactions to. The G/L accounts entered here will allow cash transactions to be 
posted to the appropriate G/L accounts during document posting. For example:
• 
Cash transfers from the bank
• 
Cash transfers to the bank
• 
Expense accounts
Tx: Enter the tax codes for expenses and revenues for your cash journal business 
transactions. These tax codes will be used by the system to calculate sales and 
purchases taxes for your cash journal business transactions and to post the tax 
amount to the appropriate G/L accounts.
Cash Journal Business Trans: Enter a business transaction description for your 
cash journal.
BusTraBlkd: Set business transaction to blocked if you do not want postings to 
be made into transactions. 
Click the Enter 
 button and save 
 your efforts.
■
■Note  Make sure you use the tax codes you created in Chapter 10 for the input/output taxes. Otherwise,  
the system will not accept your tax code.
The final step is to set up the print parameters for your cash journal.
Set Up Print Parameters for the Cash Journal
To be able to print the cash journal transactions, you need to set up the print parameters for your cash 
journal for each company code represented in the system. To set up print parameters for your cash journal, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Banking ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Cash 
Journal ➤ Set Up Print ➤ Parameters for Cash Journal. Or you can use transaction code FBCJC3.
The Change View “Maintain Print Parameter View for Cash Journal” screen is displayed (Figure 11-5). 
You can copy the print program from the list of displayed standard print parameters or you can simply use 
one of the existing print programs if one meets your requirements.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 11 ■ Customizing a Cash Journal
171
In this exercise, you will copy the standard print program for company code 0006 supplied by SAP and 
adapt it to meet your requirements. To copy that print program, select the company code 0006 from the list 
of cash journal print programs and then click the Copy 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. This 
action will specifically copy the company code print parameter you select. Change the company code 0006 
to your target company code. Change the Cash Jour. Print Program description to your own. The Report 
Variant option is a way to output a report that is unique to you. Finally, choose correspondence type SAP18 
(this is a print program to print cash doucments) for cash documents. 
■
■Note  SAP comes with predefined print parameters that you can copy. It is advisable to copy a standard 
print parameter and modify it to meet your requirements. However, you can use any print parameter with 
correspondence type SAP18.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 the print parameters.
Summary
This chapter explained how cash receipts and payments transactions are managed using the cash journal 
and discussed the importance of using cash journals as cash-management tools. You went on to look at 
various settings that you need to customize your cash journals.
As part of customizing the cash journal, you specified the menu path for creating G/L cash accounts. 
You then learned how to set an amount limit, which determines the maximum amount that can be posted 
per transaction to the cash journal. You also learned how to define number range intervals for the cash 
journal by copying and modifying standard number range intervals in the system. You learned how to set up 
a cash journal and how to create, change, and delete business transactions. You also learned how to assign 
documents to your cash journal that will determine how transactions are posted. Finally, you set up the print 
parameters for your cash journals.
The next chapter explains what a financial statement is and describes the steps involved in defining 
financial statement versions. You’ll learn how to map financial statement versions and assign appropriate 
G/L accounts from which financial statements are drawn.
Figure 11-5.  Copying the print parameters for your cash journal
www.it-ebooks.info

173
Chapter 12
Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
In this chapter, you learn what a financial statement version (FSV) is and go through the basic settings 
involved in defining financial statement versions.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Explain and define financial statement versions (FSV)
• 
Define an FSV using the appropriate specifications
• 
Assign FSV hierarchy nodes to the appropriate G/L accounts
Financial Statement Versions
A Financial Statement Version (FSV) forms the basis for drawing up financial statements in SAP ERP.  
The primary objective of a publically-owned business is to maximize returns on investors’ equity. Therefore, 
the management needs to be able to ascertain the performance of the business in form reports at a given 
interval to help aid operational and strategic decision-making geared toward improving performance. In 
SAP ERP, hundreds of business transactions are posted to the general ledger in a fiscal year. But it’s not 
possible to know how well a business is performing from the G/L accounts that transactions are posted to. 
Hence, the need for FSV.
FSV is part of the closing procedure in SAP ERP. It is a tool designed specifically for generating financial 
statements (such as profit and loss statements and balance sheets) to meet specific legal disclosure 
requirements related to certain items (such as assets, liabilities, income, expenses, and so on) in financial 
reports.
SAP ERP comes with standard, predefined FSV that you can use as a template and adjust to meet  
your requirements. You can also define your own FSV afresh if you choose not to use the standard FSV 
supplied by SAP. Interestingly, you can define more than one FSV if you need to meet individual financial 
statement reporting needs of various stakeholders, such as the tax authority, investors, and internal 
management reporting.
To define FSV in SAP ERP, you must specify the following items:
• 
The items to be included in your FSV and the order and the hierarchical structure of 
each item
• 
The text describing each financial statement item
• 
The chart of accounts
• 
Totals to be displayed in your report
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
174
FSV is a combination of G/L accounts structured in hierarchical levels that are defined in the financial 
statement version’s directory and assigned to appropriate accounts. You can define more than one FSV to 
a specific chart of account or to a group of chart of accounts. Basically, FSV allows you to assign groups of 
accounts to items in the hierarchy.
Let’s look at how to define a basic FSV in SAP.
Define Financial Statement Versions
In this exercise, you go through the various steps involved in customizing FSV. You can define your own FSV 
from scratch or copy a predefined FSV supplied by SAP and modify it. 
Problem: The accounting team is not sure of the benefits and function of an FSV. You have 
been asked by company C900 Plc to advise the accounting team on the benefits of using an 
FSV and then to create an FSV in SAP ERP.
To define an FSV, follow one of these menu paths:
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic 
Processing ➤ Document ➤ Define Financial Statement Versions.
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Master 
Data ➤ G/L Accounts ➤ Define Financial Statement Versions.
You can also use transaction code OB58.
The Change View Financial Statement Version Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button 
at the top of the screen to go to the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen, where you will specify the 
key for your financial statement version and describe the FSV’s general specifications (Figure 12-1).
Figure 12-1.  Initial entry screen where you start your customizing
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
175
Update the following fields:
Fin.Stmt.Version: Enter your proposed FSV in this field. You can enter up to 
four digits in this field. This will serve as an identification key for your FSV. We 
recommend that you use your chart of accounts key here. This is ideal for FSV 
identification for your company code, especially when you have several FSV and 
company codes in the system.
Name: Enter the text that best describes your FSV.
General Specifications: Specify the following items:
Maint.language: The language code is the language you want the  
system to use when maintaining FSV. For example, in this exercise we  
used EN (English).
Chart of Accounts: In this field, you enter your company code’s chart of 
account that you defined in Chapter 2.
Click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your work.
The next step is to create the items for the FSV you just defined. You will create the nodes for the balance 
sheet, profit and loss statement, and unassigned accounts, which will then be enhanced in subsequent steps. 
To create the items for your FSV, click the 
 button. The Change Financial Statement Version 
screen is displayed (Figure 12-2), where you will define the FSV hierarchy nodes for your FSV. The items for 
the FSV are defined in SAP ERP in a hierarchical structure.
To simplify the customization process, we will break it into four steps:
	
1.	
Create items.
	
2.	
Reassign items as subordinates.
	
3.	
Assign FSV nodes to G/L accounts.
	
4.	
Define the credit/debit shift.
Figure 12-2.  The standard hierarchical structure where you start creating your FSV items
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
176
■
■Note  In practice, before you start creating the hierarchical structure of your FSV, it is advisable that you 
create a paper sketch of your FSV structure. This will serve as a guide when defining your FSV.
Step 1: Create Items
Notice in Figure 12-2 that the FSV you defined earlier is displayed as the heading in the hierarchy structure. 
Select the FSV circled in red by clicking on it. We used CA90 as the FSV.
Click the 
 button. The Create Items screen will come up. On this screen, the FSV is displayed 
and the fields below your FSV are blank. You need to update this screen with the subheadings for your FSV 
items by typing them in (for example, Balance Sheet, Profit & Loss Account, and Unassigned Accounts), as 
shown in Figure 12-3.
After typing in the subheading for your FSV items, click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-left side of 
the pop-up screen or press Enter on your keyboard. The items you have entered in the Create Items screen 
will be copied into your FSV. Your FSV will look like the one shown in Figure 12-4, with the subheadings you 
entered below your FSV.
Figure 12-3.  The screen where you create your FSV items
Figure 12-4.  FSV hierarchy structure showing how items are reassigned
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
177
The next step is to reassign items supplied by SAP in Figure 12-4 (for example, P+L result, Net Result: 
Loss, Net Result: Profit, Liab+Equity, Assets, and so on) to your FSV as subordinates to the subheading you 
created in the FSV hierarchy. Subordinates will appear in the hierarchy under the subheadings you defined. 
Step 2: Reassign Items as Subordinates
Let’s start by assigning subordinates to the balance sheet. To reassign Liab+Equity as a subordinate to the 
balance sheet in your FSV hierarchy, select the Liab+Equity item from the list of FSV items supplied by SAP 
(see Figure 12-4). Click the Select 
 button on the top-right side of the screen to select it. Notice that the 
row containing Liab+Equity turns yellow, indicating that the item has been selected. Then select an item you 
want to reassign it to from the list of items in the FSV hierarchy. In this case, select Balance Sheet by clicking 
on it. Click the Reassign 
 button on the top-right side of the screen to reassign Liab+Equity to Balance 
Sheet. The Reassign Node dialog box pops up (Figure 12-5).
On the Reassign Node screen, the nodes you are reassigning are specified by the system. On this screen, 
you can choose to reassign a node to another node at the same level or as a subordinate. In this activity, you 
are reassigning Liab+Equity as a subordinate to Balance Sheet, so click the Subordinate button. Click the 
Enter 
 button at the bottom-right side of the Reassign Node screen to confirm your action.
■
■Note  Choose Same Level from the Reassign Node screen if you want the item you are reassigning to be on 
the same level as the item you are assigning it to.
The next step is to add text to the items you have reassigned and determine which totals to output. 
During FSV review, the texts and totals will be displayed in the balance sheets and profit and loss statements.
Change Item Text
Notice in Figure 12-6 that the node for Assets and Liab+Equity states that No Text Exists. You need to add text 
to display in the financial statement.
Figure 12-5.  The screen where you reassign an item to the same level or as a subordinate to an  
existing node in the FSV hierarchy structure
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
178
To add text to the items in your FSV, double-click on the item you want to add text to. The Item: Change 
Texts screen will be displayed for that item. For example, if you double-click Assets, the screen that pops up 
will allow you to add text and activate display totals for Assets only (Figure 12-7).
Figure 12-6.  Double-click on item to call up the change text screen
Figure 12-7.  Item change text screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
179
■
■Note  When you’re defining items in FSV, special codes are assigned to each item to maintain the 
classification of similar items under the same code and heading. These codes are designed in a systematic 
manner to form a logical sequence, often referred to as code classification. For example, the code for Asset  
is 200000, and the next items under Asset will be 200100, 200200, 200300, and so on. We will not be covering 
this topic further, as it is outside the scope of this book.
On the Item: Change Text screen, update the following fields:
Item: Enter the item code and required text and select the totals to be output. We 
used 1000000 (see Figure 12-7).
Start of Group: Enter the heading name for the specific group of items.  
The name you enter in this field will be displayed as the heading for the group  
in the report. If a G/L account is posted, this text is displayed before the item’s 
sub-items during the period.
End of Group: The text you enter here will end the group. For example, Total 
Assets will be displayed as the last item in the group. If you enter text and select 
the Display Total option in this section, the total balance for assigned G/L 
accounts is output during the selected period.
The system should default to the Display Total checkbox being selected; if not, you have to click it.  
This will display the total amount for the group in the report.
Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the Item: Change Text screen or press Enter on 
your keyboard. The system will then assign the item classification code to your FSV group. Save 
 your FSV.
Following the process you just completed for Assets, assign a classification code and text to Liab+Equity 
using this information:
• 
Item: 2000000
• 
Group Start: Liabilities
• 
Display Total: Activate
Create Items for Liab+Equity
Next, you need to create more items as subordinates for 2000000 Liab+Equity using the Create Items button 
on the top-left side of the screen. To do this, select 2000000 – Liab+Equity and click the Create button. The 
Create Items screen is displayed (Figure 12-8). In the Balance Sheet section of your FSV, update the fields 
under 2000000 with the appropriate items.
Figure 12-8.  Creating more items in FSV
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
180
To enter your updates in your FSV, click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen.  
Your FSV screen will look like the one in Figure 12-9.
Save 
 your FSV. 
Complete the Nodes for FSV
Follow Steps 1 and 2 (create items and reassign items as subordinates) to create the nodes in your FSV for 
the following items:
	
1.	
Create Intangible Assets, Fixed Assets, and Current Assets as subordinates  
to Assets.
	
2.	
Reassign the P+L Result node to Income Statement and change the name  
to P+L Result.
	
3.	
Assign the Net Result Loss & Net Result Gain nodes to Shareholders Equity.
	
4.	
Reassign Net Result: Loss to Shareholders Equity as a subordinate.
	
5.	
Reassign Net Result: Profit to Shareholders Equity as a subordinate.
	
6.	
Change the name of Net Result: Loss to Retained Earnings.
	
7.	
Change Net Result: Gain to Retained Earnings.
	
8.	
Reassign the node not assigned to Unassigned Accounts.
	
9.	
Click the 
 button at the top of the screen and create the following 
nodes under current assets:
• 
Petty Cash and Current Bank Account as subordinates to Cash & Cash 
Equivalent.
• 
Short-Term Borrowings and Bank Short-Terms Loans as subordinates to Current 
Liabilities.
• 
Bank Overdraft and Bank Short-Term Borrowings as subordinates to Short-Term 
Borrowings.
• 
Barclays Bank as a subordinate to Current Bank Account.
• 
Bank Overdraft as a subordinate to the Barclays Bank node.
Now complete the nodes for your FSV using Figure 12-10 as your model. 
Figure 12-9.  FSV hierarchy structure showing the items created
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
181
After you have reassigned these items and changed the appropriate text, save 
 your work. 
The next step is to assign your FSV nodes to the appropriate G/L accounts. 
Figure 12-10.  An extended FSV hierarchy structure showing the items you created
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
182
Step 3: Assign FSV Nodes to G/L Accounts 
FSV is designed specifically for performance-reporting purposes, in order to meet certain requirements.  
It is important to assign G/L accounts to your FSV in a structured manner so that the summary of business 
transactions posted to the G/L accounts covering a given period can be generated as a financial statement. 
To assign G/L accounts to FSV, select the appropriate item or node from your FSV hierarchy structure and 
click the Assign Account button at the top of the screen.
You will not be able to assign G/L accounts to all the nodes in your FSV. Instead, we can teach you how 
to assign G/L accounts to your bank account. If you can assign G/L accounts to your bank account, you 
should be able to assign G/L accounts to the remaining nodes or items in your FSV, because the principle is 
the same. We advise that you trying assigning all the G/L accounts you have created to the nodes or items in 
your FSV.
Select the Barclays Bank Account node under Current Assets (Cash and Cash Equivalent) by clicking 
on it. You will assign a G/L account to it. When you click on a node an item, the system automatically 
selects the item.
Click the 
 button on the top of the screen to call up the Change Accounts dialog box 
(Figure 12-11). On this screen you can assign appropriate G/L accounts to items or nodes in your FSV 
hierarchy structure.
Figure 12-11.  Assigning G/L accounts to an item in FSV
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
183
Update the following fields by entering the G/L account range you want to assign to your FSV node.  
You also must specify whether your G/L accounts are debit or credit:
From Acct: Enter the starting G/L account number range of the G/L account you 
want to enter. In this exercise, we used 111410.
To Account: Enter the ending G/L account number range in this field. In this 
exercise, we used 111431.
■
■Note  The benefits of using a number range is that when you have multiple G/L account numbers, you only 
need to enter the start and end G/L accounts, and the system will assign the entire range.
D: Stands for debit. When this field is activated or selected, the system will 
include all the debit G/L accounts in your bank account in the FSV. Select  
this checkbox.
C: Stands for credit. When this field is activated or selected, the system will 
include all the credit G/L accounts in your bank account in the FSV. Select  
this checkbox.
Then click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard. This action will then assign your chart 
of accounts and G/L account number range to your FSV and indicate if the assigned G/L accounts are debit 
and/or credit by marking an X.
Notice that the range of G/L accounts that you have assigned will appear under the Barclays Bank 
Account node in the FSV Hierarchy structure (Figure 12-12). 
Step 4: Define the Credit/Debit Shift
When your bank has a debit balance, it is considered an asset. This means that you have surplus cash in your 
bank account. On the other hand, if your bank has a credit balance, it is considered a liability. This means 
that you owe the bank, and it is referred to as overdraft (short-term borrowing). Cash balance surplus and 
deficits are disclosed separately in financial statements under different headings. For example, a debit bank 
balance is treated as an asset and a credit bank balance is treated as an overdraft under liability. So that 
the system can identify these transactions and disclose them separately in the financial statement (to meet 
accounting disclosure requirements), you have to specify these settings in your FSV.
Figure 12-12.  How the G/L accounts assigned to an item are displayed in FSV
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
184
Let’s look at how this is done using the Barclays Bank Account node in your FSV hierarchy structure as 
an example.
Select the Barclays Bank Account under Current Assets by clicking on it. Then click the Select 
 button 
at the top of the screen. The item you have selected will turn yellow.
Select the Barclay Bank Account node under Overdraft in the Liability section by clicking on it. On the 
menu bar, choose Edit ➤ Debit/Credit ➤ Define. The Define Debit/Credit Shift dialog box is displayed. The 
system will automatically select the first radio button for Debit Item (Barclays Bank Account) and Credit 
Item (Barclays Bank Account), as shown in Figure 12-13. Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side 
of the dialog box to confirm your bank account debit/credit shift assignment.
Your FSV will now look like the one shown in Figure 12-14.
Figure 12-13.  The screen where you confirm the debit and credit item defaulted by the system for your  
bank account
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
185
Save 
 your FSV. 
The final step in this activity is to check the G/L accounts assigned to the FSV. When you perform a 
check, the system will tell you the items that have not been allocated to FSV, which will need to be assigned. 
Check Assigned G/L Accounts to FSV
After assigning G/L accounts to your FSV nodes, it is important to carry out checks to find out if any of the 
items (G/L accounts) are not allocated to the FSV in your company code.
To do this, click the Check 
 button on the top-right side of the screen. The Carry Out Check dialog is 
displayed. Make sure the following checkboxes are selected:
• 
Accts Assigned to 1 Side Only
• 
Nonassigned Accounts
Figure 12-14.  Hierarchical structure depicting the nodes and G/L accounts assigned to the FSV
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
186
• 
Incorrectly Assigned Accts
• 
Enter your company code in From Company Code field
Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom of screen to confirm your specifications. The Check Financial 
Statement Version screen is displayed (Figure 12-15), showing the nonassigned accounts in the FSV  
(these are the G/L accounts that have not been allocated in the FSV but need to be assigned).
Figure 12-15.  A list of G/L accounts not allocated to FSV
Go back and assign the displayed G/L accounts on the screen to the appropriate items (nodes) in the 
FSV. (You learned how to assign accounts to FSV items in Step 3.) Save 
your FSV. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 12 ■ Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
187
Summary
This chapter showed you how to configure Financial Statement Versions (FSV). In doing this, you learned 
how to define your own FSV from scratch. This included how to create FSV items using the Create button.  
As part of this exercise, you created the following items:
• 
Balance sheet
• 
Profit and loss account
• 
Unassigned accounts
You went on to create other nodes and items as subordinates for your FSV. You assigned codes to the 
items you created and assigned G/L accounts to items in the FSV. Finally, you learned how to check the 
items assigned to the FSV.
In the next chapter, you will look at how to integrate FI into the other modules, including Material 
Management (MM) and Sales and Distribution (SD). In Material Management, you will look at the various 
steps that allow the system to carry out automatic posting from MM to FI.
Finally, you will learn how to assign G/L accounts to SD. In doing this, you will determine the sequence 
to be used to achieve this objective.
www.it-ebooks.info

189
Chapter 13
Integration of FI with Other  
SAP ERP Modules
In this chapter, you learn how to integrate FI with other SAP modules as well as how to customize and 
integrate the Material Management (MM) and Sales & Distribution (SD) modules.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Integrate the FI module with other SAP modules
• 
Explain the Material Management (MM) module
• 
Configure automatic postings
• 
Explain the Sales & Distribution (SD) module
• 
Prepare revenue account determination
Integrate FI with Other SAP Modules
Most, if not all, transactions that take place in other modules in the SAP system trigger postings to the FI 
module. The idea behind assigning other modules to the FI module is to allow the system to automatically 
post financial transactions from other modules to FI. This process is referred to as integration in SAP ERP. 
The modules in Figure 13-1 are available for integration within FI.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
190
As a result, you need to perform some assignments between these modules in order to allow the system 
to perform automatic postings between them. For example, when you integrate the Payroll module into the 
FI module, postings made in the Payroll module are automatically posted to G/L accounts in real-time based 
on defined criteria.
In Figure 13-1, the Material Management (MM), Asset Accounting (FI-AA), Sales & Distribution (SD), 
Payroll, and Local General Ledger modules are integrated into FI. Therefore, postings to these modules are 
automatically posted to FI based on the integration procedures you define.
In this chapter, you learn how to integrate the Material Management (MM) and Sales & Distribution 
(SD) modules only. In Chapter 18 you integrate the Asset Accounting (FI-AA) module into FI.
■
■Note  Before you begin integrating other modules into FI, you should create the appropriate G/L accounts 
that you will need. Go to “Appendix A, Chapter 13” (Integration of FI with other modules) to create the 
appropriate G/L accounts for this exercise.
Material
Management (MM)
Asset Accounting
(FI-AA)
Payroll
Sales & Distribution
(SD)
FI
Local General
Ledgers 
Figure 13-1.  Integrating other SAP modules into FI
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
191
Material Management (MM)
Moving materials (such as goods issued and received) from one stage to another takes place in the MM 
module and those actions need to be posted to the FI. To represent the movement of these items in FI, 
they have to be assigned to G/L accounts in the FI module in the Valuation class. The Valuation class 
integrates the MM actions to FI and determines the G/L accounts where material movements (such as raw 
materials, semi-finished products, and finished products) are posted (Figure 13-2). In order for the system to 
automatically post MM transactions, you need to set its specifications in the Valuation class.
To properly classify your materials, you have to define the Valuation class for every material in the 
Valuation class’ fields. SAP supplies standard Valuation classes for this purpose.
You need to configure three settings in order to perform automatic postings from the MM module to FI:
• 
Valuation class: The Valuation class determines the G/L account group materials 
with the same account characteristics even when they are posted at different stages 
during material movement. For example, it allows goods receipt of raw materials to 
be posted to one G/L account and finished products to another. This is achieved by 
assigning different Valuation classes to materials at different stages. For example, 
the Valuation class number for Raw Materials is 3000, for Semi-Finished Products is 
7900, and for Finished Products it’s 7920.
When creating a material, you must specify a Valuation class in the accounting 
data for the material. A material is entered in the accounting data view of the 
material master data. As part of your configuration you must also assign a 
material type to the Valuation class. This will allow the system to determine 
Automatic Posts:
Valuation Class -
G/L Accounts
General Ledger
FI
Material
Management
(MM)
Purchase Order
Goods Receipts
Invoice Receipts
etc.
MM-DB
FI-DB
Figure 13-2.  How movement of material in MM is posted in FI-DB (the database)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
192
whether the Valuation class you defined can be used for the material type. 
A Valuation class can be assigned to one or more material types. Likewise, a 
material type can be assigned to one or more Valuation classes. The link between 
Valuation classes and material types is maintained by the account category 
reference. A combination of Valuation classes is often referred to as an account 
category reference.
• 
Transaction key or code:Transaction codes differentiate between transactions and 
determine the G/L account where the transaction is posted. SAP includes standard 
transaction keys that you can use to customize your settings.
• 
Accounts:This is where you assign the G/L accounts. You assign G/L accounts 
to posting transactions for every valuation class, and the postings in MM will 
automatically generate corresponding postings in FI.
In order for the system to post MM transactions automatically to the G/L accounts in FI, you need to 
perform the automatic posting configurations.
Configure Automatic Postings
When you customize the automatic postings, the system can then automatically post the MM actions to the 
appropriate G/L accounts. That means you don’t have to manually input material movements; the system 
will do it for you.
Let’s look at an example to see how customizing MM integration into the G/L accounts works in 
principle. Assume a goods receipt (GR) of £200K is posted to the Purchase Order account in the MM module. 
The double entry record for this transaction is to:
	
1.	
Debit the inventory account.
	
2.	
Credit the GR/IR clearing account (Figure 13-3).
There are two ways to access the screen where you customize these types of automatic postings:
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic 
Processing ➤ Integration ➤ Material Management ➤ Define Accounts for Material 
Management
• 
IMG: Material Management ➤ Valuation and Account Assignment ➤ Account ➤ 
Determination ➤ Account Determination Without Wizard ➤ Configure Automatic 
Postings
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Procedures screen is displayed. This screen 
contains a list of procedures you can choose from. Choose Inventory Posting BSX from the Procedures list by 
clicking on it. Then click the Details 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Enter Chart of Accounts 
Inventory Account
200K
200K
A
B
GR/IR Clearing Account
Figure 13-3.  Accounting double entry of goods receipt (GR)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
193
dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts code in the Chart of Accounts field. Click the Enter 
 
button at the bottom of the dialog box or press Enter on your keyboard. The Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen is displayed. Notice that the system has automatically entered your 
chart of accounts CA90 and the transaction code BSX for inventory posting. This is where you determine the 
valuation class for your account assignment.
In the Accounts Are Determined Based On section of the screen, specify the basis on which you want 
your material valuation accounts to be determined. You do this by setting the posting rules for the Valuation 
modification, Valuation class, and G/L accounts. Select the Valuation Modif and Valuation Class checkboxes. 
Click Save 
 at the top of the screen for the system to accept your valuation class specification. The 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed (Figure 13-4). This is 
where you specify the settings for automatic postings of MM transactions to FI.
Update the following fields:
Valuation Modification: Enter 0001 in this field for each material (Raw Material, 
Semi-Finished Products, and Finished Products). This determines accounts 
posted based on the valuation area or plant (if your valuation area is based on 
plants). A plant is an organizational unit that distinguishes activities based on 
business operations. For example, production units.
Valuation Class: Select the appropriate valuation class from the ones supplied 
by SAP by clicking the Search button. In this instance, select the Validation Class 
for Raw Material 3000, Semi-Finished Products 7900, and Finished Products 
7920.
Account: Enter the G/L Account for Raw Material 300000, Semi-Finished 
Products 790000, and Finished Products 792000 in the Account field.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your efforts.
Figure 13-4.  Maintaining the automatic posting of inventory
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
194
In the double entry example earlier in Figure 13-3, you had two accounts: Inventory and GR/IR. 
Since you have created an inventory account using the BSX transaction key, the next step is to create a 
corresponding credit account for the GR/IR clearing account. To do this, you should use the GR/IR clearing 
account WRX transaction key from the list of procedures on the Configuration Accounting Maintain: 
Automatic Posts - Procedures screen (see Figure 13-4).
Click the Back 
 button on the top of the screen to return to the previous screen (Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Procedures). Search for GR/IR clearing account WRX from the 
Procedures list by clicking the scroll 
 buttons. Click the Details 
 button at the top of the screen to go to 
the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen, where you will assign an 
account to the GR/IR clearing account. Notice that the system will automatically use your chart of accounts 
CA90 and the transaction code WRX GR/IR clearing account (Figure 13-5).
Enter the GR/IR clearing account G/L account 191100 in the Account field and save 
 your account 
assignment.
In an automatic posting procedure, there are several transactions and transaction keys that are 
not covered in this book that you may want to explore on your own. The following transaction keys are 
important:
• 
GBB: Offsetting entry for inventory posting
• 
PRD: Cost (price) differences
• 
KON: Consignment payables
Figure 13-5.  Maintaining the automatic posting for the GR/IR clearing account
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
195
In this activity you will only be looking at the offsetting entry for inventory posting (GBB), which is a 
predefined transaction code. Basically, the procedure for assigning a transaction key is the same. GBB has 
several account groupings that you can choose from based on the relevant movement types. The following 
list contains the accounting groupings for materials or goods movement types in GBB:
• 
AUF – Goods receipt for production orders with account assignment
• 
BSA – Initial entries of stock balances
• 
INV – Expenses/revenue for inventory differences
• 
VAX – Goods issues for sales orders without account assignment
• 
VAY – Goods issues for sales orders with account assignment
• 
VBO – Consumption for stock of material provided to vendor
• 
VBR – Internal goods issues to production/cost center
• 
VKA – Consumptions for sales order SD
• 
VNG – Scrapping/destruction
• 
VQP – Sampling
• 
ZOB – Goods receipt without purchase orders
• 
ZOP – Goods receipt without production orders
In this activity, you will only be updating general modification VBR (a predefined transaction key 
supplied by SAP for internal inventory posting to G/L accounts) with the Material Consumption account. 
After you configure the GBB-offsetting entry for inventory posting, the system will automatically post 
materials or goods issued to production or cost center to offsetting accounts in FI by debiting the Material 
Consumption account and crediting the Inventory account for materials.
Let’s configure the offsetting entry for inventory GBB now. Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Integration ➤ Material 
Management ➤ Define Accounts for Material Management. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: 
Automatic Posts - Procedures screen is displayed. Click the scroll 
 buttons to find the Offsetting entry for 
Inventory GBB in the procedure list. Select it and click the Details 
 button at the top of the screen. The 
Enter Chart of Accounts dialog pops up. Enter your chart of accounts CA90 into the Chart of Accounts field.
Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the pop-up screen to confirm your entry. You will be 
presented with the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen (Figure 13-6).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
196
In the Accounts Are Determined Based On section, check the following checkboxes:
• 
Debit/Credit
• 
General Modification
• 
Valuation Modification
• 
Valuation Class
These items are then made available for input on the next screen. Click Save 
. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen appears (Figure 13-7). Update the screen using the 
information in Table 13-1.
Table 13-1.  Information Needed to Customize the Automatic Offsetting Entry for Inventory Posting
Field
Value
Description
Valuation 
Modif.
0001
Determines accounts posted based on valuation area or plant  
(if your valuation area is based on plants).
General 
Modification
VBR
Transaction type used to differentiate account determination.  
VBR represents internal goods issues to production/cost center.
Valuation Class
3000
An important key that determines the G/L account material 
that should be posted to at different stages.
Debit
400000
G/L account debit items are posted.
Credit
400000
G/L account credit items are posted.
Figure 13-6.  Maintaining the posting rules for automatic posting
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
197
Click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your efforts.
The next step is to integrate FI to Sales & Distribution (SD) to allow the system to automatically post 
transactions in SD to FI.
Sales & Distribution (SD)
Sales & Distribution (SD) is part of the SAP module and handles business processes from the sales order to 
the delivery. This module manages customer sales orders, shipping, billing of products, services, and risk 
management, and more. Billing is a part of the SD function, and all billing transactions that take place in the 
SD module also form part of the FI transactions, which result in postings in the FI - general ledger.
This section uses the double entry principle to illustrate how an SD billing transaction is recorded in 
accounting. Assume that a bill is raised in SD for £200K. This will look like the double entry accounting 
transaction in Figure 13-8.
The next section explains the customizing steps involved in integrating FI G/L accounts to SD in SAP ERP.
Figure 13-7.  Maintaining automatic posting for the offsetting entry for inventory posting
Customer
200K
200K
A
B
Revenue Account
Figure 13-8.  Accounting double entry when an SD document is posted to FI
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
198
Prepare Revenue Account Determination
Account determination is an important integration process in SAP ERP. It enables the system to post 
transactions in SD (sales, sales deductions, and freights) to appropriate G/L accounts in FI via account keys 
(Figure 13-9).
SAP comes with standard account keys that you can use to integrate FI and SD. The following list 
contains the available account keys that you can use when customizing:
• 
ERB – Rebate Sales
• 
ERL – Sales Revenue
• 
ERS – Sales Deductions
• 
ERU – Rebate Accruals
• 
EVV – Cash Clearing
When integrating G/L accounts in FI to SD, you first need to specify the items in Table 13-2.
SD-DB
Sales (prices, sales discounts and freights) in SD are posted automatically via
Account Keys to G/L Account in FI.
Account Keys
ERB: Rebate Sales
FI
G/L Account 1
G/L Account 2
G/L Account 3
FI-DB
ERS: Sales Deductions
ERL: Sales Revenue
Sales & Distribution
(SD)
Sales
Figure 13-9.  How SD transactions are posted to FI
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
199
When assigning G/L accounts to SD, you must also determine the sequence to use. In SAP you have five 
access sequences:
• 
Cust. Grp/Material Grp/Acct Key
• 
Cust. Grp/ Acct Key
• 
Material Grp/Acct Key
• 
General
• 
Account Key
Access sequences allow you to specify different G/L accounts for different sales organizations. 
Based on your settings, the system will go through your settings to determine if a G/L account is assigned 
to an account key. The system will check the first item in the access sequence, for example, the Cust.
GrpMaterialGrpAccKey. If a G/L account is assigned, the system will use the G/L account for revenue 
posting. If a G/L account is not assigned, the system will go to the next item in the sequence and so on, until 
the system finds an account key that a G/L account is assigned to. It will use it for posting SD transactions to 
G/L accounts in FI.
■
■Note  You should determine the access sequence that you want to maintain for your G/L account.
Let’s integrate G/L accounts in FI to SD now. This activity illustrates the steps involved in configuring 
revenue account determination.
Table 13-2.  Items Needing Specification When Integrating SD to G/L Accounts in FI
Field
Description
Application
This is where you specify the key for the Sales & Distribution application. The 
standard application key for SD is V. You can access this key using the matchcode 
next to the application field.
Condition Type for 
Account Determination
SAP comes with standard condition types KOFI and KOFK. If your company 
code is making SD (Sales & Distribution) transactions posting to FI and not to 
(CO) controlling, use condition type KOFI for the account determination. On the 
other hand, if you want the system to post SD transactions to FI and CO, you use 
condition type KOFK.
Chart of Accounts
Here you specify the chart of accounts for your G/L account structure. In this 
activity, the chart of accounts key is CA90.
Sales Organization
Here you specify the sales organization you want to apply to your account 
determination. For example, sales organization 0001, 0002, and so on. Sales 
organizations are distinguished with an identification number in SAP ERP.
Account Key
The account key you specify here will determine the appropriate G/L account 
transactions relating to sales that are posted. For example, ERL for Sales 
Revenue, ERS for Sales Deduction, and so on.
G/L Account
The G/L account in FI that transactions from SD are posted to for accounting 
purposes.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
200
Problem: Using an account key (Acct Key), assign a G/L account to the Sales Revenue 
(ERL) and Sales Deductions (ERS) modules.
You can access the menu path for revenue account determination either in FI or SD:
• 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic 
Processing ➤ Integration ➤ Sales & Distribution ➤ Prepare Revenue Account 
Determination
• 
IMG: Sales & Distribution ➤ Basic Functions ➤ Account Assignment/Costing ➤ 
Revenue Account Determination ➤ Assign G/L Accounts
The Assign G/L Accounts screen is displayed. It contains a list of five access sequences to choose from. 
Choose Account Key (this is the last item on the list) and then click Details 
 at the top of the screen to go to 
the Change View Acct Key Overview screen. This is the initial screen where you will prepare revenue account 
determination for the integration of G/L accounts in FI to SD. Click the 
 button on the top-left side 
of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview screen (Figure 13-10).
Update the following fields:
Application: Enter application key V. This is the standard key for SD.
CndTy.: Enter condition type KOFI. This condition type is used for account 
determination without posting CO (controlling). If you want to be able to post to 
FI and CO, use the condition type KOFK.
ChAc: Enter the chart of accounts you defined in Chapter 2. This will allow you to 
use the G/L accounts in your chart of accounts.
SOrg: Enter sales organization 0001. We used 0001 for illustration purposes.
ActKy: Enter account key ERL (sales revenue) and ERS (sales deductions).  
The account key will allow the system to distinguish between transactions.
Figure 13-10.  Assigning G/L accounts to an account key
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 13 ■ Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules 
201
G/L Account: Enter the G/L account you want sales revenue to be posted in the 
G/L account in FI. This activity uses 800000 as the G/L account for illustration 
purposes.
Provision Acc.: Enter the G/L account you want to post sales deductions to in 
this field.
Click the Enter button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your work to complete your 
configuration.
Summary
This chapter explained the processes involved in integrating FI with other modules in SAP ERP. It briefly 
discussed material movements that take place in the Material Management (MM) module that need to 
be posted to FI. This included material issues and receipts. It went on to explore the steps involved in 
customizing the integration of MM with FI. In customizing MM, we defined the Valuation class for Raw 
Material, Semi-Finished Products, and Finished Products using the standard valuation keys supplied by 
SAP and assigning them to appropriate G/L accounts. You also looked at the relationship between Sales 
& Distribution (SD) and FI. You learned about this through a flow diagram, which explained the concepts 
involved in configuring SD with FI.
Finally, you also learned how to customize SD in order for the system to determine the appropriate 
G/L accounts that SD transactions are posted to. In doing so, you specified various condition types and 
assigned them to G/L accounts. This is necessary so that the system can determine the G/L accounts that SD 
transactions are posted to.
The next chapter explains how to customize the Accounts Payable (AP) and Accounts Receivable 
(AR) modules. It explains how to create number ranges for customers/vendors and covers the problems 
associated with creating number ranges. It defines account groups with screen layouts, explains the use of 
payment terms and various installment plans, and covers how to configure manual and automatic outgoing 
payments in SAP ERP. It also looks at how to define adjustment accounts for receivables and payables by 
maturity, and adjustment posting/reversal of documents using negative postings methods.
www.it-ebooks.info

203
Chapter 14
Defining FI Accounts Receivable 
and Accounts Payable
This chapter explains what accounts receivable and accounts payable are, and also looks at the steps 
involved in customizing accounts receivable and accounts payable.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Understand what accounts payable/receivable is
• 
Describe an account group and understand its importance
• 
Maintain the Field Status group for general data about customer account groups
• 
Define account groups with screen layout
• 
Define payment terms in SAP
• 
Maintain terms of payment for an installment plan
• 
Define document types for enjoy transactions
• 
Maintain settings for manual outgoing payments
• 
Define automatic outgoing payments
• 
Maintain tolerance groups for employees, customers/vendors, and G/L accounts
• 
Define sort methods and adjustment accounts for regrouping receivables/payables
• 
Specify adjustment accounts for receivables/payables by maturity
• 
Define adjustment posting/reversal using negative posting methods
• 
Understand reasons for reversal
Accounts Payable and Accounts Receivable
Accounts Payable and Accounts Receivable simply represent Customer and Vendor Accounts, respectively. 
A customer is usually referred to as a debtor and a vendor is called a creditor. A customer is a business 
partner from whom receivables are due. These business partners owe you money for goods delivered or 
services rendered. A customer falls under the category of sales. In SAP ERP, a customer must have a master 
record. A customer master record contains information about a customer account held in the database 
that’s applied to accounting transactions in the system. A vendor is a business partner to whom payables are 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
204
due. You owe money to vendors for goods and services received. Like a customer, a vendor falls under the 
category of purchases and has a master record in the SAP system. Likewise, a vendor master record contains 
information about a vendor account held in the database, which is applied to the accounting transactions.
Configuring accounts receivable and accounts payable entails several steps and can be confusing 
if you’re not careful. We will be going through these steps systematically. First, we will take you through 
configuring accounts receivable, and then you will learn how to configure accounts payable.
■
■Note  There is no rule as to which account to configure first. Our decision to start with account receivables 
is purely a matter of choice.
What Is a Customer Account Group?
Customer account groups allow you to classify customers into business partner functions that best fit the 
nature of the business transaction. Customer account groups control the customer hierarchy containing the 
customer master record. When a customer account is created, it is assigned to an account group. Normally, 
an account group serves as a control mechanism that determines the relevant screens and fields to be 
displayed for input during document entry. This is based on the individual customer’s business functions 
and is maintained in the implementation guide (IMG).
The account group determines the fields displayed for input. You determine whether a field is 
Required, Optional, or Displayed. When you specify that a field is required for input, the system will make 
it compulsory to enter data into the field during document entry. For example, you can specify that the 
customer number, name, and bank data must not be omitted during document entry. Mark information that 
is not compulsory but may be needed as optional, and if you don’t want certain information to be entered 
during document entry but you want to display the field, mark those fields as displayed or suppressed. You 
can also hide the fields that you do not want to show by specifying their field status in the general data area.
Another benefit of customer account groups is that they assign a number range systematically for the 
customer/vendor based on the business partner function. You will look at number range in depth later in 
this chapter.
SAP provides a list of predefined account groups you can choose from instead of creating your own 
account groups. The following list includes some of these important account group numbers and names:
• 
0001 – Sold to party
• 
0002 – Ship to party
• 
0003 – Payer
• 
0004 – Bill to third party
It’s best to use the standard account groups supplied by SAP instead of creating your own account 
group. You should create an account group only if your company wants you to, in order to meet specific 
requirements. This exercise teaches you how to create your own account groups from scratch.
■
■Note  You can also define the screen layout for an account group per company code and per activity.  
We don’t cover this process, as it’s beyond the scope of this chapter. We believe that the standard setting 
supplied by SAP is sufficient.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
205
Define Account Groups with Screen Layout (Customer)
Problem: Company C900 Plc classifies customer account groups into three partner 
business functions:
• 
Domestic customer
• 
Foreign customer
• 
One-time customer
Your task is to maintain an account group that will reflect these partners’ functions.
In this exercise you will define an account group with the appropriate partner business functions and 
maintain the field status group for its general data. To customize the account groups for your customer 
based on partner business functions, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts 
Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Customer Accounts ➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating 
Customer Master Data ➤ Define Accounts Groups with Screen Layout (Customers). Or you can use 
transaction code OBD2. The Change View Customer Account Groups Overview screen is displayed. This is 
where you define the account groups for your customers. To specify your account group, click the 
 
button on the top-left side of the screen (Figure 14-1). You can create as many account groups as you need, 
such as Foreign Customer, Domestic Customer, One-Time Customer, and so on.
Figure 14-1.  Initial screen for account groups with screen layout (customer)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
206
The customer account group screen is divided into two sections: 
General Data: Contains the account group name field, where you name your 
customer account group and the area where you specify if the account group is 
for a one-time customer.
Field Status: Contains general, company code, and sales data. You can specify 
the field input status for each of these items (whether you want a field to be 
suppressed, required, or optional) during document entry.
■
■Tip  If you are creating a one-time customer account group, remember to select the One-Time Account 
checkbox in the General Data section of the Account Group Entries screen.
Update the following fields:
Account Group: Enter four characters for the account group key. This key will 
serve as your account group identifier.
Name: Enter a short description that best describes your account group. For 
example, Domestic Customer, Foreign Customer, One-Time Customer, and so on.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and then save 
 
your account group. 
■
■Note  There is no specific standard for the name you use as your account group. We advise you to use an 
account name based on how your company classifies its customer-to-business partner functions. The Domestic 
Customer Account group that we used in this exercise is for illustration purposes only and is not a standard.
Before continuing with this exercise, create two more customer account groups called Foreign 
Customer and One-Time Customer.
Next, you learn how to maintain the field status group for your customer account group. The 
specification you make here determines the field input status for General Data, Company Code Data, and 
Sales Data.
Maintain the Field Status Group for the General Data of the  
Customer Account Group
First you will learn how to maintain the field status group for general data. From the Field Status section 
of the screen in Figure 14-1, double-click General Data from the list. The Maintain Field Status Group: 
Overview screen is displayed; it contains a list of items for general data (e.g. Address, Communication, and 
so on) that you can select from. To go to the screen where you will specify how the Address fields appear 
during document entry, select Address from the Select Group list and click the Details 
 button on the  
top-left side of the screen.
The Maintain Field Status Group: Address screen is displayed (Figure 14-2). This is where you maintain 
the Field Status for Address. The specifications you input here determine whether a given field is suppressed, 
required, or optional. Base your settings on your client’s requirements. In this exercise, we set the address 
fields to optional, because we consider the address field less important than items like reconciliation 
account and sort key.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
207
Set all items in the address field to optional (make sure that all the Optional Entry radio buttons are 
clicked) and then save 
 your settings. 
Problem: To ensure that users enter important information during document entry, 
the accounting team has asked you to make the Reconciliation Account and Sort Key 
compulsory input fields.
You modify the Reconciliation Account and Sort Key fields from the Company Code Data in the Field 
Status section of the Change View “Customer Account Group”: Details screen (see Figure 14-1). To carry out 
your specifications, double-click Company Code in the Field Status section of the screen. The Maintain Field 
Status Group: Overview screen comes up. This is where you maintain the field status for your input field. 
Select Account Management from the Select Group list and then click the Choose 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen or press F2 on your keyboard to go to the next screen, which is called Maintain Field Status 
Group: Account Management (Figure 14-3). From this screen, you specify the settings for the Reconciliation 
Account and Sort Key. Set the Reconciliation and Sort Key fields to required and all the other items on the 
screen to optional. This means that during the data-entry process, the system will require a Reconciliation 
Account and Sort Key be entered. 
Figure 14-2.  The Maintain Field Status Group – Address screen
Figure 14-3.  The Maintain Field Status Group – Account Management screen
■
■Tip  Do not save your work yet, because you next learn how to use the Next Page button. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
208
Problem: The accounting team wants the Terms of Payment field to also be compulsory.
You specify the Payment Terms field from Payment Transactions within Account Management 
in the Select Group section of the Maintain Field Status Group: Overview screen. To go to the Account 
Management screen, click the Next Group 
 button at the top of the screen or press Shift+F6 on your 
keyboard. You’ll go to the next group, called Payment Transactions. The Maintain Field Status Group: 
Payment Transactions screen is displayed. In Payment Transactions, make Terms of Payment a required 
entry by clicking the Req.Entry radio button. Save 
 your customer account group. 
Before moving on, define two more account groups for your Foreign Customer and One-Time Customer 
groups.
Enter Accounting Clerk Identification Code for Customers
You need to define the name of the accounting clerks and set their identification codes in this exercise. 
The ID you define will be entered in the customer master record, which the accounting clerk is responsible 
for. The system will automatically print the name of the accounting clerk on all correspondence. This code 
can also be used to sort dunning and payment proposal lists. Follow this menu path to go to the initial 
screen to define your accounting clerk identification code for customers: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Customer Accounts ➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for 
Creating Customer Master Data ➤ Enter Accounting Clerk Identification Code for Customer. The Change 
View “Accounting Clerks” Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen to go where you will define your accounting clerk’s name and ID (Figure 14-4).
Figure 14-4.  Initial screen for setting an accounting clerk identification code for a customer
Update the following fields:
CoCd: Enter your four-digit company code. This will allow you to assign an 
accounting clerk name and identification code to your company code.
Clerk: These two characters will serve as your accounting clerk identification 
code in this field, based on company code. This code appears in the customer 
master records for which the clerk is responsible.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
209
Name of Accounting Clerk: Enter the name of your accounting clerk. This is the 
name of your accounting clerk assigned to supervise your customer.
Office User: Enter the official position of your accounting clerk assigned to 
supervise your customer in this field. For example, Account Assistant.
After you have updated the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen, click the Enter 
 button to 
confirm your entries and save 
 your work.
The next step is to create number ranges that you will assign to customer account groups. The system 
can assign a number from a number range to a customer account internally or can allow you to assign a 
number to a customer account externally, based on your specifications. 
Create Number Ranges for Customer Account Groups
We covered number ranges in Chapter 3 in depth, so we will only be looking at how to customize the steps 
involved in creating number ranges for customer accounts in this exercise. Number ranges for customer 
accounts are created using a two-character key. When creating number ranges, you must determine the 
following:
• 
Which number range intervals the system will use to assign numbers to customer 
accounts
• 
Whether numbers are assigned to customer accounts by the system internally or by 
the user externally during customer account creation
The system will automatically carry out internal number assignment based on the number ranges you 
assigned to the customer account groups. If you want the users to externally assign numbers to customer 
accounts, you must click the External Number Range checkbox.
■
■Note  If the number range intervals you enter already exist (i.e., they have already been used), you may not 
be able to continue. The system will notify you via the status bar at the bottom of the screen that this interval is 
already available. This is the complex part of number range configuration. What you have to do in this instance 
is display the current number range intervals in order to identify the number range intervals that have not been 
used. Alternatively, you can try several number range intervals randomly until you find an interval that hasn’t 
been used.
To go to the Customer Number Ranges screen where you can create number ranges for your customer 
accounts you created earlier, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable 
and Accounts Payable ➤ Customer Accounts ➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Customer Master 
Data ➤ Create Number Ranges for Customer Accounts. Or you can use transaction code XDN1. 
The displayed Customer Number Ranges screen contains three buttons. Click the 
 button 
below the company code field. This will display the Maintain Number Range Interval screen, where you can 
maintain your customer number ranges.
■
■Note  The Intervals 
 and Status 
 buttons allow you to check existing number 
ranges and determine the current number intervals of existing number ranges.
For more detailed information on creating number ranges, refer to Chapter 3.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
210
On the Maintain Number Range Intervals screen, click the 
 button on the top-left side. The 
Insert Interval screen pops up (Figure 14-5). This is where you maintain the number range intervals for your 
customer account groups.
Figure 14-5.  The screen where you define number ranges for your customer accounts
Enter the number range intervals you are using for your customer accounts in the New Interval section 
of the screen. Then click the Insert 
 button on the bottom-right side of the Insert Interval screen and insert 
your number ranges in the Existing Number Ranges section.
■
■Tip  If you are having problems maintaining your number range intervals because of number range overlap, 
skip this section and go to the next section, entitled “Assign Number Ranges to Customer Account Groups.” 
There, you can assign any existing number range to your customer account groups. This action will allow you to 
carry on with your configuration.
Save 
 your number range intervals.
The Transport number range interval screen pops up with a message. Ignore the message and click the 
Insert 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen to confirm your number range intervals. 
Using the following data, create another number range:
No: Enter a number such as 02. It defines your number range sequence in this 
field.
From Number: Enter a number such as 02000000000. It starts the number range 
in this field.
To Number: Enter a number such as 02999999999. This ends the number range 
defined in this field. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
211
■
■Note  You can create as many number range intervals as desired. The number range interval you define 
depends on your company’s requirements.
Next, you’ll assign the number ranges you just created to your customer account group.
Assign Number Ranges to Customer Account Groups
The system will automatically use the number range interval you assign to the customer account group 
when you create a customer account. It does so systematically by selecting the next available number from 
the number range. To assign number ranges to a customer account group, follow this menu path: IMG 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Customer Accounts ➤ Master 
Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Customer Master Data ➤ Assign Number Ranges to Customer Account 
Groups. Or use transaction code OBAR.
The Change View “Assign Customer Acct Groups >> Number Range:” Overview screen is displayed. 
Search for the customer account group for your foreign customer by using the Scroll  button on the right 
side of the screen or by clicking the 
 button at the bottom of the screen.
Assign a number range—in this case, 01—to the foreign customer account group (Figure 14-6). Also 
assign number ranges to the domestic customer account group and the one-time customer account group, 
such as 02 and 03, respectively.
Figure 14-6.  Assigning number range intervals to customer account groups
After assigning number ranges to your customer account groups, save 
 your number range assignment.
You have completed customizing your customer accounts. Let’s now proceed to customizing vendor 
accounts. Customizing vendor accounts is similar to customizing customer accounts. 
What Is a Vendor Account Group?
The vendor account group, like the customer account group, allows you to classify vendors within a partner 
business function that best fits the nature of business transaction involved. Business partners from other 
countries are classified under the foreign vendor account group; the vendors within your company’s country 
are classified as domestic vendors; and vendors that may likely not repeat business with you in the future 
are classified as one-time vendors. The vendor account groups control the vendor hierarchy containing 
the vendor master record. When a vendor account is created, you must assign it to an account group. The 
account group is a control mechanism that determines which screens and fields are displayed for input. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
212
This is based on the individual vendor’s business functions. The account group is maintained in the IMG. 
The IMG details the steps required for implementing the SAP system and supports you in controlling and 
documenting the implementation in SAP.
Two important purposes of the vendor account group include:
• 
It controls whether the input fields in the vendor master record are required, 
optional, displayed, and so on.
• 
It also controls the number range assignment when you create vendor accounts.
SAP comes with a predefined account group with a screen layout so you don’t have to create your 
own vendor account groups. We advise that you stick to the standard account group unless your specific 
company needs dictate the use of special vendor account groups. The next sections explain how to create 
your own vendor account groups with screen layout.
■
■Note  As with the customer account groups, you can also define a screen layout for each vendor account 
group per company code (vendor) or per activity (vendor).
Next, you will define vendor account groups with screen layout for domestic, foreign, and one-time vendors.
Define Account Groups with Screen Layout (Vendors) 
Problem: Company C900 Plc classifies its vendor account groups into three categories:
• 
Domestic vendor
• 
Foreign vendor
• 
One-time vendor
You are asked to maintain an account group that will reflect these classifications.
In this exercise, you will define account groups with screen layout (vendors) for domestic vendors. 
We advise that you define the foreign and one-time vendor account groups on your own, as the steps are 
pretty much the same. To customize vendor account groups with screen layout, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Vendor Accounts ➤ 
Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Vendor Master Data ➤ Define Account Groups with Screen Layout 
(Vendors). The Change View Vendor Account Groups Overview screen is displayed. Click the New Entries 
button to create your vendor account group. You can create as many account groups as required.
Update the following fields in Figure 14-7:
Account Group: Enter four characters, such as DV10 (domestic vendors), for 
your vendor account group. The account group used here is for illustration 
purposes. We advise that you apply the standard used by your company in 
classifying its account groups.
Name: Enter the name of your vendor account group in this field, in the General 
Data section. For example, Domestic Vendor C900.
Field Status: This section contains the general data, company code data, and 
sales data. You can specify the field input status for each of these items—whether 
you want a field to be suppressed, required, or optional during document entry.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
213
■
■Tip  If you are creating a one-time customer group, remember to click the One-Time Account checkbox in 
the General Data Section of the Account Group screen. 
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm the entries you have made and save 
 your work.
As part of this exercise and using your discretion following the previous steps, create customer account 
groups for foreign and one-time vendors.
The next step is to maintain the field status group for your vendor account group. This setting will 
determine the field input status for general data, company code data, and purchasing data. 
Maintain the Field Status Group for General Data for the  
Vendor Account Group
To specify the field status group, double-click General Data in the Field Status section of the New Entries: 
Details of Added Entries screen (see Figure 14-7). This will display the Sub-Group list for General Data. 
Select the item you want to define the field status for from the Select Group list (address, communication, 
and so on). Select Address from the Select Group list and click the Choose 
 button on the top-left side of 
the screen. The Maintain Field Status Group: Address screen is displayed. This is where you maintain the 
field status for the address. These settings determine whether a given field should be suppressed, required, 
or optional, and should be based on your client’s requirements. For this exercise, set the Address fields to 
optional, as they are of minor importance.
■
■Tip  Make sure all the items in the Address field are set to optional.
Figure 14-7.  Initial screen for account groups with screen layout (vendor)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
214
Save 
 your settings.
Problem: To ensure that this important information is entered, you have been asked to set 
the Reconciliation Account field and Sort Key to required during document posting.
You modify the Reconciliation Account and Sort key from the Company Code Data in the Field Status 
section of the Change View “Vendor Account Group”: Details screen. To specify the field status groups for 
the company code data, double-click General data. The Maintain Field Status Group: Overview screen is 
displayed. To perform your specifications, choose Account Management from the Select Group and then 
click the Choose 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or press F2 on your keyboard. The Maintain 
Field Status Group: Account Management screen appears. Set Reconciliation and Sort Key to required and 
set the other less important items to optional.
■
■Tip  Do not save your work yet. 
Problem: The accounting team wants the Terms of Payment field to be required during 
document entry as well.
You can specify payment terms in the Payment Transactions area of the 
Maintain Field Status Group: Overview screen. To go to the next group below 
Account Management, click the Next Group 
 button on the top of the screen 
or press Shift+F6 on your keyboard. The Maintain Field Status Group: Payment 
Transactions screen is displayed. Under Payment Transactions, make the terms 
of payment a required entry by clicking the Req.Entry radio button. Save 
 your 
vendor account group. 
Repeat this process to specify the field status for your foreign vendor account group.
Next, you will enter the accounting clerk name under an identification key for the accounting clerk 
responsible for the vendor.
Enter a Accounting Clerk Identification Code for Your Vendors
The accounting clerk’s name and Identification code (ID) can be entered in the vendor/master record, which 
determines what the clerk is responsible for. The system will automatically print the name of the accounting 
clerk on all correspondence and this code can also be used to sort dunning and payment proposal lists. 
Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable 
➤ Vendor Accounts ➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Vendor Master Data ➤ Define Accounting 
Clerks. The Change View “Accounting Clerks” Overview screen, which is the initial screen for maintaining 
accounting clerks for vendors, is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go 
to the actual screen (Figure 14-8) where you will customize the accounting clerk’s ID.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
215
Update the following fields:
CoCd: Enter the four-character company code. This will allow you to assign the 
accounting clerk’s name and identification code to your company code.
Clerk: Enter two characters. This becomes the accounting clerk’s identification 
code.
Name of Accounting Clerk: Enter the name of the accounting clerk assigned to 
supervise this vendor.
Office User: Enter the official position of the accounting clerk in this field. For 
example, Account Assistant.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
.
To complete this process, it is important to create number ranges and assign them to vendor account 
groups. These number range intervals will be assigned systematically to vendors when you create new 
vendor accounts. 
Create Number Ranges for Vendor Accounts
Vendor account number ranges are created with two-digit keys. It’s important that you specify the following 
when creating number ranges for vendor accounts:
• 
The number intervals that will be used as the account number for your vendor 
accounts
• 
Whether the number assignment is internal or external
When you create a vendor account, the system will automatically assign a number to a vendor account 
from the number ranges you assigned to the customer’s account group. If you want users to assign numbers 
to vendor accounts, select the External Number Range checkbox.
Figure 14-8.  Accounting clerk identification code for vendors
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
216
■
■Note  The SAP system does not allow number intervals to overlap. If your number interval does overlap, 
the system will issue a warning that the interval is already available. Find another number range that does not 
overlap.
It is also possible to choose from existing number range intervals instead of creating your own.
To create a number ranges for the domestic and foreign vendor account groups that you created earlier, 
following this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (new) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable 
➤ Vendor Accounts ➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Vendor Master Data ➤ Create Number 
Ranges for Vendor Accounts. Or use transaction code XKN1.
The Vendor Number Ranges screen is displayed and contains three buttons. The first button creates 
new number ranges, the second button displays existing number ranges, and the third button displays your 
number range status. To create number ranges, click the 
 button on the screen. This will take 
you to the Maintain Number Range Intervals screen. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The 
Insert Interval screen pops up. This is where you create the number ranges for your vendor account groups. 
Using the following information, specify your vendor account group number range intervals.
Using the following data, create another number range:
No: Enter a number, such as 03, that defines your number range sequence.
From Number: Enter a number, such as 03000000000, that you want to use to 
start a number range.
To Number: Enter the number, such as 03999999999, that you want to end the 
number range you have defined.
After specifying your number ranges, click the Insert 
 button on the bottom-right side of the Insert 
Interval screen. This will move your number range to the Existing Number Range section onscreen. 
■
■Tip  If you are having problems specifying your number range intervals because of overlap issues, skip 
this section and go to the next section, entitled “Assign Number Ranges to Vendor Account Groups,” to assign 
an existing number range to your vendor account groups. This action will allow you to carry on with your 
configuration.
Save 
 your number range intervals. The Transport Number Range Intervals screen pops up with a 
message. Ignore the message and click the Insert 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen to confirm 
your number range intervals.
As part of this exercise, repeat the steps in the section entitled “Create Number Ranges for Vendor 
Accounts” to create another number range interval using the following information:
No: Enter a number, such as 04, that defines your number range sequence.
From Number: Enter a number, such as 04000000000, that you want to use to 
start a number range. 
To Number: Enter a number, such as 04999999999, that you want to end the 
number range you defined. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
217
■
■Note  You can create as many number range intervals as desired. The amount of number ranges you define 
depends on your company’s requirements. 
Assign Number Ranges to Vendor Account Groups
To complete the vendor account groups’ setup, you have to assign number ranges to them. Follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Vendor Accounts 
➤ Master Data ➤ Preparations for Creating Vendor Master Data ➤ Assign Number Ranges to Vendor 
Account Groups. Or use transaction code OBAS. The Change View Assign Vendor Account Groups – Number 
Range Overview screen, containing a list of existing number ranges, is displayed. Search for the vendor 
account group called dv10-domestic vendor by using the Scroll button or by clicking the 
 button 
at the bottom of the screen. Assign the number range 03 to the domestic vendor account group account.
Likewise, search for your foreign vendor account group and assign the number range 04 to the foreign 
vendor account group. Save 
 your number range assignments.
Terms of Payment 
It is a normal business practice for business partners to enter into some form of payment agreement that 
governs their business relationship regarding invoice payment and cash discounts awards. This type of 
agreement is referred to as the terms of payment. Terms of payment refer to conditions with business 
partners for goods sold or services offered in relation to how payments are made. The terms of payment 
define invoice due dates and cash discounts offered within a specified period. For example, your company 
might agree to offer a discount of 5% to business partners A and B if they pay an outstanding invoiced 
amount within five days, a 2% discount when paid within 10 days, and so on, as depicted in Figure 14-9.
Business
Partner A
Business
Partner B
Agreed-Upon
Trade Terms
Discount
Awarded
Business partners agree to payment terms on invoice payment.
If agreed-upon conditions are fulfilled, a discount is awarded
Figure 14-9.  Terms of payment flow.
The terms of payment you define during configuration are assigned to the business partner’s master 
record. When you assign the terms of payment key (this is a freely definable four-character field that holds 
the terms of payment that the system uses to calculate discounts) to a business partner’s master record, the 
system will automatically default to the terms of payment during document entry. Otherwise, the user has to 
enter the terms of payment key manually when entering the document in the system. SAP also comes with a 
pre-defined standard terms of payment. You can perform the following specifications:
Payment Terms: This is a four-digit character key that determines how a 
discount is granted. Payment terms are expressed as a percentage rate that 
determines the cash discount granted or received. Payment terms are defined for 
both customers and vendors and they become valid during document entry. We 
recommend that you define separate payment terms for customers and vendors 
because changes in customer payment terms may not apply to vendors.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
218
Day Limit: The day limit is optional and is used to specify the date by which 
terms of payment are valid. It defines the terms of payment that are date 
dependent. One term of payment key can have two terms of payment, but with 
different day limits. This allows you to specify a given day of the month to which 
you may want the payment terms to apply.
Account Type: Determines whether payment terms relate to customers or 
vendors and posts business transactions to appropriate accounts in the system.
Baseline Date: The date to which the terms of payment apply. This is the date 
the system uses to determine the invoice due date. If you want the system to 
default to a baseline date for payment, you should specify the date to be used.
If you want the system to default to a baseline date during document entry, set the appropriate option 
from a choice of three default dates:
• 
Document date
• 
Document posting date
• 
Document entry date
If you do not want the system to default to a baseline date, but rather want to enter a date manually 
during document entry, use the No Default option.
The Payment Terms section of the screen is where you set the actual payment 
terms and conditions for your payment terms key. This includes installment 
payment, percentage rates for your payment terms, and the days they apply to. 
■
■Note  It is advisable to use separate terms of payment for vendors and customers. Changes may occur in 
customer payment terms that aren’t relevant to your payment agreements with vendors.
Maintaining Terms of Payment (Customer)
Problem: Company C900 Plc offers discounts to a customer using the following terms of 
payment:
• 
5% for immediate payment
• 
2% for payment made within 15 days
• 
No discount for payment in 30 days
As an FI consultant, you need to these terms of payment in the system.
To maintain terms of payment for customer, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Invoices/Credit Memos 
➤ Maintain Terms of Payment. Or use the transaction code OBB8. The Change View “Terms of Payment”: 
Overview screen appears. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries: Details of 
Added Entries screen appears, which is where you customize your terms of payment settings (Figure 14-10).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
219
Figure 14-10.  Screen where terms of payment are maintained 
Update the following fields:
Payment Terms: Contains the defined conditions for granting or receiving a 
cash discount. Payment terms are defined by entering four characters in this field 
as your term of payment key. This key will serve as your payment term, which is 
entered in the master record of the customer/vendor.
Day Limit: Specify a given date of the month that you want the payment terms to 
apply, in relation to a corresponding payment.
Own Explanation: Specify your own special description relating to your payment 
terms. The description you specify here will replace the system-generated 
explanation.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
220
Account Type: Specify the account type that your payment term applies to, 
customer or vendor. It is also possible to set your payment term to both account 
types by clicking the checkbox for Customer and Vendor, but it’s better to use one 
account type per payment term.
Default for Baseline Date: Select from a number of options to use as the date 
that’s applicable to the terms payment. The date you select will be used by the 
system to determine permitted cash discount amount or invoice due date. 
Setting choices include:
• 
No Default: You use No default if you do not want the system to default to a 
date during document entry. This means during document entry the user has to 
manually specify the baseline date that is applicable to the terms of payment.
• 
Document Date: This is the date on the document or the date you entered 
during document entry.
• 
Posting Date: This is the date a document is posted or the date you specified as 
the posting date.
• 
Entry Date: This is the date the document is entered into the system.
Payment Terms: This setting enables the system to award a cash discount if an 
invoice amount is paid within the specified date. For example, an immediate 
payment means a 5% discount, within 15 days means a 3% cash discount, and 
within 45 days means net due.
Term: This section allows you to specify up to three payment terms. This 
includes percentage rate and number of days applicable to your payment terms.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your specifications and save 
 
your terms of payment.
Next, you need to define terms of payment for your vendor using the information in Table 14-1.
Table 14-1.  Define Terms of Payment for Vendors
Field Name or Data Type
Values
Payment Terms
V001
Account Type
Vendor
Select
Default to Baseline Date
Posting Date
Select
Payment Terms
Term
Percentage
No. of days
1.
5%
Blank
2.
3%
15
3.
45
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
221
Installment Plan
Another important aspect of payment terms is the installment plan. Business partners sometimes enter 
into some form of agreement that enables them make payment systematically over a specified period. Your 
company might give its customers the opportunity to pay what they owe over several months until the full 
invoice amount is paid. Let’s walk through the steps involved in maintaining an installment plan.
The total invoice amount is divided into partial amounts and paid at different dates until the invoice 
amount is cleared or paid in full. For example, your company agrees with a customer to pay 20% of an 
invoice amount of $400 USD monthly over a five-month period. Thus, the installment plan will allow your 
company to receive $80 USD monthly over the agreed five-month period until the amount is paid in full.
When customizing an installment payment plan, you specify the following items:
• 
Number of installments for your payment terms. This is the number of payments 
needed to pay off the outstanding amount.
• 
The percentage rate that will be applied to clear the outstanding invoice amount  
(the percentage rate specified must be equal to 100%).
• 
Define terms of payments for individual installments for each percentage rate 
applicable to your installment plan.
The system will automatically split the installments once the payment is defined and assign the 
payments to the business partner’s master record. The system will also create a line item for each 
installment.
Problem: You have been asked to create a terms of payment for an installment plan, 
where 10% of the invoice amount is paid immediately, 40% is paid within 60 days, and the 
balance is paid within 90 days.
Maintaining Terms of Payment for an Installment Plan
You maintain the terms of payment for each percentage rate you are using. In this exercise, you will use 10%, 
40%, and 50%. You have to maintain terms of payments for each of these percentage rates. Let’s customize 
the terms of payment for your installment plan, maintain one term of payment to a percentage rate, and then 
apply the same steps to the remaining percentage rates. To maintain terms of payment, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction 
➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Maintain Terms of Payment. Or use transaction code OBB8.
The Change View “Rem of Payment”: Overview screen is displayed. This is an overview screen 
containing the existing terms of payments. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to go to the 
New Entries: Detail of Added Entries screen, which is where you customize your terms of payment settings. 
Update the following fields:
Payment Terms: Enter four characters. This key allows you to store payment 
conditions in your terms of payment and identify your terms of payment when 
you have more than one term of payment in the system. In this exercise, we used 
DO10 ((discount offered-10) as our terms of payment (this is a freely defined key). 
The terms of payment you define here is applicable to all payment terms. We will 
be looking at this in depth in the next exercise when defining payment terms.
Own Explanation: Describe the payment terms for your installment plan. Enter 
this description in this field: 10% Payable immediately, 40% in 60 days & 50%.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
222
Account Type: Specify the account type you want to apply to your payment 
terms. Since you are maintaining payment terms for your customers, click the 
Customer checkbox.
Default to Baseline Date: The date you select here will determine the default 
baseline date. In this exercise, we used the posting date. Click the Posting Date 
checkbox.
Terms: Specify the terms, percentage rates, and number of days for your 
payment terms. For this exercise, leave this section blank.
When you have updated the New Entries: Detail of Added Entries screen, click the Enter 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to confirm your specifications. Then save 
 your payment terms.
The next step is to define payment terms for the percentage rates you are applying to your installment 
plan. We will define payment terms for each of these percentage rates: 10%, 40%, and 50%.
Maintaining Payment Terms for an Installment Plan
You also have to maintain payment terms for each percentage rate in the installment plan quite differently 
from the one you defined for cash discount, because each payment term holds different conditions. First 
let’s set up the percentage rate of 10% for your payment terms for immediate payment and then do the 
remaining percentage rates. To go to the screen where you will define the payment terms for your percentage 
rates, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts 
Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Maintain Terms of Payment. Or use 
transaction code OBB8.
The Change View “Terms of Payment”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you customize your 
payment terms. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen. This will take you to the New Entries: 
Detail of Added Entries screen. Update the following fields:
Payment Terms: Enter a four-digit character that key you want to use as payment 
terms for 10% (percentage rate) in this field. We used P010 in this exercise.
Own Explanation: Enter a short description of your payment terms in this field. 
We used 10% payable immediately for this exercise.
Account Type: Select customer as your account type since this payment terms 
relates to installment plans with customers. Click the Customer checkbox.
Default to Baseline Date: Select the posting date as your baseline date.
Terms: Leave this section blank since 10% payment is due immediately. You do 
not need to set up any payment terms.
When you have updated the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to 
confirm and then save 
 your terms of payment. The system will take you back to the previous screen, 
called Change View “Terms of Payment”: Overview. The next step is to define the payment terms for 40% 
to 60 days. To return to the next screen where you will specify your payment terms, click the Next Entry 
 
button on the top-right side of the screen or press F8 on your keyboard to go to the New Entries: Details of 
Added Entries screen. Update the screen as follows: 
Payment Terms: P040 (payment terms for 40%)
Account Type: Select Customer
Default to Baseline Date: Select Posting Date
Terms: Enter 60 in the No. of Days field
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
223
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm. Then save 
 your terms of 
payment.
Finally, the last step in this exercise, you have to define payment terms of 50% for 90 days. Click the Next 
Entry 
 button on the top-right side of the Change View “Terms of Payment”: Overview screen or press F8 
on your keyboard to go to the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen. Update the appropriate fields on 
the screen with the following information:
Payment Terms: P050 (payment terms for 50%)
Account Type: Select Customer
Default to Baseline Date: Select Posting Date
Terms: Enter 90 in the No. of Days field
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm. Then save 
 your terms of 
payment. 
The final aspect of customizing the installment plan is to specify the terms of payment, the installment 
number, the percentage rate, and the payment terms for the installment payments.
Defining the Payment Terms for Installment Payments
To define the payment terms for installment payments, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit 
Memos ➤ Define Terms of Payment for Installment Payments. Or use transaction code OBB9.
The Change View Terms of Payment for Holdback/Retainage Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries 
screen. This is where you set your terms of payment for installment payments. Using the Search 
 button, 
display the Terms of Payment list. Search for the installment plan and terms of payment you created earlier 
and use them to update the fields in New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 14-11).
Figure 14-11.  Setting up payment terms for installment payments
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
224
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your specifications and save 
 
your terms of payment.
In the next exercise, you will learn how to define a cash discount base for incoming invoices, which will 
determine whether the cash discount base should be calculated as a net or gross value. 
Defining a Cash Discount Base for Incoming Invoices
A cash discount base is calculated either as a net or gross value, depending on your country’s regulations.
The settings you make in this exercise per company code determine whether the taxed amount is 
considered in the base amount calculation. To go to the Change View “Cash Discount Base”: Overview 
screen to define a cash discount base for incoming invoices, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Incoming 
Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Define Cash Discount Base for Incoming Invoices. The Change View “Cash 
Discount Base”: Overview screen is displayed (Figure 14-12). Search for your company code by clicking the 
 button at the bottom of the screen.
Figure 14-12.  Setting the cash discount base for incoming invoices
If your company wants the cash discount base to be calculated from gross, leave the Discount Base Net 
checkbox blank. If you want the cash discount base to be calculated from net (excluding taxes), click the 
Discount Base Net checkbox, as shown in the figure.
Click the Enter button to confirm your settings and then save.
In the next exercise, you will learn about “enjoy” transactions. 
Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos Enjoy Transactions
SAP has eliminated the redundancies of having to enter invoices and credit memos in FI in several screens. 
You now use a single screen that incorporates the enjoy initiative. As a result, it is now possible to make 
document entries and credit memos from a single screen. The advantages are
• 
Single screen transactions (this allows you to enter, park, and hold documents on a 
single screen without losing context)
• 
User-friendly interfaces
Let’s go through the steps involved in defining document types for enjoy documents and defining tax 
codes per transaction.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
225
Defining Document Types for Enjoy Transactions
When you define document types for enjoy transactions, the system will automatically default to a document 
type during document entry (incoming invoices and credit memos). If the enjoy transaction document type 
is not defined, the system will automatically propose the document type from the previous document entry. 
You can overwrite the proposed document type. To define document types for enjoy transactions, follow 
this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business 
Transaction ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Enjoy ➤ Define 
Document Types for Enjoy Transaction. Or use transaction code OBZO.
The Change View Document Types for Enjoy Transaction Overview screen is displayed. To specify the 
document types for enjoy transactions, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The New 
Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 14-13).
Figure 14-13.  Defining document types for enjoy transactions
Update the following fields:
Company: Enter your company code (C900) in his field. This will apply the 
settings to your company code.
Acct Type: Enter the account type you want the system to use as the default 
during document entry. For example, Customers/Vendors.
Trans.: Using the pull-down arrow next to the field to display the predefined 
transactions list supplied by SAP, enter the transaction description that fits the 
account type you want to apply the default setting to.
Document: Enter the document type to use as the default. For example:
DR – Invoice (Customers)
DG – Credit Memo (Customers)
KR – Invoice (Vendors)
KG – Credit Memo (Vendors) 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
226
These settings allow the system to automatically propose the document type during document entry. 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your work.
Defining Tax Code per Transaction
The settings in the Define Tax Code per Transaction section allow you to select a subset from the tax codes. 
As part of this definition, you specify tax code per transaction and per country key and then you can select 
a subset from defined tax codes in the system during document entry. To define a tax code per transaction, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ 
Business Transaction ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ Enjoy ➤ 
Define Tax Code per Transaction. Or use transaction code OBZT.
The Country Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your Country key (GB in this exercise) in the Country 
Key field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm. The Change View “Tax Code Selection Transactions” 
Overview screen is displayed. To specify the tax code per transaction, click the 
 button on the top-
left side of the screen (Figure 14-14).
Figure 14-14.  Specifying a tax code per transaction
Update the following fields:
Tax Code: Enter your output tax code in the first field and your input tax code in 
the next field.
Transaction: Enter the appropriate transaction for your tax codes. For example, 
for Output Tax, select Financial Accounting Invoice Receipt and for Input Tax, 
select Financial Accounting Outgoing Invoice.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and then save 
 your work.
■
■Note  A2 is the tax code for output tax (Financial Accounting for outgoing invoice) and B2 is the tax code for 
input tax (Financial Accounting for Incoming Receipt). 
In the next exercise, you will define accounts for a net procedure for cash discount clearing.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
227
Defining Accounts for Net Procedures
A net procedure setting defines how a cash discount is treated against invoices when a vendor invoice is 
posted with a document type for net procedure. Once the net procedure is defined, discounts posted to an 
expense or balance sheet accounts are automatically reduced by the cash discount. Also, during invoice 
posting, a similar discount amount is posted to a cash discount clearing account.
■
■Note  Before you define an account for a net procedure, you need to create the G/L account that you will 
assign to the net procedure. See “Appendix A – Chapter 14” to create the G/L accounts needed to complete this 
exercise before continuing your customizing.
To define accounts for a net procedure, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos ➤ 
Define Account for Net Procedure. Or use transaction code OBX. 
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of account ID (CA90) in the Chart 
of Accounts field. Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed. You don’t need to specify any rules for the account for 
net procedure. Click Save 
. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen 
is displayed (Figure 14-15). Update the account field by assigning the G/L account for clearing supplier 
discounts (net method) 193000 (circled in red in Figure 14-15).
Figure 14-15.  Account determination for automatic posting – net procedure
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entry and save 
 your 
account assignment.
In the next exercise, you will define the accounts that cash discount granted, cash discount taken, lost 
cash discounts, and overpayments/underpayments are posted to. Then you will define your payment block 
reasons. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
228
Defining Accounts for Cash Discounts
In this activity you specify accounts that you want to post cash discounts granted to, cash discounts taken, 
and lost cash discounts.
Defining Cash Discounts Granted
Cash Discount Granted is the cash discount you give to a customer for complying with the agreed terms of 
payment. The discount granted reduces the total invoice amount by an agreed percentage. Based on the 
settings you make in this exercise, the system will post cash discounts granted to the accounts you define.
■
■Note  Go to “Appendix A – Chapter 14, Cash Discount Granted,” to create G/L account 8800000 for this 
exercise.
To define accounts for discount granted, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Incoming Payments – Incoming 
Payments Global Settings ➤ Define Accounts for Cash Discount Granted. Or use transaction code OBXI.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed. Click Save 
 at the top of the screen. The 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed, which is where you 
assign the G/L account for Clearing Cash discount Granted to Automatic Posting – Accounts. Enter the G/L 
account for Cash Discount Granted 880000 in the account field. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side 
of the screen to confirm your entry and then save 
.
Defining Account for Cash Discount Taken
Cash Discount Taken is the cash discount you receive from vendors for complying with their payment 
conditions. Discounts taken will reduce the total invoice amount by an agreed percentage. Based on the 
settings you make in this exercise, the system will post cash discount taken to the accounts you define.
■
■Note  Go to “Appendix A – Chapter 14, Discount Received” to create G/L account 276000 for this exercise.
To define accounts for a discount taken, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Outgoing 
Payments Global Settings ➤ Define Accounts for Cash Discount Taken. Or use transaction code OBXU.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed. Click Save 
 at the top of the screen. The 
Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed, which is where you 
assign the G/L account for Clearing Cash discount taken to Automatic Posting – Accounts. Enter the G/L 
account for Cash Discount taken 276000 in the account field. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of 
the screen to confirm your entry and then click Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
229
Defining an Account for a Lost Cash Discount
Discount lost normally arises as a result of failing to comply with payment terms (failure to pay an invoice 
amount within a specified period). To define an account for a lost cash discount, it is advisable to first create 
a G/L account for discount loss, because you will need to assign the account for lost cash discount to a G/L 
account.
■
■Note  Go to “Appendix A – Chapter 14, Discount Lost” to create G/L account 880010 for this exercise.
To define accounts for lost cash discounts, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Outgoing 
Payments Global Settings ➤ Define Accounts for Lost Cash Discount. Or use transaction code OBXV.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field on dialog box and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed. Click Save 
 at the top of the screen. 
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed, which is where 
you assign the G/L account for clearing lost cash discount to Automatic Posting – Accounts. Enter the G/L 
account for lost Cash Discount taken 880010 in the Account field. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen to confirm your entry and then click Save 
.
Defining Account for Overpayments/Underpayments
Customizing an account for overpayments/underpayments allows the system to make postings to revenue 
and expense accounts if the following conditions are present:
• 
Payment difference arises as a result of overpayment or underpayment.
• 
It is not possible to post differences through cash discount adjustments.
• 
When the difference falls within tolerance limits for an automatic adjustment 
posting. 
■
■Note  Go to “Appendix A – Chapter 14, Overpayments/Underpayments,” to create G/L account 881000 for 
this exercise.
To define accounts for overpayments/underpayments, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing 
Payments ➤ Outgoing Payments Global Settings ➤ Define Accounts for Overpayments/Underpayments. Or 
use transaction code OBXL.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field on dialog box and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the dialog box. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed. Click save 
 at the top of the screen. 
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed, which is where 
you assign the G/L clearing account for unauthorized customer discounts to Automatic Posting – Accounts. 
Enter the G/L account for unauthorized customer discounts 881000 in the account field. Click the Enter 
button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entry and then click Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
230
Defining Accounts for Bank Charges (Vendor)
Bank Charges (Vendor) are incidental expenses arising from a business transaction with business partners 
and are posted to an expense account in FI. In this exercise you will define an account for your bank charges 
and assign it to an expense account. This will allow the system to automatically post these expenses to a 
bank charges account, which is an expense account.
■
■Note  You created a bank charges account in Chapter 9, so you don’t need to create another one here.  
You can use the bank charges account you created previously to do automatic posting in this exercise.
To define accounts for bank charges (vendor), follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Outgoing 
Payments Global Settings ➤ Define Accounts for Bank Charges (Vendor). Or use transaction code OBXK.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Procedures screen is displayed. This screen 
contains a list of procedures including bank charges you can choose from. Double-click Bank Charges from 
the list of the displayed procedures (Figure 14-16).
Figure 14-16.  The initial screen for specifying bank posting and bank charges
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart 
of Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Rules screen is displayed, which is where you specify the rules for 
your bank charges account. You are not specifying any rules for your bank charges, therefore, click the Save 
 button at the top of the screen to go to Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts 
screen. This is where you assign an account to the bank charges for automatic posting. Enter the G/L 
Account – Bank Charges 470100 (created in Chapter 9) in the Account field and click the Enter 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to confirm. Save 
 your efforts. 
In the next exercise, you will define payment block reasons, which are used to specify the reason for 
blocking an invoice from being paid. Normally, the system will request the reason why you want to block an 
invoice from payment. There are several reasons for blocking invoices from being paid in practice, but we 
will be looking only at some and then define payment block reasons in the system.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
231
Defining Payment Block Reasons
When defining reasons for blocking payments, there are a few specifications you need to consider. You can 
specify whether payment blocks can be changed in payment proposals or during manual payment. You can 
also specify whether documents defined with block keys can be cleared during manual payment processing 
or if changes are not allowed.
The reasons you define in this exercise allow you to differentiate why invoices are not to be paid. 
Standard block reasons are supplied by SAP, which you can use if you do not want to define your own.
Payment block reasons are valid for all company codes. This means all company codes within the client 
or in the system can use the payment block reasons in the system without having to define payment block 
reasons that are company code specific. When customizing payment block reasons, you need to update the 
following fields:
Block Ind.: This is a block indicator key that is defined with a one-digit character 
key. This key contains reasons for blocking payments. It’s entered in a document 
to block an invoice from being paid for a specified reason.
Description: Enter a short description stating why this payment is being blocked.
Block Indicators: Allows you to specify how you want the payment block reason 
you defined to function. You have three options to choose from:
Change in Payment Proposal: When you want changes to be carried out 
during the payment proposal. It is possible to remove a payment block when 
processing the payment proposal, but when you set this proposal, changes 
cannot be made during payment proposal processing.
Manual Payment Block: If you do not want documents assigned with a block 
key to be cleared during manual payment clearing, then choose this option.
Not Changeable: Changes cannot be made during payment proposal 
processing or during manual payment.
To define the payment block reasons, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Outgoing 
Payments Global Settings ➤ Payment Block Reasons ➤ Define Payment Block Reasons. Or you can use 
transaction code OB27.
The Change View Payment Block Reasons Overview screen appears containing the list of previously 
defined payment block reasons. To define your own payment block reasons, click the 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 14-17), 
where you define your block reasons. 
Figure 14-17.  Defining payment block reasons
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
232
Update the following fields:
Block Ind.: Enter your payment block reason key in this field. This is usually 
defined using a single-digit character. In this exercise, we used K as our payment 
block reason key for illustration purposes. This key is a freely definable payment 
block reason key. You can use any key of your choice.
Description: Enter a meaningful short statement describing your payment block 
reason. As an example, we used Payment Block C900 as our payment block 
reason. You can use any meaningful description of your choice.
Change in Pmnt Prop.: When you select the change in payment proposal 
checkbox, the payment block cannot be removed during an automatic payment 
program run.
Manual Payments Block: Documents defined with a payment block key cannot 
be cleared during manual payment processing. 
Save 
 your work.
Manual Outgoing Payments
Manual Outgoing Payments allow users to manually post vendor’s payments and clear open items on the 
vendor’s account against payments made. You will be looking at manual payments in depth in Chapter 17. In 
order for users to be able to perform manual outgoing payments, you must:
• 
Define tolerances for vendors
• 
Define reason codes for manual outgoing payments
• 
Define accounts for payment differences
Define Tolerances for Vendors
Three tolerance groups are maintained in SAP FI. We covered the employee tolerance group and the G/L 
account tolerance group in Chapter 4. This section covers the Customer/Vendor tolerance group. For more 
information on tolerance groups, refer to Chapter 4.
As mentioned, tolerances are simply control mechanisms that are designed to limit the amount input 
clerks are permitted to post to the system. It also serves as a control measure that determines the discounts a 
clerk is authorized to grant, the payment differences they are permitted to post in the system, and tolerances 
for payment advice. The advantage of setting tolerances is that they impose restrictions and help avoid major 
posting errors by clerks or users. Since tolerances are valid for group of business partners, the settings in this 
exercise are applicable to several customers’ and vendors’ tolerance groups. This means you don’t have to 
create a separate tolerance for vendors and customers; you can group them into one tolerance group.
In this exercise, you will create tolerances with and without a tolerance group key. Tolerances created 
with tolerance group key allow users or clerks assigned to this tolerance group to post amounts up to the 
specification. Tolerance groups are defined using four-digit characters, which serves as the group ID or key. 
The group ID you have defined is assigned to the appropriate object in the system. In this exercise, your 
tolerance group ID will be assigned to the vendor/customer master record.
Problem: You have been asked by your team leader to create two tolerance groups—one 
with a group key and one without a group key—to satisfy the minimum tolerance group 
requirement.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
233
To define tolerances, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable 
and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Manual Outgoing Payments ➤ 
Define Tolerances (vendors). Or you can use transaction code OBA3. The Change View Customer/Vendor 
Tolerances Overview screen is displayed. This screen contains a list of existing tolerances. To define your 
own tolerances, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to New Entries: Details of 
Added Entries screen (Figure 14-18).
Figure 14-18.  Defining tolerance groups
Update the following fields: 
Company Code: Enter the four digits of your company code in this field to assign 
your company code to your tolerance group.
Currency: Enter the local currency in this field. The currency you enter in this 
field will be the default during document entry.
Tolerance Group: Enter a four-digit ID as your tolerance group in this field. This 
ID will be assigned to your tolerance group relating to vendors.
In the Permitted Payment Differences section of the screen, update the following fields:
Gain/Loss: Enter the permitted payment differences that users are permitted to 
post in amount and in percentage. When posting a document, the system will 
check the amount and the percentage of the document amount posted and use 
whichever is lower.
Adjust Discount By: Specify the discount adjustment allowed.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
234
Since you will also create another tolerance group without a group key, don’t save your work yet. Click 
the Next Entry 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or press F8 on your keyboard to call up the New 
Entries: Details of Added Entries screen. Update the screen shown in Figure 14-19. Make sure that the 
Tolerance Group field is blank. 
Figure 14-19.  Setting up the standard tolerance group (without a group key)
Now save 
 your work.
Define Reason Codes for Manual Outgoing Payments
Payment differences normally arise when clearing open items against payments. The difference is 
compared to the tolerance limit allocated to the employee making the posting. If the difference is deemed 
to be immaterial, the payment is done automatically and the system will adjust the cash discount up to 
the amount specified, or the system can write it off to a special account. Otherwise, the payment has to be 
processed manually.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
235
If payment difference is outside the tolerance limit, the payment has to be processed manually in one of 
the following ways:
Partial Payment: You enter the partial payment against the open item in 
the system and assign a reason code. When a partial payment is posted, all 
documents remain in the account as open items.
Residual Item: When you assign the residual item and assign a reason code, the 
system will clear the original net amount and the payment, while the residual 
item remains in the account as an open item.
Payment on Account: All items remain open.
There are several reasons for payment differences. It is important to specify reasons for payment 
differences when posting partial payments or residual items. SAP has the flexibility that will allow you to assign 
more than one reason codes to a payment difference. You can do this by clicking the Distribute Difference 
button on the top-right side of the payment screen. We will be looking at this in detail in Chapter 17.
Reason code is part of overpayment/underpayment. It is defined per company code. You specify a 
correspondence type, which is assigned to the following items when posting payment and clearing open 
items manually. For example Partial Payments, Residual Posting, or Posting on Account. By setting further 
indicators during configuration, you can include the following optional functions with your reason code:
Charge Off Difference: When this checkbox is set for a reason code, the payment 
difference will be posted to a separate G/L account automatically.
Disputed Item: This allows disputed items to be excluded from credit checks.
Do Not Copy Text: When this checkbox is clicked, you have to enter reason 
code text into the segment text field of the residual item or the partial payment 
manually. If the indicator is not set, the system will automatically copy the reason 
code text you defined in your configuration into the segment text.
Let’s go to the screen where you will configure reason codes for your manual outgoing payments. Follow 
this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business 
Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Manual Outgoing Payments ➤ Overpayment/Underpayment ➤ 
Define Reason Codes (Manual Outgoing Payments). Or use transaction code OBBE.
The Determine Work Area: Entry dialog box pops up. This screen allows you to assign your company 
code to the reason code you defined. Enter your company code (C900) in the Work Area field and click 
the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen to confirm your entries. The Change View 
Classification of Payment Differences Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button to call up the 
New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen (Figure 14-20). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
236
Update the following fields:
RCd: Enter a three-digit character code in this field. It represents your reason 
code. This code will allow you to store text and the correspondence type for your 
reason code.
Short Text: Enter a short description of your reason code in this field. For 
example, in this exercise, we used Damaged Goods.
Long Text: Enter a full description of your reason code in this field. For example, 
we used Damaged Goods - Disputed.
CorrT: Specify the correspondence type for your reason code in this field. SAP 
comes with standard predefined correspondence types you can choose from. 
Click the pull-down arrow next to the Correspondence Type field to display the 
list of correspondence types supplied by SAP. Select the correspondence type 
that best meets your requirement. For example, the code for payment notice with 
line items is SAP01 and the code for difference 050 payment notice is SAP50.
Confirm your entries by clicking the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and then save 
 
your work.
■
■Note  You can create as many reason codes as you want. We advise that you take a look at the reason 
codes for company code 1000 (a standard company supplied by SAP as a guide) before defining your own 
reason codes.
The next step is to define accounts for payment differences. The settings you make will allow the system 
to automatically post payment differences to the accounts you specify.
Figure 14-20.  Assigning reason codes to manual outgoing payments
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
237
Define Accounts for Payment Differences (Manual  
Outgoing Payments)
Payment differences are posted to a special account in SAP ERP. In this exercise, you assign payment 
differences by reason to your G/L account so that the system can automatically post payment differences 
to that G/L account. To assign your account follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) 
➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Manual 
Outgoing Payments ➤ Overpayment/Underpayment ➤ Define Accounts for Payment Differences (Manual 
Outgoing Payment). Or use transaction code OBXL.
■
■Note  You have already created the G/L account (Unallowed Customer Discounts 881000) required for this 
configuration in a previous exercise. So you don’t need to define it again; all you need to do is simply assign it 
to the payment differences.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of account code (CA90) in the Chart 
of Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the dialog box. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts - Accounts screen is displayed. Enter the appropriate G/L account for 
payment differences in the Account field (Figure 14-21).
Figure 14-21.  Account determination for automatic posting 
Save 
 your work.
Finally, in the accounts receivable and accounts payable configuration, you will customize automatic 
outgoing payments, which consists of several steps. You will go through these steps using a top-down 
approach, starting with the top item and working to the bottom.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
238
Automatic Outgoing Payments
The Automatic Outgoing Payments program is a SAP payment-management tool that manages payments of 
multiple open invoices, posts payment documents, and prints payment media using EDI (Electronic Data 
Interchange) or DME (Date Medium Exchange) simultaneously. The payment program can be accessed 
from the user side (easy access) and the IMG (implementation guide) side. If you are a consultant, we 
recommend that you perform your configuration in the IMG side of the system and advise that you work 
from top down ensure that your payment program settings are complete. Several levels and steps are 
involved when customizing a payment program in SAP ERP:
	
1.	
All company codes
	
2.	
Paying company codes
	
3.	
Payment methods in country
	
4.	
Payment methods in company codes
	
5.	
Bank determination for payment transactions
	
6.	
House banks
All Company Codes
Specifying the company codes that you want to include in your automatic payment program is important 
when the payment process is centralized. For example, when one company code makes payments for other 
company codes. At this level, you make settings for all the company codes that you want to include in your 
payment program.
The following specifications are essential for the All Company Code configuration:
• 
Paying company code (this is the company code responsible for processing outgoing 
payments). This setting is applicable when payments are made centrally by one 
company code for several company codes. For example, the head office makes 
payments on behalf of the branches.
• 
Sending company code (this is the company code that payment is being made for by 
the paying company code). If the sending company is not specified, the system will 
automatically assume that the paying company is also the sending company.
• 
You can specify if a separate payment per business area is to be made and use 
payment method supplements.
• 
If your business partner normally allows certain days of grace for invoice payment, 
you can enter this in the Tolerance Days Payable field. The system will automatically 
delay payment of the appropriate due items until the next payment run as long as it 
is within the grace period.
• 
You can also specify special G/L transactions for vendors’ and customers’ 
settlements using the following special G/L indicators list supplied by SAP: 7 is a 
down payment for current assets, 9 is a down payment request, A is a down payment 
on current assets, and so on. You can access this list using the matchcode by the 
Special G/L Transaction to be paid field in Figure 14-22. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
239
To set up all company codes for payment transactions, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing 
Payments ➤ Automatic Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Method/Bank Selection for Payment Program ➤ 
Set Up All Company Codes for Payment Transactions. Or use transaction code FBZP. The Change View 
“Company Code” Overview screen is displayed to customize payment transactions. Click the 
 
button on the top-left side of the screen and update your settings using Figure 14-22 as a guide.
Confirm your entries by clicking the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Then save 
 
your work. 
Figure 14-22.  Setting up all company codes for payment transactions 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
240
SAP comes with predefined special G/L transactions. Here are some of important special G/L indicators 
supplied by SAP:
A – Down payment on current assets
B – Financial assets down payment
D – Discount
E – Unchecked invoice
F – Down payment request 
G – Guarantee received
Paying Company Codes
The paying company is the company assigned with the task of processing the payment transactions 
on behalf of the other company codes. A centralized payment system is in place. Invoices arising from 
transactions by other company codes are sent to one company code within the group company, which then 
makes payments on behalf of other company codes. A good example of this is an environment where the 
head office makes payment for other company codes (other branches). The company code making payment 
on behalf of other company code is referred to as the paying company code, and the company to whom 
payment is being made is referred to as the sending company code.
When you’re customizing this section, these options are important:
• 
Minimum amount for incoming payment: This determines the minimum amount 
that will be allowed by the system to go through the automatic payment program for 
an incoming payment. Any amount lower than this amount will not be allowed as an 
automatic payment, it will have to be performed manually instead.
• 
Minimum amount for outgoing payment: The amount specified as the minimum 
amount for outgoing payments relates to invoice payments. Any amount below the 
minimum amount will not be included by the system in the payment run. Amounts 
below this have to be performed manually. For example, if the minimum amount 
specification for an outgoing payment is $0.50 USD, any invoice amount less than 
0.50 USD will be excluded from the payment run.
• 
Forms: SAP comes with standard payment program forms in SAPScript. SAPScript 
defines the form layout that meets certain country specific and international 
payment methods. You can choose from several standard forms when defining 
your paying company code. The benefit of using the standard forms defined in 
SAPScript is that it saves you from having to use the wrong print program. There are 
two types of forms in this exercise—forms for printing a payment advice and the 
EDI accompanying sheet form. You will be looking an example of printed payment 
advice and EDI accompany sheet in Chapter 17 when you look at running payment 
program.
• 
Sender details: Specify the texts you want to use for your letter header, letter footer, 
and your company code sending address.
Let’s customize the paying company code by following this menu path: MG: Financial Accounting ➤ 
Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Automatic 
Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Method/Bank Selection for Payment Program ➤ Set Up Paying Company 
Codes for Payment Transactions.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
241
The Change View Company Cods Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the 
top-left side of the screen to bring up the New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen (Figure 14-23). On 
this screen, you specify the minimum amount for an incoming payment and the minimum amount for an 
outgoing payment in the appropriate fields.
Figure 14-23.  Setting the minimum amount for outgoing/incoming payments 
Figure 14-24.  Specifying the form for payment advice/EDI accompanying sheet form using the Search 
function
The next step is to assign SAPScripts, which are country specific, to the paying company code (the form 
for the payment advice and EDI accompany sheet form). To do this, click the 
 button at the 
bottom-left side of the screen to expand the screen to the Form section (Figure 14-24), where you specify the 
SAPScript you want to use as your form layout.  
■
■Note  SAP comes with several standard payment forms you can use as your payment advice and EDI 
accompany sheet. The exercise uses the International SAPScript form called F110_IN_AVIS for payment advice 
and the script form called F110_EDI_01 for the EDI accompanying sheet form. You can use any other form of 
your choice. In practice, you should use your country-specific SAPScript or what your company recommends.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
242
To assign a form for the payment advice, click the Search button 
 circled to display 
SAP script Form Tree (Display Mode). On this displayed SAPScript Form Tree (Display Mode) Structure 
List of Countries represented in the system, under Payment Medium, choose 
. A list of forms 
stored under international is displayed. Select the form you deem appropriate. For this exercise, click 
. The Form F110_IN_AVIS (Avis (international)) screen is displayed containing the 
list of languages. Double-click the 
 button to select it. This action will then assign 
SAPScript F110_IN_AVIS to your payment advice as the print program. 
The next step is to also assign SAPScript to the EDI accompany sheet. To do this, repeat the previous 
steps you used to assign the payment advice form for EDI accompany sheet form. Instead select 
 from the displayed list and double-click the 
 button. F110_EDI_01 is 
entered into the form field for EDI accompany sheet form as the SAPScript print program (Figure 14-25).
Figure 14-26.  Specifying the Sender details 
Figure 14-25.  Specifying the of payment advice/EDI accompanying sheet forms
The final step of this exercise is to assign senders details to the paying company code. The values you 
enter will determine how the sender details are displayed in correspondence. Click the 
 button 
at the bottom-left side of the screen to expand the sender details for SAPScript forms. Using the information 
in Figure 14-26, update the Sender Details for SAPScript Forms fields.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 the 
settings for the paying company code. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
243
Payment Methods in Country
The Payment Methods in Country option is a list of standard payment methods procedures per country 
you can choose from. Payment methods, although similar, vary from country to country. It is important that 
your company uses its country payment methods when making payments to business partners, but it is not 
compulsory that your company code use the all payment methods applied to your country in the payment 
program (automatic outgoing payments). You can select the specific payment methods that best meet your 
company’s requirements from the list. Most countries have more than one payment method. For example, 
checks, wire transfers, bills of exchange, and so on.
Only minimum settings are required when customizing payment methods, because SAP comes 
with standard payment methods for most countries. Although you can also create your own payment 
methods, we advise that you stick to the standard payment methods, as they are typically sufficient for 
any configuration. You will not be making any settings in this exercise, but we recommend that you take 
a look at the payment methods supplied by SAP to make sure your country payment method is included. 
If your company’s country payment is not provided, you have to create one by following this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable – Business Transaction 
➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Automatic Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Method/Bank Selection for Payment 
Program ➤ Set Up Payment Methods per Country for Payment Transactions.
Payment Methods in Company Codes
The Payment Methods in Company Codes option contains the payment methods your company chooses 
to use in the payment program as a means of making outgoing payments to business partners. Payment 
Methods per Company Codes are obtained from country payment keys defined in payment methods per 
country. A company code does not necessarily have to use the system’s payment methods per country. It’s 
possible code to use some or all of the available payment methods, depending on your requirements. The 
specifications you make here determine the payment methods the system will use when making automatic 
payments to your business partners. 
When customizing the payment methods per company codes, you need to specify the following:
• 
The paying company’s code (this is the company responsible for processing and 
making outgoing payments).
• 
The payment method that your company code is using, such as check or bank 
transfer.
• 
Amount limits. These apply to your payment methods. You specify the minimum 
and maximum amount that the system will not exceed when making payments. Any 
payment below the minimum or above the maximum will be excluded from the 
payment run in the payment program. 
• 
Other specifications include:
Foreign Payments/Foreign Currency Payments For Foreign Currency 
Transactions: The payment method will allow the system to process foreign 
currency payments and receipts. Make payments to/from business partner’s 
bank abroad.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
244
Bank Selection Control: This allows the use of optimization either by bank 
group or by postal order. When you want the payment program to make payment 
from bank within the same clearing house, click the Optimize By Bank Group 
radio button .Funds are transferred more quickly and easily from your house 
bank in the shortest possible time to the business partner’s bank account. This is 
possible only if you assign your bank in the master record to the bank group that 
you have defined. On the other hand, if you optimize by postal code, the house 
bank that’s closer to the business partner bank postal code is used. 
Let’s set up payment methods per company code by following this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing 
Payments ➤ Automatic Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Method/Bank Selection for Payment Program ➤ Set 
Up Payment Methods per Company Code for Payment Transactions. 
The Change View Maintenance of Company Code Data for a Payment Method screen is displayed. 
On the top-left side of the screen, click the 
 button to specify the paying company code data for a 
payment method (Figure 14-27).
Figure 14-27.  Maintaining paying company code data for a payment method 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
245
Update the following fields: 
Paying Co. Code: Enter the company code that you want to use for transaction 
payments. 
Payment Method: Specify the payment method key you are using in your 
payment program. (For example: Check, C). This specification is based on your 
company’s preferred method of payment.
Minimum Amount: Enter the amount limit in this field. Any payment below the 
minimum amount will be omitted from the payment run. If the field is blank, 
there will be no minimum amount limit. In this exercise, we left the field blank.
Maximum Amount: Enter the maximum amount limit in this field. Any payment 
in excess of the maximum amount will be automatically excluded from the 
payment run.
Foreign Business Partner Allowed: When this option is selected, the system will 
include foreign business partners in the payment run. 
Foreign Currency Allowed: When this option is selected, specified foreign 
currencies are allowed in the payment run.
Cust/Vendor Bank Abroad Allowed: When this option is selected, the system 
will allow payments to/from bank accounts abroad to be included in the 
payment run.
The next step is to assign a standard payment form in SAPScript to your company code payment 
method using the international version and check (with check management) to print checks. Click the 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen to expand it. Update the Forms section of the 
screen using the following information: 
• 
Form for the Payment Medium: F110_PRENUM_CHCK
• 
Next Form: Leave blank
The final step is to specify the sender’s details, which will be printed on the checks. Click the 
 button at the bottom-left side to expand the Drawer on the Form section. Update the screen as 
shown in Figure 14-28. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
246
■
■Note  Pyt Adv.Ctrl is the section of the screen where you add an advice note to the payee. For example, if 
you want to print a payment note every time a payment is generated, you choose Always Payment Advice. The 
only difference with the check payment method is the form section. (You don’t need to print anything on a bank 
transfer payment, since these payments are made via the bank.) Therefore, in the Payment Advice Note Control 
section, click the None radio button and leave the SAPScript for Form for the Payment Medium blank. 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and then save 
.
To see your company code payment method, click the Back 
 button on the top of the screen to return 
to the Change View Maintenance of Company Code Data for a Payment Method screen. The payment 
methods you defined in this exercise are displayed (Figure 14-29). 
Figure 14-28.  Specifying the form for payment medium
Figure 14-29.  Company code data for a payment method 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
247
Bank Determination for Payment Transactions
Normally, companies have more than one bank account from which payments are made. The specifications 
you make in the Bank Determination for Payment Transactions section allow you to prioritize which bank 
accounts should be used when making payments. If there aren’t sufficient funds to make a payment in 
the first bank account, the system will use the second bank account you specify, and so on. First, you have 
to specify the ranking order for the bank accounts. Secondly, you have to specify the house banks that 
payments are made from and the subaccounts that those payments are posted to. Third, you have to specify 
the available funds in each of the bank accounts. Finally, you may want to specify the value date, which 
defines the maximum number of days between the payment run and the bank value date within which 
payment should be made, as well as expenses/charges (includes fees/charges). This last step is not covered 
in this exercise, because value date is used by default and expenses/charges are rarely used in payment 
program. 
■
■Note  Before you start customizing bank determination for payment transactions, make sure that the house 
banks you are applying to your payment transaction have been defined. You can see how to define a house 
bank in Chapter 9.
Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable 
➤ Business Transaction ➤ Outgoing Payments ➤ Automatic Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Method/Bank 
Selection for Payment Program ➤ Set Up Bank Determination for Payment Transactions. The Display View 
“Bank Selection”: Overview screen comes up. Make sure the Bank Selection folder on the left side of the 
screen is open. Work through each folder displayed under the Bank selection folder (Figure 14-30) from top 
down to ensure that you don’t miss anything. 
Figure 14-30.  House bank payment ranking order
The first step is to specify the bank ranking order for payment purposes.
Ranking Order
Payments are made in order of ranking from your house bank by the payment program. The system will 
check the bank account with the highest priority for sufficient funds. If there are enough funds, payment will 
be made from the first house bank in order of ranking. If there are insufficient funds in the first house bank, 
the system will check the second house bank for sufficient funds and make payment from the house bank if 
it has sufficient funds.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
248
To customize the ranking order for your payment program, click the Position button at the bottom 
of the screen. Select your company from the Bank Selection list on the left side of the screen and double-
click the 
 folder embedded in Bank Selection. The Change View Ranking Order Overview screen 
is displayed. Click the 
 button to specify the bank ranking for house banks. Update the following 
fields:
Payment Method: Enter the payment method you want to use in your payment 
transaction in the appropriate order. (For example, if you want payment to 
be made by check or bank transfer, enter C for check payment and T for bank 
transfer in the payment method field.) During the payment run, the system 
will automatically apply the payment method that you entered in the payment 
method to your payment transaction.
Currency: Enter the currency key that you want to apply to payment transaction. 
If this field is blank, the payment program carries out the payment in any 
currency. Only the currency that you specified will be used by the payment 
program.
Ranking Order: Enter the ranking order that you want the system to make 
payment from your house bank. For example ranking order 1, 2 and so on.
House Bank: Enter the house banks you want to use for your payment 
transaction in the ranking order of payment in this field.
Use the information in Table 14-2 to specify the ranking order. 
Table 14-2.  Specification of Ranking Order for Your Payment Program
Payment Method (PM)
Currency (Crcy)
Bank Ranking
House Bank
C
Leave blank
1
BARC1
T
Leave blank
1
BARC1
C
Leave blank
2
HSBC1
T
Leave blank
2
HSBC1
Confirm your entries by clicking the Enter 
 button on the top-left of the screen or press Enter on your 
keyboard and save 
 your ranking order.
The next step is to specify the bank accounts your payment program will make payments from and to 
determine which subaccounts payments your payment program will posted to.
Bank Accounts
Bank accounts allow you to specify which house banks the payment program can make payments from and 
where outgoing payments are posted during a payment run. Payments are posted to subaccounts based on 
payment method. For example, an outgoing payment made with a check is posted to the subaccount for 
checks. Likewise, payments made with bank transfer are posted to the subaccount for bank transfers.
■
■Note  You have already created the bank accounts needed for this configuration in Chapter 9 in the House 
Bank section. However, make sure that you have created the appropriate G/L account for your bank account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
249
Double-click the 
 folder on the left side of the screen (see Figure 14-30). The Change View 
Bank Accounts Overview screen appears. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The 
New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed, where you will determine the settings for your 
payment program. Update the following fields: 
House Bank: Enter the house banks you want to use for your bank account in 
this field in payment ranking order. (For example, you want payment to be made 
first from your Barclays Bank Account. On the contrary if there are no sufficient 
funds in Barclays Bank Account, then use HSBC Bank Account, and so on.)
Payment Method: Enter the payment method you want to use in your payment 
transaction and in the appropriate order. (For example, if you want payment 
to be made by check or bank transfer, enter C for check payment or T for bank 
transfer in the payment method field.) During the payment run, the system 
will systematically apply the payment method that you entered in the payment 
method to the subaccounts.
Currency: Enter the currency key that you want to apply to the payment 
transaction. If this field is blank, the payment program will carry out the payment 
in any currency. Only the currency that you specified will be applicable to the 
subaccount in your payment program.
Account ID: Enter your bank account’s ID in this field. You created this account 
ID in Chapter 9.
Bank Subaccount: Enter the G/L account that you created in for the check 
account and the bank transfer account in Chapter 9.
Using the information in Table 14-3, specify the banking accounts for your payment program.
Table 14-3.  Specifications of Banking Accounts for Your Payment Program
House Bank
Payment Method (PM)
Currency (Crcy)
Account ID
Bank Subaccount
BARC1
C
Leave blank
BARC
111412
BARC1
T
Leave blank
BARC
111414
HSBC1
C
Leave blank
HSBC
113155
HSBC1
T
Leave blank
HSBC
113158
Confirm your entries by clicking the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or pressing Enter 
on your keyboard. Then save 
 your work.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
250
■
■Note  Subaccounts the payment methods are posted to:
G/L account 111412: Barclays Bank Check issued out (the account check payments posted for Barclays Bank).
G/L account 111414: Barclays Bank Outgoing transfer (payments made by bank transfer are posted in this 
account for Barclays Bank).
G/L account 113155: HSBC Bank Check issued out (this is the account check payments are posted for HSBC).
G/L account 113158: HSBC Bank Outgoing transfer (payments made by bank transfer are posted in this account 
for HSBC). 
The final step is to specify the available amount in each bank account used by your payment program.
Available Amounts
The Available Amounts field holds the funds available in your selected bank accounts. You specify the 
amount available for incoming and outgoing payments. During the payment run, the payment program 
will check the selected bank accounts to find the bank account with sufficient funds, based on your ranking 
order. If the funds are insufficient in the first bank account, the payment program will automatically check 
the second bank account, and then the third bank account, until it finds a bank account with sufficient funds 
for payment.
The payment program does not conduct amount splits, but the system can check your bank account 
based on ranking order to find out which bank account has sufficient funds for payment. If none of the bank 
accounts assigned to the payment have sufficient funds, payment will not be carried out. Before running the 
payment program, ensure that you have available funds.
Double-click the 
 folder on the left side of the screen (see Figure 14-30) and the Change 
View “Amount Available”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen 
and the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen comes up. Update the following fields:
House Bank: Enter the House Bank key you defined in your house bank 
customizing in Chapter 9. This will allow you to specify available funds in the 
bank account with this house bank key in your payment program.
Account ID: Again, enter the Bank Account ID you defined in the house bank 
section of Chapter 9. In conjunction with the house bank key, you specify the 
available funds for each of the selected bank accounts in your payment program.
Days: This field is important when you want to post payments before their due 
date. If you are not posting payment of bill exchange due date, enter 999 in 
this field. This indicates the maximum number of days you can include in your 
payment.
Using the information in Table 14-4, specify the banking accounts for the paying company code 
(Figure 14-31).  
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
251
■
■Note  Use dots (.) to separate amounts in units of hundreds and commas (,) to separate amounts in units of 
tens. For example, 1000 is represented in the system as 1.000,00. 
Confirm your entries by clicking the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your 
configuration. 
Sort Methods and Adjustment Accounts for Regrouping 
Receivables/Payables
Accounting standards define how companies classify and disclose receivables and payables according to 
their remaining life. SAP provides the facilities to perform this function in the sort methods and adjustment 
accounts for regrouping receivables/payable. The remaining life of AR and AP is defined in the sort method. 
For example, AR remaining life is classified as less than one year or more than one year. Payables’ remaining 
life is classified as less than one year, 1-5 years, and more than five years.
The settings you define here allow you to classify receivables and payables into periods or years. For 
example, receivables/payables due within a year are classified as receivables/payables due within one year. 
Likewise, the receivables/payables due after one year, but within five years, are classified as receivables/
payables due between one to five years. Other items due outside these periods are classified as receivables/
payables due after five years. It is important to classify transactions arising from receivables and payables in 
the G/L account based on periods to allow proper disclosure in the financial report.
Table 14-4.  Specifications of Amount Available for Outgoing Payment
House Bank
Account ID
Days
Currency
Amount Available for Outgoing Payment
BARC1
BARC
999
GBP
9.999.999.999.999.00
BARC1
BARC
999
GBP
9.999.999.999.999.00
Figure 14-31.  Specifying the available amounts
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
252
In this exercise, you will define settings that allow you to sort receivables and payables items into 
periods.
Problem: Company C900’s accounting staff wants to be able to classify receivables and 
payables in the G/L accounts in periods for proper disclosure in the financial statement. 
Your task as FI consultant is to define sort method and adjustment accounts for regrouping 
receivables and payables for receivables/payables due within one year and receivables/
payables due after one year.
Define Sort Methods
To define sort methods for receivables, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General 
Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Reclassify ➤ Transfer and Sort Receivables and Payables 
➤ Define Sort Method and Adjustment Accts for Regrouping Receivables/Payables. Or use transaction code 
OBBU.
The Change View “Sort Methods”: Overview screen is displayed. This is where you start customizing. 
Click the 
 button to go to the screen where you will specify the periodic interval and description for 
your receivables/payables periodic interval (Figure 14-32).
Figure 14-32.  The initial periodic interval screen
Double-click the Receivables folder. In the Interval field, enter C900, and in the Description field, enter 
Receivables/Payables Regroup.
■
■Note  We recommend that you use company code as the sort methods interval in this exercise, because 
this will enable you to trace your sort method to your company code. This is important, especially when you 
have more than one company code. 
Save 
 your configuration. 
Period Intervals for Receivables
The next step is to create the periodic intervals for receivables due within one year and receivables due after 
one year. To create the periodic intervals for recevables, select the periodic interval (C900) that you defined 
earlier. Since you are sorting receivables in this exercise, double-click the 
 folder from left pane 
of the screen. The Change View “Receivables”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button 
to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen to create the periodi intervals for receivables 
(Figure 14-33).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
253
Update the following fields:
From: Enter 0 for receivables due within one year and 1 for receivables due after 
one year.
Time Unit: You have three options to choose from: Day, Month, and Year. Using 
the drop-down arrow, select Year for each field. This will classify the receivables 
on a yearly basis.
Description: Enter the descriptions for each interval: “Receivables due within 1 
year” and “Receivables due after 1 year”.
Cust.Pstg: When you click the Customer Posting checkbox, the system will 
classify receivables based on your interval specifications.
Vend.Pstg: When you click the Vendor Posting checkbox, the system will classify 
payables based on your interval specifications.
G/L Posting: When you click the G/L posting checkbox, the system will classify 
postings to the G/L account based on your interval specifications. 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entires and save 
 your work.
Periodic Intervals for Payables
Next, you need to define the periodic intervals for payables due within one year, payables due between 
one and five years, and payables due after five years. To create the periodic intervals for payables, select 
the periodic interval (C900) you defined earlier in Figure 14-32 and double-click the 
 folder on 
the left pane of the screen. The Change View “Payables”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 
button to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen, where you’ll create the periodic interval 
specifications for payables. Update the screen using the data shown in Figure 14-34. 
Figure 14-33.  Creating periodic intervals for receivables
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
254
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard to confirm the entries and then save 
 the 
periodic intervals you have defined. 
Define Adjustment Accounts for Receivables/Payables by Maturity
In this exercise, you define adjustment accounts for receivable and payables by maturity. The system will 
automatically post to the accounts you assigned for each period interval based on your specifications.
■
■Note  Before defining adjustment accounts for receivable/payables by maturity, you must first create 
the G/L accounts you will need for your configuration. Go to “Appendix – A, Chapter 14” (Define Adjustment 
Accounts for Receivables/Payables by Maturity) to create the G/L accounts.
This exercise only defines adjustment accounts for receivables/payables by maturity for foreign 
receivables/payables. The same procedure is applicable when you create domestic and one-time 
receivables/payables. We advise that you create accounts for domestic and one-time payables/receivables 
on your own.
Receivables Due Within One Year
To maintain automatic posting procedures for adjustment accounts for receivables/payables by maturity, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting ➤ Periodic 
Processing ➤ Reclassify ➤ Transfer and Sort Receivables and Payables ➤ Adjustment Accounts for 
Receivables/Payables by Maturity. Or use transaction code OBBV.
The Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – Procedures screen is displayed. Click 
 from the displayed procedures list and then click the Choose 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen. The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) 
in the Chart of Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The Maintain FI 
Configuration: Automatic Posting – Accounts screen appears (Figure 14-35), which is where you perform the 
specifications for adjustment accounts for receivables due in one year. Using the information in Table 14-5, 
update the screen. 
Figure 14-34.  Creating periodic intervals for payables
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
255
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entires and save 
 your 
account assignment. 
Receivables Due After One Year
On the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – Procedures screen, select 
 
from the displayed procedures list and click the Choose 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Enter 
your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of Accounts field of the Chart of Accounts screen and click the 
Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to proceed to the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – 
Accounts screen. Update the screen in Figure 14-36 using the information in Table 14-6.
 
Figure 14-35.  Assigning G/L accounts to periodic intervals for automatic posting of payables due  
within one year
Table 14-5.  The Accounts for Posting Receivables Due Within One Year
Reconciliation
Adjustment
Trag. Acct.
213000 – Trade creditors, foreign
213099 – Trade payable, foreign, 
adjustment
119300 – Vendor with a debit 
balance
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
256
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entires and save 
 your 
account assignment. 
Payables Due Within One Year
On the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – Procedures screen, click 
 from the 
displayed procedures list and then click the Choose 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Enter your 
chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of Accounts field of the chart of accounts screen. Then click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to proceed to the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – 
Accounts screen. Update the screen by using the information in Table 14-7. 
Table 14-6.  The Accounts for Posting Receivables Due After One Year
Reconciliation
Adjustment
Trag. Acct.
119000 – Trade debtors, foreign
119099 – Trade receivables, foreign, 
adjustment
119030 – Trade receivables 
foreign, due > 1 yr.
213000 – Trade creditors, foreign
213099 – Trade payables, foreign, 
adjustment
120000 – Other debtors due > 
one year
Table 14-7.  The Accounts for Posting Payables Due After One Year
Reconciliation
Adjustment
Trag. Acct.
119000 – Trade debtors- foreign
119099 – Trade receivables, foreign, 
adjustment
213300 – Debtor with a 
credit balance
Figure 14-36.  Assigning G/L accounts to periodic intervals for automatic posting of receivables  
due after one year
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
257
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entires and save 
  your 
account assignment.
Payables Due Between 1-5 Years
On the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – Procedures screen, select 
 
from the procedures list and click the Choose 
 button.
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts in the Chart of Accounts 
field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entry. The Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting 
– Accounts screen is displayed.
Update the screen using the data in Table 14-8.
Table 14-8.  The Accounts for Posting Payables Due Between 1-5 Years
Reconciliation
Adjustment
Trag. Acct.
119000 – Trade debtors, foreign
119099 – Trade receivables, foreign, 
adjustment
202000 – Other creditors due 
within 1-5 years
213000 – Trade Creditors- foreign
213099 – Trade payables, foreign, 
adjustment
213030 – Trade payables, 
foreign, due b/w 1-5 years
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entires. Then save 
  your 
account assignment. 
Payables Due After Five Years
On the Maintain FI Configuration: Automatic Posting – Procedures screen, click 
 and then 
click the Choose 
 button (or you can simply double-click the Payables button).
The Enter Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart 
of Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entry. The Maintain FI Configuration: 
Automatic Posting – Accounts screen is displayed (Figure 14-37). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
258
Update the screen using the data in Table 14-9. 
Table 14-9.  The Accounts for Posting Payables Due After Five Years
Reconciliation
Adjustment
Trag. Acct.
119000 – Trade debtors – foreign
119099 – Trade receivables, foreign, 
adjustment
212100 – Other creditors 
due > 5 years
213000 – Trade Creditors- foreign
213099 – Trade payables, foreign, 
adjustment
213040 – Trade payables, 
foreign, due > 5 years
Figure 14-37.  Assigning G/L accounts to periodic intervals for automatic posting of payables  
due after five years 
Save 
 your changes.
Adjustment Posting/Reversal
It is inevitable that during document posting, some incorrect document might be mistakenly entered in the 
system. An incorrect document entered in the SAP system cannot be deleted; instead it must be reversed. 
Documents can be reversed in the system using either the normal posting reversal or the negative reversal 
method.
With normal posting reversal, the debit and credit sides of the total transaction are increased with the 
adjustment figure. With negative reversal, the adjustment figure is subtracted from the total transaction 
figure in the account. In other words, the total transaction figure will not be increased with the transaction 
figures. The transaction figures in the system remain as the original figures before posting. This systematic 
style of reduction is referred to as negative posting. When you permit negative posting, negative postings will 
be permitted for your company code. This will allow the system to reduce transaction figures in G/L and in 
your customer and vendor accounts without actually increasing the total transaction figures.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
259
Permit Negative Postings
Problem: The accounting team in the C900 Plc company heard that transactions posted 
to the system can be systematically reversed without having to increase total transaction 
figures. The team is interested in knowing how this can benefit them. Consequently, your 
colleagues have asked you to customize the system to allow negative postings for company 
code C900.
In this exercise, you will specify a negative posting for your company code. This specification will allow 
you to carry out negative postings. To activate Negative Postings, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Adjustment 
Postings/Reversal ➤ Permit Negative Postings.
The Change View “Maintain Negative Postings in Company Code”: Overview screen is displayed 
(Figure 14-38). This is where you specify that you want your company code to be permitted for negative 
postings. 
Figure 14-38.  Maintaining negative postings by company code
Search for your company code using the Position button at the bottom of the screen. Then click the 
Negative Postings Permitted checkbox and save your settings 
.
Define Reasons for Reversal
It is mandatory to state the reason for reversing a document in SAP ERP during document reversal. Hence it 
is important to define reasons for reversing documents. When you’re posting document reversal, the reason 
for the reversal will be copied to the document that is reversed.
■
■Note  You can use the standard reversal reasons supplied by SAP or you can define your own reversal 
reasons.
To define reasons for reversal that will be applied to negative postings, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ 
Adjustment Postings/Reversal ➤ Define Reasons for Reversal.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
260
The Change View “Reason for Reverse Posting”: Overview screen is displayed. This screen contains 
reasons for reversal. For example:
01 - Reversal in current period
02 - Reversal in closed period
Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries 
screen (Figure 14-39).
Figure 14-39.  Reasons for using reverse posting
Update the following fields:
Reason: Enter up to two characters of your choice. This is a freely definable code. 
For example, we used ER (Error) as our reason code for this exercise. This code 
serves as the identifier code of your defined reason for reversal.
Text: Enter a short text that best describes the reason for reversal in this field, 
such as Posting Error C900.
Neg. Posting: When you click the Negative Posting checkbox, you can create 
negative posting for this reason code.
Alt.Pos.Dt: This checkbox allows alternative posting dates for this reason code.
Save 
.
Summary
This chapter covered account payables and account receivables, and explained what a customer account is. 
It also explained the steps involved in defining account groups with screen layout for customers. You learned 
how to maintain the field status group for general data for a customer account group. You also learned how 
to enter an accounting clerk identification code for customers and create number ranges and assign them 
to your account groups. You learned what a vendor account is and how to customize vendor accounts. 
You learned how to define account groups with screen layout for vendors, maintain the field status group 
for general data for a vendor account group, define accounting an clerk identification code for vendors, 
maintain number ranges for your vendor accounts, and assign number ranges to end or account groups.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 14 ■ Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
261
The next exercise you learned about in this chapter was terms of payment. You learned how to maintain 
terms of payment for customers and how to maintain terms of payment and an installation plan. You 
then learned how to define a cash discount base for an incoming invoice, define incoming invoices credit 
memos/credit memos, define document types for enjoy transactions, define tax code per transaction, and 
define accounts for net procedures.
You also learned about manual outgoing payments. You learned how to define tolerances for outgoing 
payments. You learned also how to define reason codes and how to define accounts for payment differences.
Apart from learning what an automatic outgoing payment is, you went through the steps involved when 
defining automatic outgoing payments. You looked at the specifications involved when defining and paying 
company codes, payment methods per country, and payment methods per company codes.
You learned how to define sort methods and adjust accounts for regrouping receivables/payable. You 
learned how to define sort methods for accounts receivables and payables by defining periodic intervals for 
receivables and payables. The next exercise explained how to define adjustment accounts for receivables/
payables by maturity based on periods receivable and payables due to enabling automatic postings to the 
G/L accounts. In so doing, you learned how to define accounts for receivables/payables due in one year, 
receivables due after one year, payables due between one and five years, and payables due after five years.
Finally, you looked at the difference between the normal reversal and negative reversal posting 
methods. You learned how to activate the indicator for permitted negative postings and how to define a 
reason code for negative posting.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to define correspondence in SAP. In doing this, you will define 
correspondence types, assign programs for correspondence type, define sender details for correspondence 
form, determine call-up functions, defining dunning procedures, specify the special G/L transactions 
that allow the system to dunn special G/L transactions, and learn about the various levels involved when 
defining dunning.
www.it-ebooks.info

263
Chapter 15
Defining the Dunning Procedure 
and Correspondence
This chapter explains what dunning is and covers the basic settings involved in customizing the dunning 
procedure. It also explains what correspondence is and the steps involved in defining correspondence types.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Define a dunning area
• 
Define the dunning procedures
• 
Specify special G/L transactions that allow the system to dun special G/L 
transactions
• 
Define correspondence types
• 
Assign programs for correspondence types
• 
Define sender details for correspondence forms
• 
Determine call-up functions
Dunning
It is normal business practice for business partners to fall behind when paying invoices. A customer may 
forget that an invoice is outstanding and need to be reminded to pay. SAP ERP provides a procedure referred 
to as a dunning notice. Dunning is the automatic process of sending notices to business partners based 
on defined criteria about overdue invoices or outstanding debt. The dunning program ensures that the 
mechanism for sending reminders is in place.
The program looks at business partners’ accounts to determine which open items are overdue and 
at what level and generates the appropriate dunning notices. The dunning program can be used to dun 
customers and vendors.
The next section explores the steps involved in customizing dunning in SAP.
Define the Dunning Area
The SAP system comes with a basic setting that you can use to customize the dunning area for your dunning 
program. The predefined setting is typically sufficient, so you do not need to customize the dunning area. You 
can access the dunning area using this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and 
Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Dunning ➤ Basic Settings for Dunning ➤ Define Dunning Area.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
264
In the basic dunning settings, you can define the following items:
Dunning Areas: A dunning area could be a department or a unit in a company 
code that you want to use to process your dunning.
Dunning Keys: These keys are company code-independent. The advantage of a 
dunning key is that it allows you to display items separately with a dunning key 
and print the dunning key text in the dunning notice.
Dunning Block Reasons: Allows you to exclude an item or account from being 
dunned during a dunning run. To do this, you enter a block key in the dunning 
block field in the master record.
■
■Tip  If you are defining your own dunning area, it’s best to use the basic settings supplied by the system.
Define the Dunning Procedures
Dunning procedures determine how dunning is carried out in SAP. You can define more than one dunning 
procedure. There is no restriction to the number of procedures that you can define. The account that you 
want to include in your dunning process must have a dunning procedure assigned to it. Dunning procedures 
are applicable to the standard and special G/L transactions.
■
■Note  SAP comes with standard dunning procedures. These procedures can be adapted and modified to 
meet your company code-specific settings. 
Problem: Company C900 wants to have four dunning levels as part of its credit control 
that will systematically generate reminder letters about overdue invoices. The first letter is 
a courteous reminder; subsequent reminders will be a bit firmer. Your task is to define four 
dunning levels for company C900.
When maintaining a dunning procedure, you can specify the following items:
• 
Dunning levels
• 
Charges
• 
Minimum amounts
• 
Dunning text
• 
Special G/L indicator
To define the dunning procedure for your dunning program, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Account Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Dunning ➤ 
Dunning Procedure ➤ Define Dunning Procedures. Or use transaction code FBMP.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
265
Using the information in Table 15-1, update the Maintain Dunning Procedure: Overview screen  
(see Figure 15-1).
Figure 15-1.  The screen for maintaining a dunning procedure
The Maintain Dunning Procedure: List screen comes up and displays a list of 
existing dunning procedures in the system. Click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen to go to the Maintain Dunning Procedure: Overview screen, 
where you will create your dunning procedure (Figure 15-1).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
266
Table 15-1.  The Input Fields to Update When Maintaining a Dunning Procedure
Field
Value
Description
Dun. Procedure
C900
Enter your company code in this field. This 
represents the key for the dunning procedure. 
The key is company code-independent, 
meaning the key can be used by several 
company codes in the system.
Name
Four-level dunning, 
every two weeks
Enter a short description for your dunning 
procedure.
General Data
Dunning Interval in Days
14
This specification defines the intervals in 
days after which point delinquent accounts 
are dunned at given intervals. The system 
checks at every dunning run to see if the 
number of days specified is greater than the 
last run day. If so, a new dunning notice is 
issued; otherwise, a new dunning notice will 
not be issued.
No.of Dunning Levels
4
Enter the number of dunning levels agreed in 
this procedure in this field. This specification 
represents the number of dunning levels 
permitted in this procedure. Usually the 
system allows a maximum of 9 levels.
Total due items from dunning level
Leave blank
Min.Days in Arrears (Acct)
5
This allows the system to determine the 
minimum days an item in the account must 
have for the account to be dunned. If the 
specified number of days is not reached, a 
dunning notice will not be issued.
Line Item Grace Period
2
This entry specifies the number of days that 
can exceed an item’s due date.
Interest Indicator
01
When selected, interest is calculated on 
outstanding debts.
Standard Transaction Dunning
Check
When this item is checked, the system will 
only dunn the normal business transactions. 
If you want to include the special G/L 
transactions in your dunning procedure, you 
should make sure that you choose the dun 
special G/L transactions option.
Reference Data
Ref. Dunning Procedure for Texts
C900
This provides dunning text for your dunning 
procedure.
Click the Enter 
 button at the top-left side of the screen or press Enter twice on 
your keyboard and save 
 your dunning procedure.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
267
Maintain Dunning Levels
Dunning levels allow you to assign dunning letters to your notices. As part of the credit control procedure, 
several letters are sent out systematically to remind business partners about open items. These letters are 
categorized into various levels (SAP allows a maximum of nine dunning levels). The first dunning level could 
be a very friendly reminder; the second is a bit firmer; and so on.
Click the 
 button at the top-left side of the Maintain Dunning 
Procedure: Overview screen to go to the Maintain Dunning Procedure: Dunning 
Levels screen (Figure 15-2).
Figure 15-2.  Maintaining dunning levels for your dunning procedure
Update the screen by specifying the following items:
Days in Arrears: The number of days an invoice is in arrears determines the 
dunning notice level that’s created for it. For example, if an overdue item is 
in arrears for two days, the payment program will create a dunning notice 
at dunning level 1. Likewise, if an overdue item is in arrears for 16 days, the 
payment program will create a dunning notice at level 2, and so on.
Calculate Interest? The system calculates interest on the set dunning levels. For 
example, interests should be calculated on dunning levels 3 and 4.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
268
Always Dun? This allows the dunning program to always dun the overdue item 
at the last dunning level so that no item is skipped at this level.
Print All Items: This allows you to print an overview of the customer/vendor 
account balance at the specified level.
Payment Deadline: This determines the new payment deadline printed on the 
dunning notice. It’s best to use a basic 12-month calendar to avoid the payment 
deadline falling on a weekend.
Always Dun in Legal Dunning Proc.: Selecting this option allows you to print 
dunning notices using a legal dunning procedure, regardless of whether any 
changes have taken place in the account or not. 
Maintain Charges
Sometimes a small fee may be charged on overdue items at certain dunning levels. Dunning charges are 
displayed only in the dunning letter; no other entry takes place in the system. Dunning charges are entered 
in a customer account manually.
Click the 
 button to go to the Maintain Dunning Procedure: Charges screen. The Dunning 
Charges dialog box pops up, allowing you to specify the currency you want to use for your dunning charges. 
Assume you want to use your company code currency for charges. Enter your company country currency 
key (for example, GBP) in the Currency field in the dialog box and click the Enter 
 button. The Maintain 
Dunning Procedure: Charges screen is displayed (Figure 15-3).
Figure 15-3.  Specifying charges for a dunning procedure
Specify the dunning levels and charges you want to apply to each dunning level 
and click the Enter 
 button at the top-left side of the screen to confirm. 
The next step is to specify the minimum amount you want to apply to your dunning levels.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
269
Maintain Minimum Amounts
You set minimum dunning amounts per dunning level to stop the system from triggering high dunning 
levels for insignificant amounts. You can do this by specifying a minimum amount or minimum percentage 
rates for each dunning level. The dunning program will check the open item to see if it is to be dunned. If 
the amount due on the open item is less than the minimum amount, the dunning program will exclude it 
from the dunning. But if the open item exceeds the minimum amount or the minimum percentage rate, the 
system will dun the open item. The system will also check your specifications to determine the minimum 
amount on which interest is applied.
Click the 
 button (circled in Figure 15-3) at the top of the Maintain 
Dunning Procedure: Charges screen to go to the Maintain Dunning Procedure: 
Minimum amounts screen. The Minimum Amounts dialog box pops up. Enter your 
company country currency key (for example, GBP) in the Currency field on the 
dialog box and click the Enter 
 button to confirm the currency you are using. The 
Maintain Dunning Procedure: Minimum amounts screen is displayed (Figure 15-4).
Figure 15-4.  Specifying the of minimum amount and minimum amount for interest for each dunning level
When the minimum amount or percentage is reached or exceeded in respect to all open items, the  
system will trigger the next upper dunning level. If the specified minimum amount or minimum 
percentage is not reached, the system will automatically assign the items to the next lower level and  
carry out another check.
■
■Note  You can specify either a minimum amount or a minimum percentage to your dunning procedure. 
You cannot use both at the same time.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm.
The next step is to specify the dunning texts you want to use for each dunning level.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
270
Maintain Dunning Texts
SAP comes with standard forms in SAPScript, which you can use for your dunning procedure. You can 
maintain the name of the form that you want to use per dunning level. SAPScript defines the layout of the 
form represented in the system. Dunning programs generate payment advice notes, dunning notices, and 
payment forms.
When customizing the dunning text, you first need to specify the dunning 
procedure for your company code data. Click the 
 button at the top 
of the Maintain Dunning Procedure: Minimum Amounts screen. The Company 
Code/Account Type dialog box comes up. Enter your company code (C900) in 
the Company Code field. Select the account type you are using for your 
dunning procedure. In this case, click the Customer radio button and then click 
the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your entries. The 
New Company Code dialog box pops up. Enter your company code (C900) in 
the Company Code field and click Enter 
 to confirm your entries. This action 
brings your company code to the top of the company codes displayed on the 
Maintain Dunning Procedure: Company Code Data screen. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Select the Dunning By 
Dunning Area and Separate Notice Per Dunning Level checkboxes and assign a 
reference company code for the text (Figure 15-5).
Figure 15-5.  Set the dunning by dunning area and separate notics per dunning level for the company code data
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your dunning 
procedure.
Next, you need to assign a SAPScript form for each dunning level. Click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen, which is the Maintain Dunning 
Procedure: Minimum Amounts screen.
Click the 
 button to specify dunning text forms for each dunning level.
The Company Code/Account Type dialog box pops up. Enter your company code 
(C900) in the Company Code field and specify your account type. In this 
instance, your account type is Customer. Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom 
of the screen to confirm your specifications. The Maintain Dunning Procedure: 
Dunning Texts screen appears to assign text forms for your dunning levels. 
Maintain the dunning text by specifying the appropriate forms for each dunning 
level (Figure 15-6).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
271
SAPScript forms contain the reminder letters you apply to each dunning level. SAP comes with 
predefined dunning forms that you can assign to each dunning level. For example, F150_DUNN_01, 
F150_DUNN_02, and F150_DUNN_03. We recommend that you use the SAPScript form F150_DUNN_01 
for dunning levels 1 & 2 and F150_DUNN-02 for dunning levels 3 &4. The F150_DUNN_01 content is more 
cautious than the remaining SAPScript forms.
■
■Tip  You can change the content of the forms to meet your requirements.
The final step in customizing the dunning procedure is to specify any special G/L 
indicators for customers and vendors. Click the Back 
 button to return to the 
previous screen, called Maintain Dunning Procedure: Overview.
Maintain Special G/L Indicator
The special G/L indicator allows you to dunn special G/L transactions. You can also apply special G/L 
transactions to your dunning by setting the appropriate indicators for special G/L transactions. For example, 
if you want a down payment request to be dunned, you must set the special G/L indicator in the dunning 
procedure. This will automatically allow the system to search for due down payment requests and include 
them in your dunning. You will look at special G/L transactions in detail in Chapter 16.
Click the 
 button on the top-right side of the Maintain Dunning 
Procedure: Overview screen. The Maintain Dunning Procedure: Special G/L 
Indicator screen appears. Select the special G/L transactions you want to include 
in your dunning procedure from the list of special G/L indicators (Figure 15-7).
Figure 15-6.  Input screen for your dunning text forms
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
272
Click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen, called Maintain 
Dunning Procedure Overview, and the save 
 your dunning procedure.
Correspondence
It is customary business practice to communicate with business partners through some form of 
correspondence during the normal course of business. SAP comes with standard correspondence tools, 
including several types of correspondence you can choose from. This enables you to generate ad-hoc 
correspondence. Examples of some of the correspondence you can generate in the system are payment 
notices, account statements, individual correspondence, and so on.
Correspondence types are letters represented in the system that are intended for your business 
partners. Standard correspondence types are supplied by SAP. You can use the standard SAP 
correspondence types or you can create your own.
You must create a correspondence type for every type of letter you need. Examples of correspondence 
types include:
• 
Payment notices
• 
Account statements
• 
Open item lists
Figure 15-7.  Configuring special G/L indicators
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
273
Each correspondence type has a related print program defined in the system and each print program 
has its own variant and SAPScript form assigned to it. For each correspondence type, a print program and 
selection variant are defined. This enables you to print correspondence.
■
■Note  You can also copy the standard correspondence types and modify them as desired. Using the 
correspondence types supplied by SAP saves you time.
Define Correspondence Types
Problem: Your client wants to be able generate account statements for their business 
partners. You have been asked to define a correspondence type for an account statement.
To define correspondence types, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings ➤ Correspondence ➤ Define Correspondence Types. Or use transaction code OB77.
The Information screen with the warning, “Caution: The Table Is Cross Client” 
pops up. Ignore that warning and click the Enter 
 button to accept. The 
Change View “Correspondence Types”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the Change View 
“Correspondence Types”: Details screen (Figure 15-8).
Figure 15-8.  Specifying your correspondence types
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
274
Update the following fields:
Correspondence: Enter a five-digit character as your correspondence ID. This 
will allow you to identify your correspondence among other correspondence in 
the system.
Correspond. Type: Enter a name for your correspondence type. For example, 
account statement, open item list, open item list with payment advice, and so on.
■
■Note  If you want to send a customer a communication containing data from a different company code, 
select the cross company code (Cross-Comp.Code) checkbox.
Click the Enter button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries 
and then save 
.
The next step is to assign programs to the correspondence types you just defined.
Assign Programs to the Correspondence Types
SAP comes with various standard print programs and correspondence variants assigned to correspondence 
types, which you can use when printing correspondence requests. To assign programs for your 
correspondence type, use this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global 
Settings ➤ Correspondence ➤ Assign Programs for Correspondence Types. Or use transaction code OB78.
The Change View “Allocate Program for Automatic Correspondence”: Overview 
screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to go to 
the input field (Figure 15-9).
Figure 15-9.  The screen where you assign programs for correspondence types
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
275
Using the information in Table 15-2, update the screen.
Table 15-2.  Information for the Input Field for Assigning Programs on the Correspondence Types Screen
Field
Value
Description
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code in this field.
Correspondence
ACS01
Enter your correspondence ID here. This can be up 
to five characters.
Name of the Print Program
RFKORD10
The print name entered here must be obtained from 
the print name supplied by SAP for correspondence 
types that fit your correspondence. You can access 
this print program using the matchcode in the Name 
of the Print Program field.
Name of Variant
SAP06
Some variants are already defined in the 
system. Since you are assigning programs for 
correspondence types for Account Statement, use 
the standard variant for account statement (SAP06) 
supplied by SAP.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your work.
For a bit more practice and to better understand how to assign correspondence 
types, use the standard SAP correspondence types and assign the following 
correspondence types to your company code C900: SAP08 - Open item list
• 
SAP14 - Open item list with payment advice (single)
Then, follow the steps you just completed in this section and assign a print 
program for correspondence type for Account Statement SAP06.
Define Sender Details for a Correspondence Form
The standard text specifications you make will be applicable to your letter form. This will determine the 
appearance of the letter you send to your business partners. To define sender details for a correspondence 
form, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings ➤ 
Correspondence ➤ Define Sender details for Correspondence Form. Or you can use transaction code OBB1
The Change View “Sender Details For Correspondence”: Overview screen is 
displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to go to the New 
Entries: Details of Added Entries screen. This is where you specify the sender 
details for the correspondence form (Figure 15-10).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
276
Using the information in Table 15-3, update the screen.
Figure 15-10.  Sender details for the correspondence form
Table 15-3.  Sender Details for the Correspondence Form
Field
Value
Description
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code in this field.
Program name
RFKORD10
Enter the print program name in this field. This is a 
predefined variant provided by SAP, specifically for the 
printing program for account statement. This program name 
allows you to print the exact correspondence.
Text ID
ADRS
The text ID you enter here is applicable to the standard text 
you apply to your correspondence type. For example, header 
text, footer text, and so on.
Header Text
Footer Text
Signature Text
Sender
ADRS_HEADER
ADRS_FOOTER
ADRS_SIGNATURE
ADRS_SENDER
This definition determines the appearance of your 
correspondence letter. This determines the format of header, 
the footer, the signature, and the sender.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your 
entries and save 
 your work.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
277
Determine Call-Up Functions
Call-up functions allow you to determine the correspondence type used online. For example, you can enter 
documents, settle payments, display documents and account balances, and process line items online when 
you activate the following functions:
• 
DocEnt (document entry)
• 
Pmnt (payment settlement)
• 
DocDsp (document display)
• 
AccDsp (account balance display and line item processing)
To determine your call-up functions use this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings ➤ Correspondence ➤ Determine Call-Up Functions. Or use can transaction 
code OB79.
The Change View “Call Options of Correspondence Types”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to display the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen. Use 
the information in Table 15-4 to update that screen.
Table 15-4.  Activating the Necessary Items for the Online Functions
CoCd
Corr
Correspondence Type
DocEnt
Pmnt
DocDsp
AccDsp
C900
ACS1
X
X
X
X
Click the Enter button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your settings and 
then save 
 your efforts.
Define Reply Addresses for Balance Confirmation
As part of an audit process, balance confirmations are often sent to business partners asking them to 
confirm their account balances. Replies to balance confirmations are usually sent to a third party (such 
as an auditor), who has a different address than the company code initiating the balance confirmation 
notifications. The most notable balance confirmation letters are:
Balance Confirmation: Allows you to generate letters notifying business 
partners of their account balance and to request a confirmation.
Balance Notification: Allows you to send balance notification to business 
partners and to request a reply only if they disagree with the balance.
Balance Request: Allows you to ask business partners to advise you on their 
account balance based on their own records.
To define reply addresses for balance confirmations, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Closing ➤ Count ➤ 
Balance Confirmation Correspondence ➤ Define Reply Address for Balance Confirmation.
The Change “Company Code-Dependent Address Data”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the
 button at the top of the screen to go to the New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen 
(Figure 15-11).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
278
Enter your company code in the CoCd field (C900) and enter the address identification in the Address 
ID field (0001, which is predefined by SAP). Click the Address 
 button at the top of the screen. The Edit 
address screen pops up. This screen allows you to enter the address balance confirmations that are sent 
to your business partners. Enter the address where you want business partners to return their balance 
confirmations (Figure 15-12).
Figure 15-11.  Assigning a reply address to a company code
Figure 15-12.  Defining the address where the balance confirmation replies are sent 
Click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your entries. The 
system will return to New Entries screen. Click the Save 
 button to save your 
reply address.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 15 ■ Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence
279
Summary
This chapter explained what dunning is and talked a bit about how to define a dunning area. You learned 
how to define a dunning procedure. You also learned how to specify dunning levels, charges, and 
minimum amounts for your dunning procedures. You learned how to assign text to the dunnings and how to 
specify the G/L indicators for each dunning procedure. You also learned how to use SAP’s correspondence 
features. You learned how to define correspondence types, assign programs to correspondence types, 
define details for correspondence forms, determine call-up functions, and add a reply address for balance 
confirmations.
The next chapter looks at configuring special G/L transactions. As part of this customizing activity, you 
will learn you how to define various types of down payments, define tax clearing accounts, and use various 
special G/L transactions, including guarantees (automatic offsetting entry (statistical), down payments 
(free offsetting entry), and bills of exchange (noted items).
www.it-ebooks.info

281
Chapter 16
Customizing Special G/L 
Transactions
This chapter looks at special G/L transactions and explains how to disclose them in SAP R/3 using 
alternative reconciliation accounts.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Demonstrate an understanding of special G/L transactions
• 
Explain various technical factors related to special G/L transactions, including 
guarantees (automatic offsetting entry (statistical), down payments (free offsetting 
entry), and down payment requests (noted items)
• 
Configure special G/L transactions for down payments, down payments received, 
and down payment requested
• 
Define tax clearing accounts for down payments
• 
Define alternative reconciliation accounts for customers and vendors
Special G/L Transactions
Special G/L transactions are part of the Accounts Receivable (AR) and Accounts Payable (AP) transactions 
needing special disclosure requirements in the financial statement. Due to their nature, special 
G/L transactions are posted to special subledgers and to the general ledger in the SAP ERP system. 
The advantage of maintaining special general ledger transactions is to meet the separate disclosure 
requirements. When customizing special G/L transactions, you use a special subledger account linked to 
special G/L accounts using a special G/L indicator to make postings to alternative reconciliation accounts 
(special G/L accounts) possible.
Special G/L transactions include down payments, bills of exchange, and other transactions. In SAP R/3 
special G/L transactions can be distinguished between business relationships and technical factors. This is 
represented in Figure 16-1.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
282
First you will be looking at the distinctions between technical factors represented in special G/L 
transactions and then you’ll look at the steps involved in customizing special G/L transactions in SAP R/3.
■
■Note  Before looking at special G/L transactions in detail, it is important to refer back to Chapter 5 for a 
recap on the General Ledger (G/L), subledgers, and G/L reconciliation accounts. We have provided a list of nine 
accounts in “Appendix A, Chapter 16, Customizing Special G/L Accounts” that you needed to complete this 
exercise.
Technical Factors
SAP differentiates between the different special G/L transactions based on the nature of their treatment. 
These distinctions are classified into three categories, referred to as technical factors:
• 
Noted items
• 
Free offsetting entries
• 
Automatic offsetting entries
Special G/L
Transactions
Down Payment
Bill of Exchange
Other Transactions
Automatic Offsetting
Entry
Noted Items
Free Offsetting Entry
Free Offsetting Entry
Free Offsetting Entry
Noted Items
Guarantees
Bill of Exchange
Payment Request
Down Payment
Received
Down Payment
Received
Down Payment Made
Down Payment
Request
Figure 16-1.  The distinctions between the special G/L transactions according to their relationships and 
technical factors
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
283
Noted Items
Noted items include down payment requests and bill of exchange payment requests. Noted items have no 
impact on the general ledger. Since no postings are made in the G/L accounts, noted items are purely for 
informational purposes and serve only as reminders. The system automatically reminds users that the down 
payment request exists for the account. The system doesn’t make open item balance checks or offsetting 
entries. Only one line item is updated when a noted item is created.
Noted items are treated as line items in the open item account, so you should activate the line item 
in the G/L master record for G/L accounts 119000 and 196000 (these are the G/L accounts you define in 
Appendix A for your special G/L transactions). You can include down payments in the payment program 
and dunn overdue down payments using the dunning program.
Free Offsetting Entry
An example of a free offsetting entry is a down payment that’s been received. Depending on the type of 
posting involved, free offsetting entries generate proper postings in the general ledger since they are part of 
accounts receivable/payable. Special G/L transactions related to free offsetting entries will automatically 
debit or credit special G/L reconciliation accounts once they occur.
Automatic Offsetting Entry
Typically, an automatic offsetting entry is a guarantee of payment and is termed a statistical posting because 
it’s not displayed in the financial statements. Automatic offsetting entries are only displayed as notes to the 
financial statements. Since they form part of the automatic offsetting entries, entries are made in the same 
offsetting account. Offsetting entries accounts are defined in the IMG (implementation guide), which makes 
it possible for the system to make automatic offsetting entries. Once an open item is cleared in the account, 
the system will automatically clear the item in the offsetting account.
Configuration of Special G/L Transactions
You look at down payments made, down payments received, down payment requests, and guarantees 
in this exercise. No additional configurations are needed for the bills of exchange and other special G/L 
transactions. The settings for guarantees supplied by SAP are sufficient. 
Down Payments
Down payments are a kind of short-term finance. It is a normal business practice for business partners to 
obtain short-term finance by way of down payments without accruing interest. For example, a manufacturer 
may not be able to finance its production and may request a down payment before production begins 
or during or after production. Accounting practices separate down payments from the normal business 
receivables and payables and display them separately on the balance sheet.
There are several factors that give rise to down payments under the normal course of doing business. 
Payables or receivables arising from the purchase of an asset or from providing a service can be financed 
through down payments. Down payments are disclosed on the balance sheet as assets or liabilities. If the 
transaction is a receivable, it is treated as an asset and debited accordingly. On the other hand, if the down 
payment is payable, it is a liability and it is credited on the balance sheet. Upon the delivery of goods or the 
performance of a service for which the down payment was made, the accounts involved need to be cleared 
and the down payment is no longer displayed on the balance sheet.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
284
Down Payment Received
Down payment received is an advance payment made to you by your customers as a down payment in 
anticipation of the provision of goods or services to your customer. Only minimum settings are required 
here, because SAP comes with a predefined setting for down payments. In this exercise, you define 
reconciliation accounts for customers’ down payments. Your specifications will make it possible for the 
system to automatically post down payment transactions to a special G/L reconciliation account instead of 
the normal receivable G/L reconciliation account.
Problem: As part of their accounting policy, company C900 Plc wants to be able to post 
customer down payments to a special reconciliation account, instead of to the normal 
customer reconciliation account. You must define the reconciliation accounts for the 
customer down payment for com C900.
To define the reconciliation accounts for down payments, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Down 
Payments Received ➤ Define Reconciliation Accounts for Customer Down Payments. Or use transaction 
code OBXR.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L List screen is displayed (Figure 16-2). This screen 
contains the list of special G/L transactions.
Figure 16-2.  List of special G/L transactions provided in SAP
Select Down Payment from the list of items displayed on the screen by clicking on it. Then click the 
 
Details button on the top-left side of the screen.
The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen to go to the Maintain 
Accounting Configuration: Special G/L Accounts screen. It holds the input field where you will assign the 
reconciliation account and special G/L account to your down payment (Figure 16-3).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
285
Enter G/L account 119000 in the Reconciliation Account field and special G/L account 170000 in the 
Special G/L Account field (these are the G/L accounts you created in Appendix A). Enter A into the Output 
Tax Clearing field. This specification allows the system to post output tax elements arising from down 
payments to the output tax clearing account. SAP comes with two tax types: A for output tax and V for input 
tax. You can access these tax types by using the matchcode or the search function that appears when you 
click on the Output Tax Clearing field. When you click on the matchcode or the search function, a list of tax 
types is displayed. Select tax type A and then 
 save your work.
You can display the down payment for customer properties to see if the standard settings supplied by 
SAP meet your requirements. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Maintain 
Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – Properties screen appears (Figure 16-4).
■
■Note  SAP comes with predefined settings for special G/L properties. Check the special G/L specifications 
provided by the system to make sure that they meet your requirements.
Figure 16-3.  Account assignments to special G/L accounts—customer down payments
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
286
Once you are satisfied with the settings for the down payments, save 
 your configuration.
The next step in this exercise is to define the reconciliation accounts for the customer down payments.
Down Payment Requests (Customer)
As mentioned earlier, a down payment is a form of short-term finance. It can also be an engendered 
commitment from a customer, especially when the integrity of the customer is in question. Down payment 
requests are normal business practice when advance payment is requested prior to the commencement of a 
business transaction.
To define the reconciliation accounts for customer down payment requests, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions 
➤ Down Payments Received ➤ Define Reconciliation Accounts for Customer Down Payments. Or use 
transaction code OBXR.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L List screen is displayed. Select Down Payment 
Request from the list of items displayed on the screen and click the Details 
 button on the top-left side of 
the screen.
The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen to go to the Maintain 
Accounting Configuration: Special G/L Accounts screen. This is where you assign the reconciliation account 
and special G/L account to your down payment request (Figure 16-5).
Figure 16-4.  The standard properties for customer down payments
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
287
Enter G/L account 119000 into the Reconciliation Account field and special G/L account 196000 into 
the Special G/L Account field. Enter planning level type FF (Down Payment Request) in the Planning 
Level field.
Save 
 your work.
The final step in defining customer down payments is to define the tax clearing account.
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Customer Down Payments)
The tax entered for the down payment will be posted to the tax clearing account you define in this activity, 
and this tax rate typically depends on your country’s legal specifications. To define the account for tax 
clearing for customer down payments, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts 
Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Down Payments Received ➤ Define Account 
for Tax Clearing. Or use transaction code OBXB.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedures screen is displayed. From the 
Procedure list, select 
 and click the Choose 
 button. The Chart of Accounts Entry screen 
pops up. Enter your chart of accounts ID (CA90) in the Enter Chart of Account field and click the Continue 
 button to proceed to the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen. Click the 
Output Tax Clearing checkbox (Figure 16-6). By activating output tax clearing, you will be able to specify the 
tax type and the G/L account you want for down payments.
Figure 16-5.  Special G/L accounts for customer down payment requests
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
288
Click the Save 
 button. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen is 
displayed. Enter Output Tax type A in the Output Tax Type field and enter the appropriate G/L account for 
Output Tax Clearing on down payments (170010) in the Account field (Figure 16-7).
Save 
 your work.
Figure 16-6.  Specifying the output tax clearing tax type for the customer
Figure 16-7.  Specifying the output tax type and account for output tax clearing on customer down payments
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
289
Down Payment Made
Down payment made is an advance you pay to your vendor as a down payment in anticipation of receiving 
goods or services. For example, you might make a down payment on your current assets. Before customizing 
the down payment made, make sure that you have created the appropriate alternative reconciliation 
accounts for down payments. You do this in “Appendix A, Chapter 16, Customizing Special G/L Accounts.”
In this exercise, you will define vendor down payments, which are managed in the G/L. The settings 
you specify here will make it possible for the system to automatically post down payment transactions to a 
special G/L reconciliation account instead of to the normal receivable G/L reconciliation account.
Problem: As part of their accounting policy, company C900 Plc wants to be able to post 
vendor down payments to a special reconciliation account, instead of to the normal 
vendor reconciliation account. You must define reconciliation accounts for vendor down 
payments for company C900.
To define the reconciliation accounts for down payments, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Down 
Payments Received ➤ Define Reconciliation Accounts for Customer Down Payments. Or use transaction 
code OBXR.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L List is displayed. This screen contains a list of 
special G/L transactions represented in SAP. To specify the special G/L account that the down payment 
transaction will be posted to, select Down Payment on Current Assets from the list of displayed special G/L 
transactions on the screen and click the Choose 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. You can also 
just double-click the option from the list in Figure 16-8.
Figure 16-8.  Possible list of special G/L transactions provided by SAP
The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries. The Maintain Accounting 
Configuration for Special G/L Accounts screen is displayed. Enter G/L account 213000 in the Reconciliation 
Account field and the special G/L account 159000 in the Special G/L Account field. Enter Input tax type V in 
the Input Tax Clearing field (Figure 16-9). When you enter the tax type into the input clearing field, the 
system can automatically post input tax elements arising from down payments to the input tax clearing 
account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
290
Save 
 your work. You can check the default specifications for the special G/L payment properties to 
see if the standard settings are adequate. To do this, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen.
Down Payment Requests for Vendors
Vender down payment requests need to be customized when a vendor requests payment from you before 
commencing a business transaction. To customize vendor down payment requests, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ 
Down Payments Made ➤ Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Down Payments. Or use transaction 
code OBYR.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L List screen is displayed. This screen contains the 
list of special G/L transactions. Select Down Payment Request from the list by clicking on it and then clicking 
the Details 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. 
Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of Accounts field and click the Continue 
 button. The 
Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – Accounts screen is displayed. Enter G/L account 213000 
in the Reconciliation Account field and enter the special G/L account 196300 in the Special G/L Account 
field. Enter Planning Level Type FF (Down Payment Request) in the Planning Level field (Figure 16-10). The 
planning level helps to control cash position and provide liquidity forecasts in cash management.
Figure 16-9.  Special G/L accounts for vendor advances
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
291
Save 
 your work.
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Vendor Down Payments)
Depending on your country’s legal specifications, the tax entered for down payments will be posted to the 
tax clearing account you define here.
Problem: Your client wants a tax clearing account that will enable them to display gross 
down payments in the vendor accounts in order to meet legal requirements. Your task is to 
define a clearing account for down payments made that will enable your client to achieve 
this objective.
To define an account for tax clearing for your vendor down payments, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ 
Down Payments Made ➤ Define Account for Tax Clearing. Or use transaction code OBXD.
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Procedures screen is displayed. From the 
Procedure list, select Input Tax Clearing on Down Payments by clicking on it and clicking the Choose 
 
button. The Chart of Accounts Entry screen pops up. Enter your chart of accounts ID (CA90) in the Enter 
Chart of Account field and click the Continue 
 button to proceed to the Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen. Click the Input Tax Clearing checkbox. Click the Save 
 button. 
The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen is displayed. Enter Input Tax 
type V in the Input Tax Type field and enter the appropriate G/L account number (159010) for input tax 
clearing on down payments. Click the Enter 
 button and then save 
 your work.
Figure 16-10.  Special G/L accounts for vendor down payment requests
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
292
Guarantees
A bank guarantee is a legally binding document issued by a bank or other financial institution on behalf of 
a client to a third party (supplier) to enable the client to obtain goods or services from a supplier on credit 
for an agreed time period. A bank guarantee is a type of short-term borrowing. It is a formal assurance by 
the bank to make payments to a supplier in an event where the client fails to meet their part of the debt 
obligation. Banks normally request some form of collateral or security from their clients before issuing them 
a letter of credit in order to safeguard the bank’s assets.
In this activity, you will define guarantees for customers and vendors and walk through the steps 
involved in defining accounts for an automatic offsetting entry.
Define Alternative Reconciliation Accounts for Customers  
(Guarantees)
Alternative reconciliation accounts for customers are guarantees received from customers as payments 
toward services offered or goods delivered at a specific future date. Customizing the alternative 
reconciliation accounts will allow you to perform the specifications of the account that guarantees received 
are posted.
Problem: It is a mandatory disclosure requirement for company C900 Plc to maintain 
separate special G/L accounts where guarantees are posted, instead of to the normal 
customer/vendor reconciliation accounts. Your task is to define an alternative 
reconciliation account that will enable posting these guarantees to G/L special accounts.
To specify the alternative reconciliation account for customers for posting guarantees, follow this 
menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business 
Transactions ➤ Postings with Alternative Reconciliation Account ➤ Other Special G/L Transactions ➤ 
Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Customers. Or use transaction code OBXY.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – List screen is displayed. Select Guarantee from 
the displayed list of items and click the Choose button at the top left to go to the screen where you will 
maintain accounting configurations. The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of 
accounts (CA90) and click the Enter 
 button. The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – 
Accounts screen is displayed. Enter G/L account number 119000 in the Reconciliation Account field and 
account number 196100 in the Special G/L Account field (Figure 16-11). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
293
Click the Enter 
 button or press Enter on your keyboard to confirm your entries and then  
save 
 your work.
Define Alternative Reconciliation Accounts for Vendors (Guarantees) 
Guarantees made to vendors are posted to the alternative reconciliation accounts you set up in this 
exercise. Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts 
Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Postings with Alternative Reconciliation Account ➤ Other Special G/L 
Transactions ➤ Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Vendors. Or use transaction code OBXT.
The Maintain Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – List screen is displayed. To configure a guarantee 
for a vendor, double-click the guarantee on the list. The Chart of Accounts Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your 
chart of accounts (CA90) and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen. The Maintain 
Accounting Configuration: Special G/L – Accounts screen is displayed. Enter G/L reconciliation account 21300 
in the Recon. Acct field and G/L account 196400 in the Special G/L Account field. Save 
 your work.
The final step in this exercise is to define accounts for automatic offsetting entries for customer and 
vendor guarantees. 
Define Accounts for Automatic Offsetting Entry
Problem: Your task is to define accounts for automatic offsetting entries accounts for the 
following special G/L transaction types:
DG – Customer-Guarantee
DS – Customer-Check/Bill of Exchange
KG – Vendor-Guarantee
KS – Vendor-Check/Bill of Exchange
Figure 16-11.  Account assignment to special G/L accounts—customer guarantees
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
294
By defining accounts for automatic offsetting entries, you are simply specifying the G/L accounts that 
the system will post the offsetting entry to for special G/L transactions. These are based on account type, 
special G/L indicator, chart of accounts and reconciliation accounts. Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable ➤ Business Transactions ➤ Postings with 
Alternative Reconciliation Account ➤ Other Special G/L Transactions ➤ Define Accounts for Automatic 
Offsetting Entry. Or use transaction code OBXS.
The Enter Your Chart of Accounts dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts ID in the Chart of 
Accounts field. Confirm your entry by clicking the Enter 
 button to proceed to the Configuration Accounting 
Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen. Click the Account Type/Special G/L Indicator checkbox. This setting 
allows the system to automatically post special G/L transactions to the appropriate special G/L accounts.  
When you click the Save 
 button at the top of the screen, the Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic 
Posts – Accounts screen appears. This is where you assign the G/L accounts for the automatic offsetting postings.
Use the information in Table 16-1 to update the Account Type/Special G/L Indicator and Account fields 
(Figure 16-12).
Table 16-1.  List of Account Type/Special G/L indicators and Accounts
Account Type/Sp.G/L Indicator
Account
DG Customer – Guarantee
196110
DS Customer – Check/Bill of Exchange
196210
KG Vendor – Guarantee
196410
KS Vendor – Check/Bill of Exchange
196210
Figure 16-12.  Assigning account types to G/L accounts for automatic statistical offsetting entries
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your configuration.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 16 ■ Customizing Special G/L Transactions
295
Summary
This chapter looked at special G/L transactions in detail by comparing special G/L transactions with the 
normal G/L transactions. It explained various forms of special G/L transactions covered in SAP ERP, such 
as down payments, bills of exchange, and guarantees. You learned about the technical factors they belong 
to (noted items, free offsetting entry, and automatic offsetting entry). You also learned how to configure 
down payments (down payment made, down payment received, and down payment request) and how 
to check the properties of standard down payment settings supplied by SAP to see if they meet your 
requirements. You also learned how to define tax clearing accounts for down payments and learned about 
the specifications of the accounts special G/L transactions are posted to.
Finally, you learned what a guarantee is. You learned about alternative reconciliation accounts for 
customers/vendors and defined accounts for an automatic offsetting entry.
The next chapter explains how to create vendor/customer master records, post invoices and credit 
memos, hold and park documents, post incoming and outgoing payments, post down payments, display 
balance/line items, print correspondence, execute dunning notices, process manual outgoing payments/
automatic payments, and perform cash journal postings.
www.it-ebooks.info

297
Chapter 17
End User - Accounting  
Document Posting
This chapter explains how to enter information about business transactions in the form of documents in  
the user side of the system. You will see how the customizations you made in Chapters 1-16 work on the  
user side.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Create a vendor/customer master record
• 
Post invoices
• 
Post credit memos
• 
Hold and park documents
• 
Post incoming and outgoing payments
• 
Post down payments
• 
Display balance/line items
• 
Print correspondence
• 
Execute dunning
• 
Process manual outgoing payments/automatic payments
• 
Perform Cash Journal postings
Customer/ Vendor Master Record
In this exercise, you create some vendor/customer master records for your business partner and enter some 
invoices to test the settings you configured in earlier chapters.
Vendor/customer master data contains information about your business partners (customers and vendors). 
The information related to a vendor or a customer is stored in their individual master record. A typical vendor’s 
master record contains the vendor’s name, address, terms of payment, and so on.
Problem: Your task is to create customer and vendor master records.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
298
Create Customer Master Record
To create a customer master record, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts 
Receivable ➤ Master Records ➤ Create. Or use transaction code FD01.
The Customer Create: Initial Screen is displayed. Select your Account Group (Foreign Customer – C900)  
in the Account Group field using the pull-down arrow. Then enter your company code (C900) in the 
Company Code field (Figure 17-1).
Click the 
 Enter button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Create Customer: General Data 
screen appears (Figure 17-2).
Figure 17-1.  Selecting a customer account group
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
299
Update the following fields:
Name: Enter the customer’s name.
Search Term 1/2: Enter the search code. Preferably use part of the  
customer name.
Street Address: Enter your customer’s address in this section.
Specify: Enter the GB (Great Britain) country code.
Region: This is your customer’s region. Enter KE (Kent) in this field.
The next step is to update the company code data. Click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen. The Create Customer: Company Code Data screen is displayed. In the Account Management section 
of the screen, update the following fields:
Recon. Account: Enter your customer reconciliation account (1190000) 
in this field. All postings in the subledger are automatically updated in the 
reconciliation account.
Sort Key: Enter the sort key (01) in this field.
Figure 17-2.  The screen where you update the customer’s address details
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
300
The next step is to enter the payment transactions in the customer master record. Click the 
 tab at the top of the screen to go to the payment transaction data. Update the following 
fields:
Terms of Payment: Enter the payment terms key (CUS1) you defined. This key 
holds information about the terms of trade agreed upon for settling prompt 
invoice payments with your business partner.
Payment Method: Specify the payment methods CT (Check/Transfer) you 
want to use to make payments to business partners. For example, when you use 
automatic payments, the system will use check/bank transfer in the payment 
program.
House Bank: Enter the house bank you want to use for making payments in the 
field. For example, BARC1.
For the final step in creating your customer general data, click the 
 tab at the top of 
the screen to go to the screen where you will enter your customer correspondence data. Update the dunning 
data by entering C900 in the Dunning Procedure field.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your customer master record.  
A message box pops up with the question, “Do you want to save customer data to file?” Click the 
 
button on the pop-up screen to confirm that you want to save your master record. The system will notify you 
on the status bar that your customer has been created.
Before continuing, create more customer master records using your own discretion.
Create Vendor Master Record
To create a vendor master record, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts 
Payable ➤ Master Records ➤ Create. Or use transaction code FK01.
The Create Vendor: Initial Screen is displayed (Figure 17-3). Enter your company code (C900) in the 
Company Code field and enter the Vendor Account group (FVDR for foreign vendor) in the Account Group field.
When you click Enter 
 or press Enter on the keyboard, the Create Vendor: Address screen is displayed 
(Figure 17-4). This is where you will update your vendor’s address. 
Figure 17-3.  The Create Vendor Master Record initial screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
301
Update the following fields:
Name: Enter your vendor’s name in the name field.
Search Term 1/2: Enter the search code. It’s best to use part of the  
customer’s name.
Street Address: Enter your customer’s address in this section.
Country: Enter the GB (Great Britain) country code.
 Region: Enter Lo (London)
After updating the Create Vendor: Address screen, you need to update your vendor’s accounting 
information. To specify your vendor’s account details, click the Next Screen 
 button on the top-left side 
of the screen about four times or so until you get to the Create Vendor: Accounting Information Accounting 
screen. Update the following fields:
Recon. Account: Enter your vendor reconciliation account (213000).
Sort Key: Enter the sort key (01).
Figure 17-4.  Update the vendor’s address here
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
302
The final step in creating a vendor’s master record is to update the vendor’s financial transaction. Click 
the Next Screen 
 icon to go to the next screen, called Change Vendor: Payment Transactions Accounting. 
Update following fields: 
Terms of Payment: Enter the code VDR1 for the terms of payment.
Payment Method: Enter the method you want to use for automatic payment. 
This example uses CT (Check/Transfer).
House Bank: Enter the house bank you want to use in making payment in your 
payment program in this field. This example uses Barc1.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and then save 
 your vendor master record.
Before continuing, create more vendor master records using your discretion.
Accounts Receivable—Document Entry
In this exercise, you will learn how to enter a customer document (invoice), display the document, and post 
the document to the system, as well as how to post credit memos.
Problem: Account receivable clerks want to know how to enter and post basic invoices  
to the system.
Customer Invoice Posting
To enter invoice receipts and post invoices, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
Accounts Receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Invoice. Or use transaction code FB70.
■
■Tip   The system will normally display the last Customer Invoice Company Code screen you used for posting 
invoices as the default screen. To avoid posting invoices to the wrong company, make sure that the correct 
company code is displayed on top of the screen. Otherwise, click the Company Code button on top of the 
screen and enter the details. The Enter Company Code dialog box pops up. In the Company Code field, enter 
your company code (C900) and click the Continue 
 button. The system will display the appropriate customer 
invoice screen for invoice posting.
The Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900 screen appears. Click the 
 button 
at the top of the screen. The Enter Company Code dialog box pops up. This screen will allow you to specify 
the company code you want to post invoices to. Enter your company code (C900) in the Company Code field 
and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen to proceed to the screen where you will input 
and post the invoice, which is the Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900 screen (Figure 17-5). Your 
company code is displayed at the top of the screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
303
Use the matchcode or the Search function 
 in the Customer Field to search for the customer 
account you want to post invoices to. When you click the matchcode on the customer field, the Account or 
Matchcode for the Next Line Item (1) screen pops up. Enter your company code (C900; this is usually the 
default) in the Company Code field and then click the Continue 
 button on the bottom-right side of the 
screen. The Account or Matchcode for the Next Line Item (1) screen is displayed (Figure 17-6).
Figure 17-5.  Initial Customer Invoice Basic screen for invoice input
Figure 17-6.  This Account screen is displaying a list of customers for your company code 
Choose the customer whose invoice you want to process by double-clicking on it from the customer 
displayed list (or you can click the name and then double-click the Enter 
 button). For example, if you 
click on the Customer Account Number 152 from the Customer list, that customer is entered into the 
Customer field (Figure 17-7). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
304
Update the remaining fields in the screen: 
Invoice Date: This is the date on the document (the date the invoice was issued).
Posting Date: The date you posted the document. This will usually be today’s 
date, although it is possible to back-date a post. 
Amount: Enter the document amount (2000). This is the amount on the 
customer’s invoice.
Calculate Tax: If you want the system to calculate the tax on the invoice amount, 
select the Calculate Tax checkbox. Then specify your output tax code (A2) in the 
field below this one. The system will apply the percentage rate assigned to this 
tax code and will calculate the tax amount for your invoice.
G/L Acct: Enter the G/L account (800000) where you want the invoice to be 
posted to.
DC: Specify the accounting treatment of the Credit or Debit transaction. This will 
determine how the transaction is posted in the account.
Figure 17-7.  Customer Invoice Basic screen where you enter customer invoice details and the G/L account to 
which the invoice is posted 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
305
Amount in Doc. Curr.: Enter an * sign in this field. This will allow the system 
to automatically copy the amount in the amount field into this field. It is also 
possible for you to enter the invoice amount yourself. We recommend that you 
use the * sign in this field, because this will help you avoid entering different 
amounts. It’s also faster when processing large volume of invoices.
Tax Code: The system will use the tax code you entered in the Calculate Tax field 
above in this field. Otherwise, you have to enter it yourself.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries. To display the 
invoice you entered for your customer, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Document 
Overview screen is displayed (Figure 17-8) and shows the line item of your customer invoice.
Figure 17-8.  The Document Overview screen shows the documents posted to the system
If you are satisfied with your entries, post your entries by clicking the Post 
 button at the top of the 
screen. Upon posting/saving, the system will notify you from the status bar that your document was posted 
in your company code C900. 
■
■Note  When you post the customer invoice, the system will automatically debit the customer account and 
post the invoice amount to the credit side of the sales revenue account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
306
Posting a Credit Memo
A credit memo is a systematic reduction of the original invoice amount arising for a number of reasons.  
You might reduce an invoice because the customer was accidentally overcharged, or the product delivered 
was defective, or there was complaint about product delivered or service rendered, and so on.
When an invoice is posted to the system, the customer’s account is debited. On the other hand, when  
a credit memo is posted, the customer’s account is credited to reduce the account balance by the credit 
memo amount.
Problem: Your company invoiced a customer for the amount of $2000 for goods supplied, 
but they complained that the goods had light damage on transit. You have been asked to 
raise a credit memo to reduce the original invoice amount by $200. Your task is to post a 
credit amount of $200 to the system to reduce the invoice amount from $2000 to $1800.
To post a credit memo, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account 
Receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Credit Memo. Or use transaction code FB75. The Enter Customer Credit 
Memo: Company Code C900 screen comes up (Figure 17-9).
Figure 17-9.  The Customer Credit Memo screen, where you can enter a credit memo to reduce a customer’s 
account and the G/L account against an invoice amount posted
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
307
Update the following fields: 
Transaction: This is the nature of transaction: Credit Memo. This is set by default.
Customer: Enter your customer number account (152) that you want to post 
credit memo to.
Document Date: This is the credit memo date.
Posting Date: The date to post the credit memo. This is usually today’s date.
Amount: This is the credit memo amount (200).
Calculate Tax: Check this option to include the credit memo amount for output 
tax amount calculation.
G/L Acct: This is the G/L 800000 account you want to post the credit memo 
amount to. This will be debited against the sales revenue account and credited to 
the customer account to reduce the original invoice.
Short Text: This is set by default when you enter the G/L account in the  
G/L account field and click Enter or press Enter on your keyboard.
D/C: Specify whether the transaction should be treated as debit or credit. Since 
this is a customer credit memo, enter debit in this field.
Amount in Doc. Curr: Enter the credit memo amount in this field or use the * sign.
Tax: The tax code application to your credit memo is set by default by the system. 
Otherwise, enter it manually. 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries. To display the credit 
memo you entered, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Document Overview screen is 
displayed (Figure 17-10) showing the line item of your customer credit memo.
Figure 17-10.  The Document Overview screen showing the credit memo posted to the system
Post your entries by clicking the Save 
 button. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
308
Holding and Parking Documents
During document processing, some information that’s needed to complete a transaction may not be readily 
available. As a result, the document cannot be posted properly. The important thing about SAP is that it 
gives you the flexibility to save incomplete documents without performing proper FI posting. In other words, 
you don’t have terminate your processing; you can come back later to complete the document and perform 
proper FI posting when you have the information required to complete the document. You can post it later 
without having to interrupt your document processing.
In SAP ERP, there are two ways to save an incomplete document without performing proper FI posting:
• 
Holding documents: This process allows incomplete documents to be held in the 
system temporarily until the document is completed. In this case, the document 
being held is not available for evaluation. That means no account balance is updated 
and no document number is assigned.
• 
Parking documents: Parked documents are just an extension of held documents. 
Incomplete documents can be saved temporarily for further processing at a later time. 
Unlike withheld documents, when a document is parked, the document is available 
for real-time evaluation. Like held documents, parked documents can be completed 
at a later time to form part of a completed financial accounting posting. Parked 
documents can be deleted like held documents when they are no longer required.
You can perform document parking for vendor accounts (this includes invoices and credit memos),  
for customer accounts (this includes invoices and credit memos), and for G/L accounts.
Holding Documents
Problem: Company C900 Plc’s accounting clerks have heard of the hold document 
function, but they are not sure exactly how it works.
Your task is to explain to the account clerks how to perform document holding without 
having to terminate the document processing.
In this exercise, let’s assume that you are not sure which general ledger account to use when entering a 
customer invoice and you want to use the hold function until you find out which G/L account to use. To go to 
the customer invoice input screen, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts 
Receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Invoice. Or use transaction code FB70. The Enter Customer Invoice: 
Company Code C900 screen is displayed (Figure 17-11).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
309
Update the screen using the data shown in Figure 17-11. Leave the G/L account field blank and click 
the 
 button to temporarily hold the document until you can ascertain the proper G/L account to 
use. The Hold Document dialog box pops up. Enter a number such as H001 (a meaningful number of your 
choice that you can remember easily) in the Temporary Document Number field. This number will enable 
you to identify the held document among others. Click the 
 button on the bottom-left side 
of the screen. The Hold Document screen disappears and the system will notify you on the massage bar that 
 on Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900.
Calling Up a Held Document
Problem: You have now obtained the right G/L account from a colleague and you want to 
find and open your held document to complete it and post it.
To display the held document, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the Enter Customer 
Invoice: Company Code C900 screen. The Tree section of the screen opens on the left side. It contains a Held 
Documents folder (Figure 17-12).
Figure 17-11.  The Customer Invoice Basic screen, where you will use the hold function
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
310
Double-click the Held Documents folder to display the contents. A list of held documents is displayed, 
including your held document, called 
. To display the held document, double-click on H001 from 
the displayed list. The held document is called up in the Enter Customer Invoice: Company code  
C900 dialog. Complete the document by adding the missing G/L account (800000); then click the 
 
button to hide the Tree pane.
To check the completed document before posting, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. 
The Document Overview screen appears and displays the completed document. Check the displayed 
documents to make sure that you are satisfied with your completed document before posting. Click the  
Post 
 button at the top of the screen to post your document. 
Parking Documents
Problem: An accounting clerk want to know if it is possible to park an incomplete document 
that will be available for real-time evaluation and come back later after obtaining the 
right information, all without interrupting document processing. The accounting clerk is 
not sure which tax code to use and wants to park the documents so he can come back later 
with the right tax code.
To go to the Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900 screen, use this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts Receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Invoice. Or use transaction code FB70.
Use the information in Table 17-1 to update the screen.
Figure 17-12.  The Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900 screen with the Tree pane displaying the 
Held Documents folder
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
311
Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to park your document.
The system will notify you on the status bar that that document C90018000000082012 was parked.
■
■Tip   Take note of the parked document number. You will need it to identify your document when you want 
to return to it.
Parking/Editing a Document
Problem: Assume that tax code A2 is what you need for the parked document. Your task 
is to advise the accounting clerk on how to complete the parked document and post it as a 
complete document.
To go to the Enter Customer Invoice: Company Code C900 screen, click the 
 button on the 
top-left side of the screen. The tree section is expanded.
Click the 
 folder to open it; a list of parked document numbers is displayed.
Select the appropriate parked document number (C90018000000082012 in this example) that you want 
to process from the list. The parked document is called up. Complete the document by updating the Tax field 
on the Edit Parked Customer Invoice screen. Click the 
 button on the top of the screen to display 
your completed document and check your entries. If you are satisfied with your entries, click the 
 
button to post the completed document. 
Incoming Payments
In this exercise, you learn three methods for manually posting incoming customer payments in SAP ERP:
• 
Posting a standard incoming payment
• 
Posting a partial payment
• 
Posting a residual item
Table 17-1.  The Information to Complete the Enter Customer Invoice Screen 
for a Parked Document
Field
Value
Customer
Enter your customer number
Invoice Date
Today’s date
Posting Date
Set by default by the system
Amount
Enter the invoice amount (4000 in this example)
G/L Account
800000
Amount in Doc. Curr
1000
Tax Code
Leave this blank
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
312
Posting a Standard Incoming Payment
Posting a standard incoming payment is when a customer pays an outstanding invoice and you post the 
incoming payment and clear it against the billing document. The balancing figure in the customer account 
becomes nil.
Problem: A billing document of $2000 less discount of $40 was posted and the customer 
made payment of $1960 toward the outstanding invoice to clear the account.
To post the incoming payment and clear it against the open items, follow this menu path: Accounting 
➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable ➤ Document Entry➤ Incoming Payment. Or use transaction 
code F-28. The Post Incoming Payments: Header Data screen is displayed (Figure 17-13).
Figure 17-13.  The screen where incoming payments are posted
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
313
Update the following fields: 
Document Date: Enter the document date. Use today’s date.
Posting Date: Preferably, use today’s date as your posting date.
Document Number: (optional) Enter the document number. This number is 
usually on top of the document.
Doc.Header Text: (optional) The text you enter in this field describes the document.
Clearing Text: (optional) The text you enter in this field provides a short 
description of the clearing document.
Type: The document type is set automatically by the system.
Period: This is set by default by the system. This is the accounting period derived 
from your fiscal year measured in months. For example, month five is displayed 
as period 5 by the system.
Currency/Rate: Your company code’s local currency type is set by default by the 
system. For example, GBP (British pounds).
In the Bank Data section of the screen, update the following fields:
Account: Using the matchcode, enter the G/L account 111411 for incoming 
checks.
Amount: Enter the incoming payment amount of $1960.
Bank Charges: (Optional) you can enter any charges arising from bank 
transactions.
Value Date: This defaults to today’s date. This is the number of days that have 
passed between the posting date of the payment run and the bank value date.
In the Open Item Selection Section of the screen, update the following fields:
Account: Using the matchcode, enter the customer account number 152.
Account Type: The system defaults account type D for customer.
To display any outstanding customer account you want to clear, click the 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen. The Post Incoming Payments Process Open Items screen appears (Figure 17-14).  
This is where you clear incoming payments against outstanding invoices.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
314
The open items on the customer account are displayed. Notice that the amount balances are activated 
(blue). Since the payment received is only for an item on the account and not the entire open item balance, 
you must deactivate all the activated items. To deactivate the activated items, click the Click the Select All 
 button below the Account items on the left side of the screen to select all the displayed open items on the 
account. Click the Deactivate 
 button to deactivate all the activated open items. All the open items 
will turn black to indicate they are deactivated.
To process the open items you will now have to activate the line item that you want to clear with the 
incoming payment. Click the line item that you want to clear—2000—(this is the first item on the account item 
on the screen). Notice that the Amount Entered and Not Assigned fields on the bottom-right side of the screen 
in Editing Status section below the account item have reduced to 1960 and the Assigned field is now zero. The 
reduction in the entered amount is due to the discount offered to the customer as part of terms of payment.
Click the Activate 
 button to activate the line item that you want to use to clear the incoming 
payment. The Amount Entered and Assigned fields show the amount you are clearing, and the Not Assigned 
field is set to zero (Figure 17-15).
Figure 17-14.  The Clearing Incoming Payments with Open Items screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
315
To display the open item you want to clear with the incoming payment, click the 
 button on 
the menu bar and then click 
 from the pull-down menu. The Post Incoming Payments Display 
Overview screen is displayed.
If you’re satisfied with your payment clearing, click the Post 
 button to automatically clear the open item. 
After you click the Post button, the system will notify you that 
.
Now let’s look at how a partial payment is treated.
Posting a Partial Payment
Partial payment is when you make an incomplete payment toward an outstanding amount or open item. 
In other words, only a fraction of the outstanding amount has been settled. In SAP, partial payments are 
treated differently from standard payments. Since the outstanding amount is not settled in full, it is treated 
as payment on account (i.e., both the open item and partial payment remain open in the account).
Problem: Assume that you have an open item of $4900 and you receive a partial  
payment of $3000.
Figure 17-15.  The Posting Incoming Payment Processing Open Items screen shows the amount entered 
against a payment
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
316
Post an incoming partial payment of 3000 in the Post Incoming Payment: Header Data screen using 
the menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable ➤ Document Entry➤ Incoming 
Payment. Or use transaction code F-28. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen 
to proceed to the Post Incoming Payments Process Open Items screen to clear the incoming payment against 
outstanding invoices.
Since you want to process a partial payment, deactivate all active open items and click the 
 
tab at the top of the screen. The Post Incoming Payments Enter Partial Payment screen appears. Activate the 
open item that you want to post partial payment to. For this exercise, click the open item with the amount 
of $4900 and click the Activate 
 button below the account items. The open item you have activated 
turns blue. The Payment Amount field will be ready for input. Enter the partial amount (3000) in the 
Payment Amount field against the open item (4900).
Notice that in the Editing Status section at the bottom of the screen, the Amount Entered and Amount 
Assigned fields will equal 3000 and the Not Assigned Amount field will be zero (Figure 17-16).
Click the Post 
 button.
Now let’s look at how residual items are treated. 
Figure 17-16.  The screen where you post match open item against open items with a partial payment
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
317
Posting Residual Items
Residual items arise when you are prepared to receive payment less than the original invoice amount as final 
settlement of an open item.
■
■Note   When posting residual items, you must specify a reason code. The reason code contains the reason 
for the reduction in incoming payment as compared to the original billing document.
 Problem: Assume that Company C900 Plc has agreed with a business partner to  
accept $10,000 as full settlement for an invoice of $12,000 due to slight damage in goods 
during transit. Therefore, your residual item amount is $1760 ($12,000 less discount of 
$240 = $11,760 less $10,000).
Post an incoming payment of $10,000 from the Post Incoming Payment: Header Data screen using this 
menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Incoming 
Payment. Or use transaction code F-28. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to 
proceed to the Post Incoming Payments Process Open Items screen. Since you want to process residual items, 
deactivate all the open items that are activated and click the 
 tab on the top of the screen. The Post 
Incoming Payments Create residual items screen appears displaying the open items on the account (Figure 17-17). 
Figure 17-17.  The Post Incoming Payments: Create Residual Items screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
318
Activate the open item from which you want to create a residual item. For this exercise, click the open 
item with the amount of $11,760 ($12,000 less the cash discount of $240) to select it for activation and then 
click the Activate 
 button below account items. The open item you have activated turns blue, 
indicating that the item is activated. The Residual Item and RCd (Reason code) fields are ready for input. 
Enter the residual item 1760 in the Residual Item field and then enter the Reason Code DMG in the RCd 
field. You can access the reason code using the matchcode by the RCd field.
Notice that in the Editing Status section, the Amount Entered field is $10,000 (less the residual amount 
of $2,000) and Amount Assigned field is $1760 ($2000 less the cash discount of $240). 
To check the residual item you have processed, click the 
 button on the menu bar and then 
click 
. The payment overview shows your entries. Click the Post 
 button on the top of the screen 
to post your entries. The system will notify you that 
.
Customer Down Payments
In this exercise, you learn how to post customer down payment requests, post customer down payments, 
and clear customer down payments.
Posting a Customer Down Payment Request
It is a normal business practice to request an advance payment from a customer once an order is placed, 
prior to delivery. This is referred to as down payment request. Let’s see how this is represented in SAP.
Problem: The accounting team wants to know how to post a down payment request and 
you have been assigned to teach them.
To go to the Customer Down Payment Request Header Data screen to enter the data for the customer 
down payment, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account receivable ➤ 
Document Entry ➤ Down Payment ➤ Request. Or use transaction code F-37. Using the information in 
Table 17-2, update the fields in the Customer Down Payment Request Header Data screen.
Table 17-2.  The Information to Update Customer Down Payment Request Header Data Screen
Field
Value
Description
Document Date
Today’s date
This is the date on your document (invoice) you are processing.  
For illustration purposes, we used the current date.
Posting Date
Today’s date
The date the document is posted to the system. This should usually 
be today’s date, but is also possible to back-date a post. It all depends 
on what you are trying to achieve.
Type
DZ
Document type is set by default.
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code.
Currency/Rate
GBP
Document currency
Account
152
Customer account
Teg.sp.G/L ind.
A
The special G/L indicator for down payment is set by the system 
based on setting made in IMG.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
319
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to proceed to the Customer Down Payment 
Request Add Customer Item screen to complete your down payment request data input. Using the 
information in Table 17-3, update the fields. 
Table 17-3.  The Information to Add Customer Items to the Customer Down Payment Request
Field
Value
Description
Amount
5000
Down payment request you made to your customer.
Calculate Tax
Select
Click the Calculate Tax checkbox to have the system calculate the tax 
amount.
Tax Code
A2
This tax code holds the percentage rate for the output tax that will be used 
by the system to the calculate tax amount.
Due date
Future date
This is the date the down payment request is due (for illustration 
purposes, enter any date after the current date).
Click Enter 
 on the top-left side the screen to confirm your entries and then click the Overview 
 button to display your down payment request. The Down Payment Request Display Overview screen 
appears containing a one-line item for your customer down payment request. If you are satisfied with your 
down payment request entries, click Post 
 to post your down payment request. 
■
■Note   A down payment request is a noted item and consequently does not impact the G/L. No posting is 
made to the G/L. Noted items are for information purposes only. Hence, the one-line item display on the Down 
Payment Request Display Overview screen.
Posting Customer Down Payments
Customer down payments are payments received in advance and in anticipation of providing goods or 
rendering services to a business partner. To go to the down payment screen, follow this menu path: Easy: 
Financial Accounting ➤ Account receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Down Payment ➤ Down Payment. Or use 
transaction code F-29.
The Post Customer Down Payment: Header Data screen is displayed. Update the screen using the data 
in Figure 17-18.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
320
Click the 
 button to proceed to the Post Customer Down Payment Added Customer Item screen, 
where you enter data for your down payment. Use the data in Table 17-4 to update the fields on the screen.
Figure 17-18.  The screen where you enter the header data for the down payment
Table 17-4.  The Data to Update Additional Customer Items for Down Payment
Field
Value
Description
Amount
5000
Enter the down payment document amount in this field.
Tax Code
A2
This is your tax code for output tax.
Calculate Tax
Select
Click this checkbox to allow the system to automatically calculate output tax 
amount for your down payment.
Click the Overview 
 button to go to the Post Customer Down payment Display Overview screen.  
This screen will show the down payment line items. Post 
 your down payment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
321
■
■Note   The down payment received is an example of a free offsetting entry. Free offsetting entries allow 
proper posting in the general ledger. The special G/L reconciliation account is automatically debited or credited. 
Clearing Customer Down Payments
Problem: The finance team heard that it is possible to clear down payment requests with a 
down payment received. You have been asked to demonstrate how this is done.
To go to the Clear Customer Down Payment: Header Data screen (Figure 17-19) to carry out down 
payment clearing, follow this menu path: Financial Accounting ➤ Account receivable ➤ Document Entry ➤ 
Down Payment ➤ Clearing. Or use transaction code F-39.
Figure 17-19.  Clearing a down payment request with a down payment received
Update the following fields:
Document Date: Use today’s date.
Posting Date: This date is set by the system. This usually defaults to today’s date.
Account: Enter your customer account number (152) that the down payment 
relates to.
Invoice Ref.: Make sure that the invoice reference is blank, because the system 
will default to the last document number.
Fiscal Year: This is your company code accounting year. This is set by default by 
the system.
Click Enter 
on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries, and then click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Clear Customer Down Payment Choose 
Down Payments screen appears, where you clear with the down payment request with down payment 
received (see Figure 17-19).
Select the down payment line item you want to clear with this down payment request. Then, on the 
menu bar, click 
 and then click 
. The Clear Customer Down Payment Display Overview 
screen (Figure 17-20) is displayed showing the breakdown of the down payment clearing. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
322
Click the Post 
 button.
■
■Note   When you post the customer down payment, the system will automatically clear the down payment 
request made against the down payment received. During this process, the down payment request is cancelled. 
Figure 17-20.  The Down Payment Overview screen shows the down payment request clearing with the down 
payment received
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
323
Display Account Balances
In this exercise, you learn how to display the balance of the following account types:
• 
Customer accounts
• 
Vendor accounts
• 
G/L accounts
■
■Note   In order for the system to display an account balance, you must set the account indicator called 
Open Item Management in the account’s master data.
Problem: A new finance staff member wants to display a customer account balance and 
wants to display line items. He has approached you as the SAP consultant to take him 
through the steps involved.
Display Customer Account Balances
This exercise will allow you to display the account balances of customers. To display balances, follow this 
menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable ➤ Account ➤ Display Balances.  
Or use transaction code FD10N.
The Customer Balance Display screen is displayed. Update the following fields:
Customer: Enter the customer account number that you want to display. If 
you are not sure of the customer account number, you can use the matchcode 
function to search for your customer.
Company Code: Enter the company code the customer belongs to.
Fiscal Year: Enter your company code accounting year related to the customer 
transactions.
Click the Execute button 
 on the top-left side of the screen to go to the Customer Balance Display 
screen. It shows your customer account balance (Figure 17-21).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
324
It is also possible to display line items or a particular document directly from this report. To do this, 
select any period from the list of balances by clicking on the balance you want to display. For this exercise, 
we are using period five (circled in Figure 17-21) to illustrate how to display the customer line item. Select 
period five’s balance from the list of balances and click the Call Up Line Item Report 
 button (this button 
will allow you to display the customer line item) on the top-left side of the screen. Alternatively, you can 
double-click on the balance you want to display. The Customer Line Item Display (Figure 17-22) displays all 
the line items.
Figure 17-21.  The Customer Account Balance Display screen shows the account balance of the customer  
you specified 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
325
■
■Note   The drawback to displaying a line item using the Customer Balance Display is that it does not give 
you the flexibility to define your line item display criteria.
It is possible for you to make some changes in a document displayed in the line item on the screen 
(Figure 17-22). To do this, select the document you want to make changes to (circled) and click the Display 
Document 
 button at the top left of the screen. The Display Document: Line Item 1 screen is displayed. 
Click the Change Display 
 button at the top of the screen. The Change Document: Line Item 1 screen is 
displayed. This is the screen where you can make changes to your document. After making the appropriate 
changes, save 
 your work.
■
■Note   You can only make minimum changes in certain fields, for example, the Assignment and Text fields.  
It is also possible to change the discount/payment terms, as well as the payment block and dunning block. 
Figure 17-22.  The Customer Line Item Display screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
326
Display Line Items
The Line Item Display function enables you to display all the document line items posted to a given 
account. In order to display these line items, you must set the indicator for line item display in the account’s 
master data.
Line item display is applicable to the following account types:
• 
Customer accounts (the line item setting is mandatory)
• 
Vendor accounts (the line item setting is mandatory)
• 
G/L accounts (this setting is found in the G/L master data) 
You can display the following items in your line item display:
• 
Open items: These are outstanding items in the account at the specified period.
• 
Cleared items: The items payment have been received and cleared.
• 
All items: Open and cleared items.
Display/Change Customer Line Items
To go to the Display Line Items screen, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
Account Receivable ➤ Account ➤ Display/Change Line Items. Or use transaction code FBL5N.
Using the information in Table 17-5, update the Customer Line Item Display screen.
Table 17-5.  The Fields to Update for Line Items Display
Field
Value
Description
Customer Account
152
Enter the Customer Account number that you want to display line items 
for. You can display single or multiple customer line items by entering 
the appropriate customer number(s) in this filed. You can access the 
customer number using the matchcode by the customer account field.
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code in this field. It is also possible to include a 
single or multiple company code in your line item display.
Open items
Select
You have the option to display open or cleared items separately by 
selecting the appropriate radio button. It is also possible to display all 
items (both open and cleared items simultaneously) by clicking the All 
Items radio button.
Click Enter 
 and then click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The system will 
display the line items for open items, depending on your selection (Figure 17-23).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
327
Correspondence
In this exercise, you learn how to generate and output correspondence requests for individual customers 
by using print reports. To print correspondence, you must first request correspondence by specifying the 
correspondence type for the company code. SAP comes with predefined correspondence types. For this 
exercise, we will request an account statement. Once the correspondence is generated, the correspondence 
requests are deleted. For pending correspondence requests, the print program is scheduled daily.
Request Correspondence
To request correspondence, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account 
receivable ➤ Account ➤ Correspondence ➤ Request. Or use transaction code FB12.
The Request Correspondence screen is displayed. Enter your company code in the company code field 
(C900) and click the Enter 
 button on top of the screen or press the Enter button on the keyboard. The 
Correspondence Selection screen with list of correspondence types appears. In this exercise, you will be 
looking at how correspondence requests for customers’ account statements are carried out. Therefore, select 
the SAP06-Account Statement type from the displayed account list and click 
 on the top-left side of the 
screen. The Detail Specifications for Correspondence screen pops up (Figure 17-24).
Figure 17-23.  The selected customer line item display
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
328
Update the following fields: 
Company Code: Your company code is the default.
Customer: Enter the customer account you want to include in your 
correspondence request.
Posting from: Enter the date you want your customer account statement to start 
from in this field.
Posting to: Enter the date you want your customer account statement to end.
Click the 
 button. Then click the Enter button. The system will display the 
 message on the message bar.
After completing the correspondence request, you can go on to perform print correspondence. 
Print Correspondence
To print correspondence, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable 
➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Print Correspondence ➤ As Per Requests. Or use transaction code F.61.
The Trigger for Correspondence screen is displayed. Update the fields using the information in Table 17-6.
Figure 17-24.  Specifying correspondence for a correspondence request
Table 17-6.  Data to Update the Trigger for Correspondence Screen
Field
Value
Description
Correspondence
ACS1
Enter the corresponded type for the Account Statement identifier. It is also 
possible to search for the appropriate correspondence type, by using the 
Search icon by the field if you are not sure of the appropriate correspondence 
number. If you want to generate more than one correspondence type, you can 
do so by specifying the correspondence type range.
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code. It is also possible to generate and print 
correspondence for a range of company codes. To do this, you have to specify 
the company code range. This is possible when you have more than one 
company code.
Account Type
D
Specify the appropriate account type.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
329
Click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to print the correspondence.  
The Information screen pops up with the message, “1 correspondence requests carried out were deleted”. 
Confirm the deletion by clicking the Confirm 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen.  
The Correspondence Requests screen pops up with the message, “A correspondence request was selected,” 
and the question, “Would you like to issue the request?” Click the 
 button on the bottom-left side 
of the pop-up screen to confirm that you want to issue this correspondence request. The Output Parameter 
dialog box pops up. Enter your output print device (LP01) in the Output Device field and click the 
 
button to confirm. The Trigger for Correspondence Log is displayed (Figure 17-25). 
Figure 17-25.  The Trigger for Correspondence screen shows the account statement for your company code
To display a list of spool requests (the documents marked for the print function but not yet output to a 
printer or to another output device) for the account statement you have just completed, type /nSP02 in the 
Command Field at the top of the screen and press Enter on your keyboard. The Output Controller: List of 
Spool Requests screen is displayed.
To display the printout preview, select the appropriate item from the list of spool requests by making 
sure that the Spool No checkbox is clicked. For this exercise, click the checkbox for spool number 14993  
(the spool number we use here is for illustration only; it is not a standard spool number. Spool numbers vary 
depending on the current spool number used by the system). Click on the Display Contents 
 button at the 
top of the screen to display the print preview for your customer account statement (Figure 17-26).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
330
To print the account statement, click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen (Figure 17-27).
Figure 17-26.  Print preview of the customer’s account statement
Figure 17-27.  The spool requests for printing
Click the Print button 
 at the top of the screen. The system will notify you that 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
331
Execute Dunning
Dunning is the systematic process of communicating with customers to ensure adequate collection of account 
receivables due. The system sends reminder letters to customers about their account being due for payment. 
Communication through the dunning process starts with a gentle reminder and gradually escalates as an 
account becomes more overdue.
Problem: Your team leader sent you a memo asking that you generate dunning for 
customers with outstanding balances outside the agreed credit period.
To execute the dunning program, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
Account Receivable ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Dunning ➤ Execute Dunning. Or use transaction code F150.
■
■Tip  Before you start with dunning, post some back-dated invoices. Use last month’s dates. This will enable 
you to see how dunning works in practice.
The Dunning screen is displayed. Update the fields using the data in Table 17-7.
Table 17-7.  Data for the Dunning Screen
Field
Value
Description
Run On
Use today’s date (in this 
example, it’s 21.05.2012)
This is the date you want to run your dunning program.  
We advise you to use the current date.
Identification
C900
This will you enable to identify your dunning notice, 
especially when more than one dunning run is performed 
on the same date. We recommend that you use any suitable 
identification key. The company code is ideal.
Click the 
 tab at the top of the screen to go to the parameter section of the Dunning Parameter 
screen. On this screen you will define the exact parameters for the document and the business partner you 
want to include in your dunning run.
Update the fields using the information in Table 17-8.
Table 17-8.  The Data for Dunning Parameter Specification
Field
Value
Description
Dunning Date
Today’s date
The date you want the dunning to be performed.
Document Post Up To
Today’s date
This field will allow you to select a range of documents up to an 
earlier given period.
Company Code
C900
Enter your company code. It is also possible to generate 
dunning for a range of company codes or multiple company 
codes by specifying the appropriate company code’s range.
Customer
152
Likewise, you can run dunning for a single business partner or 
multiple business partners. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
332
Click the 
 tab at the top of the screen to return to the Status part of the screen. The system will 
prompt you to save your parameter. Click the 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen to save 
your parameter specifications. On the Dunning screen, notice that the status of your dunning run so far will 
be displayed in the status section of the screen as “Parameters Were Maintained” (Figure 17-28).
Figure 17-28.  The screen where you maintain the dunning parameters
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to schedule your dunning print program. 
The Output Parameter dialog box pops up. Enter your output print device (LP01) in the Output Device field 
and click the 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. Once you click the Continue button, 
this will allow you specify your output device that you want to send your dunning to (in this case, to a 
printer). The Schedule Selection and Print screen pops up (Figure 17-29). The system automatically defaults 
to the start date, start time, and output device that you specified previously. Click the Start Immediately and 
Dunn.Print With Scheduling? checkboxes. By clicking Start Immediately, you are instructing the system to 
output your dunning run immediately.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
333
Then click the 
 button.
■
■Note   It is possible to schedule the system to perform a dunning run at a later date and time.
The system gives you an update of your dunning run status. For example, “Select and Print Is Scheduled”.
Press Enter on the keyboard twice. The system will give you the current status of your dunning in the 
Status section of the screen, such as “Select and Print Is Complete” (Figure 17-30).
Figure 17-29.  Specifying the dunning print with scheduling options 
Figure 17-30.  The screen where you can view the dunning run’s status 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
334
Click the 
 button on the top-right side of the screen. The Dunning List Variant dialog box 
will appear and the system defaults to the print program automatically. All you need to do is click the Enter 
 button. This will display the list of documents included in your dunning proposal.
It is also possible to see details of a document on the list, which you’ll do next.
Display Dunning Details
Select the document you want to display from the displayed list in the Dunning Proposal list (Figure 17-31) 
and then click the Detail 
 button at the top of the screen.
Figure 17-31.  The documents included in dunning proposal 
The Detail: Display screen is displayed containing the following information about the document you have 
selected: Account Type, Company Code, Customer, Dunning level, Doc. Company Code, Document Number, 
Fiscal Year, Line Item, and Reference. Click the Back 
 button twice to return to the Dunning screen. To see a 
print preview before printing the dunning, click the 
 button. The Output Parameters screen pops 
up. Enter your output print device (LP01) in the Output Device field and click the 
 button to output a 
sample printout. The Schedule Sample Printout dialog box appears. The system automatically defaults to the 
start date, start time, output device, and no.sample printout. Make sure that the Start Immediately checkbox is 
clicked. Click the Display 
 button to display a printout sample (Figure 17-32).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
335
Print Dunning
Before printing the dunning, display the List of Spool Requests in Output Controller screen. To do this, type 
/nsp02 in the command field on the top-left side of the Print Preview screen and click the Enter 
 button. 
Make sure the item you want to print is selected by clicking the Spool No. checkbox. Then click the Print 
 
button. This action generates a print output request.
Accounts Payable—Document Entry
In this exercise, you will be looking at how to process vendor documents (invoices), display and post the 
entered document, and post credit memos to a vendor account.
Problem: The accounts payable clerks want to know how to enter and post basic invoices.
Figure 17-32.  The dunning print preview for overdue items on a customer account 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
336
Vendor Invoice Posting
To enter and post vendor invoices, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts 
payable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Invoice. Or use transaction code FB60.
The Enter Vendor Invoice: Company Code C900 screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen. The Enter Company Code dialog box pops up. Enter your company code in the Company 
Code field (C900) and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your entry. Enter your 
vendor account ID in the Vendor field. You can search for your vendor’s account by using matchcode in the 
vendor’s field. The Account or Matchcode for the Next Line Item (n) screen pops up. To call up the customer 
list for a given Company Code, enter your company code in the Company Code field (C900) and click the 
Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. On the Account or Matchcode for the Next Line Item 2 Entries 
Found screen, select the vendor you want from the displayed list of vendors and click the Enter 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen. You can also double-click on the appropriate vendor on the vendor’s list.
■
■Note   The line items on the Account or Matchcode for the Next Line Item n Entries Found screen vary 
according to the number of vendors you have.
Notice that the vendor account number you selected from the vendor list is displayed in the Vendor 
field. Update the appropriate fields on the screen, as shown in Figure 17-33.
Figure 17-33.  The Vendor Invoice Basic screen is where you enter vendor invoice details and the G/L account 
where the invoice is posted 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
337
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen confirm your entries. To display your entries, 
click the 
 button. This Document Overview screen (Figure 17-34) shows your entries. 
Figure 17-34.  The Document Overview screen displays the document entries
Post 
 your vendor’s invoice. 
As an exercise on your own, follow the steps in the account receivable in the section entitled  
“Customer Down Payments” and attempt the following tasks: 
• 
Display a vendor’s account balance by following this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts payable ➤ Account ➤ Display Balances. Or use 
transaction code FK10N.
• 
Post a vendor’s down payment request by following this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts Payable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Document Entry ➤ 
Request. Or use transaction code F-47.
• 
Post a vendor’s down payment by following this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial 
Accounting ➤ Accounts Payable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Document Entry ➤ Down 
Payment ➤ Down Payment. Or use transaction code F-48.
• 
Clear a vendor’s down payment by following this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts Payable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Document Entry ➤ 
Down Payment ➤ Clearing. Or using transaction code F-54.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
338
Manual Outgoing Payment
The Manual Outgoing Payment option allows you to settle vendor invoices and clear open items manually.
Before attempting manual outgoing payment, post an invoice amount of $10,000 to your vendor’s 
account.
Outgoing Payment
To post an outgoing payment manually, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
Account Payable ➤ Document Entry ➤ Outgoing Payment ➤ Post. Or use transaction code F-53.
The Post Outgoing Payments: Header Data screen is displayed (Figure 17-35).
Figure 17-35.  The screen where outgoing payments are posted
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
339
Update the following fields: 
Document Date: Use today’s date.
Posting Date: Use today’s date.
Account: Enter the G/L account for clearing outgoing payments.
Amount: Enter $9700 (this is the invoice amount of $10,000 you posted in 
Manual Outgoing Payments earlier, less $300 discount received)
Value Date: Use today’s date. 
Account (in the Open Item selection): Enter the vendor account that you’re 
making payment to.
To clear a payment with an open item, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen. The Post Outgoing Payments Process Open Items is displayed.
■
■Note   Notice that the open items in the Gross Amount column are activated (displayed in blue). Also notice 
that Cash Discount Amount and Cash Discount Percentage are red. Since you do not want to clear all open 
items simultaneously, you need to deactivate all activated items and activate only the open item(s) you want  
to clear.
Deactivate all activated open items on the screen and only activate the open item you want to process 
with the payment. You may want to refer back to the section “Posting Standard Incoming Payments” to 
review how to deactivate and activate open items.
■
■Note   Notice that the Amount Entered and Assigned will be $9700 (the document amount of $10000 less 
$300 cash discount and the outgoing amount of $9700), bringing Not Assigned to a zero balance.
To display the posted outgoing payment overview, click the 
 button on the menu bar at the 
top of the screen; a pull-down menu is displayed. Choose 
 from the drop-down menu. The Post 
Outgoing Payments Display Overview screen is displayed (Figure 17-36). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
340
Check your entries and then click Post 
 if they meet your requirements. 
Automatic Payments
The automatic payment program is an automated way to process and post huge lists of accounts payables 
and accounts receivables in a single payment run.
Before proceeding with an automatic payment run, you’ll learn how to create check lots. You need 
check lots when maintaining the variant for a payment run.
Check Lots
Checks are managed in lots (batches). SAP provides a check-management system that divides bank checks 
into check lots (batches) by assigning number ranges to represent batches or check lots. To define the check 
lots that you will use, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting ➤ Account Receivable & Account 
Payable ➤ Business Transaction ➤ Payments ➤ Automatic Outgoing Payments ➤ Payment Media ➤ Check 
management ➤ Define Number Ranges for Checks. Or use transaction code FCHI. The Check Lots screen is 
displayed. Using the information in Table 17-9, update the appropriate fields. 
Figure 17-36.  The Outgoing Payments Display Overview screen.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
341
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Then click the Change 
 button on the 
top-left side of the screen. The Maintain Check Lots screen is displayed. Click the Create 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to create your check lots. The Create Lot screen pops up (Figure 17-37). This 
screen allows you to specify your check lot and check numbers.
Figure 17-37.  Specifying the check lots and check numbers
Using the data in Table 17-10, specify the lot number and check number information. 
Table 17-9.  Updating the Check Lots Screen
Field
Value
Description
Paying Company Code
C900
This is the company code that is making payments. This is the case 
where centralized payment system is in operation. All invoices 
from branches are sent to the head office for payment.
House Bank
Barc1
Using the matchcode or the Search button to search for your house 
bank, enter your house bank’s ID in this field. The system uses a 
combination of both the house bank code and the account ID to 
trace check lots to the paying bank.
Account ID
Barc
The house bank ID and account ID are used by the payment 
program to determine which bank to use for invoice payment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
342
Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the Create Lot screen to confirm your 
specifications. The system will then create your check lot (Figure 17-38). 
Table 17-10.  Data to Update the Check Lot Screen
Field
Value
Description
Lot Number
0001
Enter a check lot number in this field. You can enter up to four 
digits in this field. This number enables you to identify this 
particular check, which is helpful when you have more than one 
check lot.
Check Number
0001
Checks are issued systematically in sequence. This is the start 
number of the check.
To
1000
This is the end number of the check sequence. The system will 
automatically issue checks for payment in this order.
Additional Information
Short info.
Check lot
This is a short description of the check lot.
Figure 17-38.  The Maintain Check Lots screen
Save 
 your check lot. 
Automatic Payment Program
The Automatic Outgoing Payments option is a payment management tool that allows you to pay multiple 
open invoices, post payment documents, and print payment media using EDI (Electronic Data Interchange) 
or DME (Date Medium Exchange).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
343
Configuring the automatic outgoing settings takes four major steps:
	
1.	
Maintain parameters (enter your parameters).
	
2.	
Start proposal run (create and edit payment proposal).
	
3.	
Start payment run.
	
4.	
Schedule print.
To go to the automatic payment transaction screen, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial 
Accounting ➤ Banks ➤ Outgoings ➤ Automatic Payments ➤ Open Items (Customer and Vendor). Or use 
transaction code F110. The Automatic Payment Transactions: Status screen is displayed (Figure 17-39).
Figure 17-39.  Specifying the automatic payment transaction’s run date
Update the following fields:
Run Date: Enter today’s date, plus 10 days. This is the date on which you want 
the system to run the payment program. This date can be changed depending on 
what you want to achieve. For example, if today’s date is May 21, 2012, your run 
date will be May 31, 2012.
Identification: Enter C900 as your payment run identification in this field. You 
can use up to a five-digit identifier. This will enable you to identify your payment 
run if you have more than one payment run with the same run date.
■
■Note   Notice that the system displays the status of the automatic payment as “No Parameters Entered As 
Yet” in the Status section of the screen in Figure 17-39.
Click the 
 tab at the top of the screen to go to the Automatic Payment Transactions: 
Parameters screen to specify the payment parameters of the automatic payment run (Figure 17-40).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
344
Update the following fields:
Posting Date: This is set to today’s date by default. We recommend that you use 
today’s date.
Docs Entered Up To: Defaults to today’s date.
Company Codes: You determine the company code you are using for your 
automatic payment run. Enter your company code (C900) in this field.
Payment Methods: Enter the payment you want to use for your payment run. 
For example, C- Check, T-Bank Transfer, and so on. You can access the payment 
methods supplied by SAP using the matchcode next to the payment methods 
fields. In this exercise, we making payment by check, so enter C (check) in this 
field for your payment method.
Next Payment Date: Enter today’s date plus 30 days. This means the next 
payment run will be 30 days from today’s date. The importance of the next 
payment date is that it enables the system to decide whether to make payment 
using a cash discount or to make payment based on the net amount.
Vendor: Enter your vendor account number (300123) in this field. You can 
specify the vendor’s range (from/to) for which you want to trigger the  
payment program.
Figure 17-40.  Specifying the automatic payment parameters
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
345
Click the 
 tab at the top of the screen to go to the Automatic Payment Transactions: 
Additional Log screen to specify the required logging type and additional account required for your payment 
proposal (Figure 17-41).
Figure 17-41.  The screen for additional specifications for your payment proposal
When creating the payment proposal, select the following items in the Required Logging Type section of 
the screen:
• 
Due date check
• 
Payment method selection in all cases
• 
Line items of the payment documents
Enter the vendor’s account number(s) that you want to include in the Accounts Required section.
Click Enter 
 and then save 
 your payment program. 
Next, click the 
 tab to go to the Automatic Payment Transactions: Printout/DME 
screen to specify the variant for the print program. The print variant allows you to store the properties of 
frequently used datasets and call them up easily.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
346
■
■Note   Once your payments have been posted, you need to print the payment media. Since different 
payment methods were specified in your payment program, the print program will need print variants for the 
payment media and a payment advice note.
The Automatic Payment Transactions: Printout and DME screen is displayed. Using the data in 
Table 17-11, update the appropriate fields.
Table 17-11.  The Data to Use to Specify the Variant for the Print Program
Report
Variant
Description
RFFOAVIS
Leave blank
RFFOEDI1
Leave blank
RFFOUS_C
C900
Enter a variant name. You can enter up to 14 characters in this field. This 
does not necessarily have to be your company code. We used our company 
code for easy identification of our variant.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Variants: Change Screen 
Assignment dialog box pops up. This is the screen where variants are maintained for the print program.  
You have two options to choose from:
• 
For All Selection Screens
• 
For Indiv.Selection Screens
Click the All Selection Screens button and then click the 
 button on the bottom-right side 
of the screen to confirm your selection. The Maintain Variant: Report RFFOUS_C, Variant C900 screen is 
displayed (Figure 17-42).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
347
Update the following fields: 
Program run date: Enter Today’s date plus 10 days. This defaults to today’s date.
Identification feature: Enter a four digit (C900) code as your identification 
feature in this field. You can use up to a five digits of your choice. Using your 
company code will enable you to identify your print media variant if you have 
more than one variant in the system.
Paying company code: Enter the paying company code (C900). This is the 
company that makes payments. You should determine the company code you 
want to use as a paying company code.
Payment method: Enter the payment method you want to use for your variant. 
For example, C for check payments.
House Bank: Enter up to five digits as your house bank identifier (Barc 1) in this 
field. This is the bank that will make the payments.
Account ID: Enter up to five digits as your account ID (Barc). The house bank ID 
and account ID used by the payment program determine the banks to use during 
invoice payment.
Figure 17-42.  The screen where Print Variant is updated
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
348
Check lot number: Enter the check lot number (1) you defined in the Check Lot 
section. Using the matchcode or search function, specify the check lot you want 
to use for the print media variant.
Print checks: When selected, this checkbox indicator allows you to print checks 
in the payment program.
Print Payment Summary: This specification allows you to print payment 
summaries in the payment program.
Printer: Enter the printer you want to use for printing. For example,  
LP01 (local Printer 01). 
Print Immediately: This specification allows your printing job to be sent to print 
spooling and print when the printer is available.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Variant Attributes screen is displayed. 
Update the Meaning field by entering a description of your variant attribute. In this exercise, we used 
Payment Run C900.
Save 
 your variant.
Click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen (the Automatic Payment Transactions:  
status screen).
Click the Status 
 tab at the top of the screen to go to the Status screen. You can see the status of 
your payment program so far.
When you click the Status tab, the system will prompt you to save your payment proposal. Confirm the 
save by clicking the 
 button. On the Automatic Payment Transactions screen, the system will 
notify that “Parameters have been entered”.
Payment Proposals
The Payment Proposal option allows you to execute a test run of your payment before performing an actual 
payment run. Because of the sensitive nature of payment program, a test run will give you the opportunity to 
see which items you have included in your payment proposal and which items are blocked for payment.
Using the Edit ➤ Proposal menu path on the menu bar at the top of the screen, you can carry out the 
following tasks:
• 
Display proposals
• 
Edit or delete proposals
• 
Generate a proposal list
• 
Display an exceptional list
From the proposal list, you can block and unblock items planned for payment.
On the Automatic Payment Transactions: Status screen (Figure 17-43), the system status turns green 
and displays, “Parameters have been entered”. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to 
schedule a payment proposal. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
349
The Schedule Proposal dialog box pops up. Update the following fields:
Start Date: Today’s date is the default. We recommend that you use today’s date 
to schedule a proposal for your payment run.
Start Immediately: If you want your schedule proposal to start immediately, 
make sure that this checkbox is clicked. If this checkbox is not clicked, you must 
specify a start time in the Start Time field.
Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The system status displays “Proposal is 
ready to be started” under “Parameter have been entered”. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of 
the screen to see the status of your payment proposal. The system status displays “Proposal is running”. Click 
the 
 button again to create your payment proposal. The display on the status screen will turn green 
and state that “Payment proposal has been created”. 
Payment Runs
When you execute a payment run, the system will read your payment and perform the following functions:
• 
Clear selected items for payment
• 
Clear open items in accounts payable
• 
Reduce payables against appropriate G/L accounts
• 
Post payments to bank sub-accounts as per transfers and checks
To execute a payment run, click the 
 button. The Schedule Payment dialog box pops up. 
Update the following fields:
Start Date: This defaults to today’s date.
Start Immediately: For your schedule payment to start immediately, make sure 
that this checkbox is clicked. If this checkbox is blank, you must specify a start 
time in the Start Time field. 
Figure 17-43.  The Automatic Payment Transactions Status screen shows that the parameters have  
been entered
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
350
Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The system status displays “Payment 
Run is ready to be started”. Click the 
 button to run your payment. The status turns green and states 
that (Figure 17-44):
• 
Payment run has been carried out
• 
Posting orders: 1 generated, 1 completed
Figure 17-44.  The automatic payment transactions have been posted, generated, and completed
Display Payment Proposals
The Display Payment Proposal option allows you edit and block/unblock payment proposals. To display a 
payment proposal, click the 
 button. The Display Payment Proposal: Payments screen is displayed 
with your payment proposal. The indicator for payments/exceptions turns green (Figure 17-45).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
351
■
■Tip   You can scroll to the right to see more details.
Click the Back 
 button to return to the previous screen (Automatic Payment Transaction: Status).
To display the proposal log click the 
 button. Here the system will display any errors that 
occurred during your payment run.
Click the Back 
 button to return to the Automatic Payment Transaction: Status screen.
To display the payment list, use this menu path: Edit ➤ Payment ➤ Payment List. The List Variant 
dialog box pops up. The Program field’s value RFZALI20 is set by default by the system. You don’t need to do 
anything here. Click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen to display the Payment List 
screen, which contains all payments included in your automatic payment program. 
Schedule Print Jobs
To send your payment transaction to a print spool, click the Back 
 button to return to the Automatic 
Payment Transaction: Status screen. Click the 
 button. The Schedule Print dialog box pops up 
(Figure 17-46). Make sure that the Start Immediately checkbox is clicked.
Figure 17-45.  The Payment Proposal display screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
352
Replace the ‘?’ in the Job Name field with a letter or number of your choice. There is no strict rule on 
what you can replace it with. The number 1 we use is for illustration purposes. Click the Enter button 
. 
The system will display the message 
 on the status bar at the 
bottom of the screen.
Display Spool Request
To display a spool request, use this menu path: System ➤ Service ➤ Output Control, found on the menu bar 
at the top of the screen. The Output Controller: List of Spool Requests screen is displayed (Figure 17-47).
Figure 17-46.  Specifying the print job to start immediately 
Figure 17-47.  The List of Spool Requests screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
353
Click the Execute 
 button. The Output Controller: List of Spool Requests screen is displayed with 
list of spool requests. Use date and title to identify the item you want to display from the spool list. Select 
the Spool No. of the item or item(s) you want to include in your print preview. Click the Display Content 
 
button at the top of the screen. The sample of check printout will be displayed (Figure 17-48). 
Figure 17-48.  The Check Payment Advice Note Sample Printout - Print Preview screen
To see the actual print preview, click the Next Page 
 button on the top-right side of the screen to 
display the Payment Advice note. When you click the Next Page 
 button again a few times, you can see all 
the payment documents, including the check payment summary.
To print, click the Back 
 button to return to the Output Controller: List of Spool Requests screen. Click 
the Print 
 button on the top-left side of the screen; the system will send your check to the printer. 
The system will then notify you that 
.
Use the Cash Journal
The Cash Journal allows you to post small cash documents instead of using the normal accounts payable 
and receivable transaction postings. The Cash Journal allows you to post the following cash transactions:
• 
Cash payments (for cash purchases)
• 
Cash receipts (for cash sales)
• 
Check receipts
To post transactions in the Cash Journal, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
Banks ➤ Incomings ➤ Cash Journal. Or use transaction code FBCJ.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
354
The Cash Journal 0001 Company Code C900 screen is displayed. Click the Change Cash Journal 
 
button (located somewhere in the middle of the screen) to specify the Company Code and/or the Cash 
Journal you want to use for your Cash Journal transaction. The Cash Journal dialog box pops up. Update the 
following fields:
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900) in this field. This is the 
company code that you want to use for your Cash Journal transaction.
Cash Journal: Enter the Cash Journal number (0001) in this field. This is the 
Cash Journal you want to use for posting the Cash Journal transactions.
Click the Continue 
 button in the middle of the screen. The screen name will 
change to reflect the Cash Journal and company code you specified, such as Cash 
Journal 0001 Company Code C900.
Cash Receipts
Cash receipts are small cash amounts generated from miscellaneous sales, cash withdrawals, or other 
miscellaneous cash incomes during a fiscal year period and that are retained as petty cash to mitigate small 
amounts of cash purchases.
Problem: As a SAP FI consultant, you have been asked to teach the accounting clerks how 
to process petty cash transactions in the Cash Journal. Your task is to post a Cash Journal 
transaction amount of $2000.
Click the 
 tab in the middle of the screen to go to the part of the Cash Journal screen where 
cash receipts transactions are posted (Figure 17-49).
Figure 17-49.  Document status in the Cash Journal
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
355
Update the following fields: 
Business Transaction: Specify CASH SALES in this field. This is the nature of the 
business transaction you want to conduct.
Amount: Enter the cash document amount ($2000) in this field.
Tax: Specify the tax code for the output sale (A2) you want to apply to your cash 
receipt for calculating tax amount.
The system will automatically default to the G/L account 8000001 to post cash sales, based on the 
specification you made when you customized the Cash Journal.
Click the Enter 
button on the top-left side of the screen. Notice that the Document Status option  
has turned red. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen to post your cash receipt transaction.  
After posting, the Document Status will turn green and the total cash receipts will be credited with the 
amount posted. 
Cash Payments
Like the cash receipts, these are small cash payments made toward miscellaneous office purchases.
Problem: A petty cash purchase of $1500 was made. You are told to make this Cash Journal 
posting by splitting the expenses as follows: printing paper at $1000 and pens at $500.
Click the 
 tab in the Cash Journal 0001 Company Code C900 screen and update the 
following fields: 
Business Transaction: Specify CASH PURCHASE in this field. This is the nature 
of the business transaction you want to conduct in your Cash Journal.
Amount: Enter the document amount ($1000) that you want to process in your 
Cash Journal transaction.
Text for Item: Enter a short description of your transaction. For example, 
printing paper.
The next step is to split the document amount. Click the Split 
 button next to the 0.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
356
Notice that the cash amount of $1000 is copied into Row 1. Since you want to split $1500 between two 
Cash Journal items, update Row 2 with the following information:
Business Transactions: Specify the Cash Journal transaction CASH PURCHASE 
in this field.
Amount: Enter the amount of $500 for pens.
Text for Item: Enter the description of the transaction item (pens).
Click the 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Cash Document Split (Cash Expenses) 
screen disappears. On the Cash Journal 0001 Company Code C900 screen, notice that the Business 
Transaction field will have an * sign because this Cash Journal transaction has split documents. Click the 
Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Document Status field will turn red because the Cash 
Journal document has not been posted. Click the 
 button to post your transaction. After posting, 
the Document Status field turns green and the total cash receipts are credited with the amount posted.
■
■Note   The Balance Display for Display Period section displays the total receipt and cash payments 
balances, as well as the total Cash Journal balance. 
Figure 17-50.  How to split a document amount in the Cash Journal
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 17 ■ End User - Accounting Document Posting 
357
Summary
This chapter showed you how to create customer and vendor master records and how to enter customer 
invoices using hypothetical scenarios. You also learned how to post credit memos in order to reduce an 
original invoice amount. After this, you learned what holding and parking documents do. You then learned 
how to post various incoming payments, including posting income payments in the standard way, posting 
partial payments, and posting residual items.
You also learned how to post customer down payments—this included posting down payment requests, 
down payments received, and clearing down payment requests with a down payment. You next looked at 
how to display account balances and line items. You learned how to generate and print correspondence, as 
well as how to execute dunning runs.
You learned how to post a vendor’s invoice and then went on to perform manual outgoing payment. 
Afterward, you learned how to carry out the specifications for automatic payment. You learned how to define 
check lots for automatic payments, set up automatic payments, start proposal runs, start payment runs, and 
schedule print runs. You then learned about payment proposals. Finally, you looked at the Cash Journal and 
learned how to post cash receipts and cash payment transactions.
In Chapter 18, you will learn how to define a controlling area, create cost elements, define cost center 
accounting, maintain statistical key figures, and define a profit center.
www.it-ebooks.info

359
Chapter 18
Customizing the Controlling 
Module
In this chapter, you learn how to customize the Controlling module in SAP ERP and learn how to define the 
cost elements, cost center, and profit center.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Explain what controlling is
• 
Maintain a controlling area
• 
Maintain version approaches/transfer prices
• 
Explain what cost element accounting is
• 
Make default settings for automatic creation of primary and secondary cost elements
• 
Perform cost center accounting
• 
Define cost centers’ standard hierarchy
• 
Define statistical key figures
• 
Configure the basic settings of a profit center
• 
Maintain the controlling area settings
• 
Create a dummy profit center
• 
Assign profit centers to cost centers
• 
Post controlling documents
• 
Produce a profit center: interactive reporting
• 
Define distribution
The Controlling Module
The Controlling module is designed to enable organizations to collate, manipulate, and coordinate huge 
financial data accumulated from business operations into concise and meaningful management reports. 
These reports provide management with timely and adequate information beyond that of basic financial 
reports to aid management in making vital decisions on running the organizations relating to cost and 
profitability.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
360
Management needs to present and past performance, and predicts future performance. This is where 
SAP controlling plays an important role. It provides the platform to maintain be able to make operational 
and strategic decisions that will make the business profitable. In order to do this, they need a tool that 
measures cost and profit, measures management accounting to meet management’s reporting needs, and it 
facilitates management decision-making and optimization of the entire organizational process.
General Controlling
The settings carried out at the General Controlling level are fundamental, because they hold general 
information relevant to the entire Controlling (CO) module.
Organizational Controlling
The following controlling settings are carried out in the organizational structure:
• 
Maintain controlling area
• 
Maintain number ranges for controlling documents
• 
Maintain versions
Problem: As a SAP functional consultant, your task is to maintain the controlling area, 
define number ranges for controlling documents, and maintain the appropriate versions 
for the controlling area for Company C900.
Maintain Controlling Area
The controlling area is an internal system within an organization specifically used for cost accounting 
purposes. It is the internal structure that allows management to plan activities, carry out activities’ 
allocation, and monitor costs.
To maintain the controlling area, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ General Controlling ➤ 
Organization ➤ Maintain Controlling Area. Or use transaction code OKKP.
The Choose Activity screen pops up with three options to choose from:
• 
Copy, delete, and check controlling area
• 
Maintain controlling area
• 
Delete controlling area
Select Maintain Controlling Area from the list of activities by clicking on it. Click the 
 button at 
the top of the screen. The Change View “Basic Data”: Overview screen appears. Click the 
 button on 
the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Details of Added Entries input screen (Figure 18-1).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
361
Update the following fields:
Controlling Area: Enter controlling area C900. This can be up to four digits. 
We recommend that you use your company code as your controlling area. This 
makes it easier to remember, especially if you have more than one controlling 
area.
Name: Enter a short description for your controlling area. For example, 
“Controlling Area C900”.
Person Responsible: If your organization has a designated person responsible 
for that controlling area, enter their name. This field is optional.
CoCd -> CO Area: Choose from two options: Controlling Area Same as Company 
Code (if you select this option, the company code assignment to the controlling 
area must be uniform with processes defined for your company code in logistics 
and FI) or Cross Company Code-Costing Accounting (this option allows all 
cost accounting to be conducted in several company codes in one controlling 
area). Click the drop-down arrow next to the field to display the options. For this 
exercise, select Controlling Area Same as Company Code.
Figure 18-1.  The screen where the basic settings for a controlling area are maintained
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
362
Currency Type: Enter the currency type that you want to use for your 
controlling area; we use 10 in this example. SAP comes with standard currency 
types (10-Company Code Currency, 20-Controlling Area Currency, 30-Group 
Currency, 40-Hard Currency, 50-Index-Based Currency, and 60-Global Company 
Currency).
Currency: Specify the country currency key (GBP is used here) that you want to 
use for your controlling area.
Chart of Accts: Enter the company code’s chart of accounts you want to use for 
the controlling area. CA90 is used here.
Fiscal Year Variant: Enter the fiscal year variant (C4). This is the same fiscal year 
variant you used in your company code.
CCtr Std. Hierarchy: Enter a meaningful identifier key for your cost center 
standard hierarchy. The cost center standard hierarchy you enter here will define 
the tree structure of the cost centers belonging to your controlling area. In this 
exercise, we used H-C900 as the cost center standard hierarchy.
Document Type: Enter the document type (SA) for G/L account posting. This 
will represent the document type for your controlling area. This document type 
can be accessed using the matchcode next to the document type field. 
■
■Note  Only company codes with the same chart of account in the controlling area can use the same 
controlling area.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries. The Check Standard 
Hierarchy dialog box comes up asking if you want the system to create a standard hierarchy for the standard 
hierarchy identifier key (H-C900).
Click the 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm that you want the system to create a 
standard hierarchy for your standard hierarchy key (H-C900).
The second step is to assign the company code(s) to the controlling area.
■
■Note  Make sure you assign the company code before activating the components/control indicators.
To create the standard hierarchy for your cost centers, double-click the 
 
folder in the Controlling area of the left pane of the New Entries screen. The Check Standard Hierarchy dialog 
box pops up again stating that, “Standard hierarchy does not exist, should the system create it?”. Click the 
 button to confirm that you want the system to create the hierarchy. The Change View “Assignment 
of Company Code(s)”: Overview screen appears. This screen allows you to assign your company code to the 
controlling area you defined earlier. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The New 
Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is displayed. Enter your company code (C900) in the CoCd (Company 
Code) field. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and then save 
.
The third and last step is to assign components and control indicators.
To assign controlling components and control indicators to your controlling area, double-click the 
 folder in the Controlling area on the left pane of the screen. 
The New Entries: Details of Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 18-2).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
363
Update the following fields:
Fiscal Year: This is your company code accounting year. The fiscal year you 
assigned to your controlling area must have the same number of posting  
periods as the fiscal year in the FI (Financial Accounting) components for your 
company code.
■
■Tip  Make sure your fiscal year range specification is earlier than the current fiscal year. For example, if 
your current fiscal year is 2013, use 2011 as the starting fiscal year. By default, the system uses 9999 as the 
ending fiscal year.
Figure 18-2.  Activating components for the controlling area 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
364
To include important controlling components with your controlling area, you must assign the  
following items:
Cost Centers: Set this field to Component Active. The cost center will remain 
inactive until set to active.
Order Management: Set this to Component Active. Order management 
becomes active when activated.
Commit. Management: Set this to Component Active.
AA. Activity Based Costing: If this indicator is set, primary costs can be assigned 
directly to activity type of a cost center.
Projects: Set to indicator.
Sales Orders: Set to indicator.
Cost Objects: Set to indicator.
All Currencies: Set to indicator.
Save 
 your efforts. The Information dialog box pops up stating, “Critical transport: Control Indicator 
in Controlling Area. Ignore this warning. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm.
■
■Note  The warning “Critical transport: Control indicator in Controlling Area” means that you want 
to transport some important controlling indicators in the controlling area, which could result in data 
inconsistencies in the target system for two reasons:
If the indicator has been changed in the target system.
If you make an account assignment to cost objects in the target system.
Maintain Number Ranges for Controlling Documents
In this exercise, you will copy an existing controlling area’s number ranges and adapt them to your controlling 
area number ranges. The general principle is that when a document is posted in the controlling area, the 
system automatically generates a unique document number from the number ranges and assigns it to the 
document. A number range is unique to a document and cannot be reused when posting another transaction. 
Every document posted in a controlling area must be assigned to a number range group. For more details on 
document number ranges, refer back to Chapter 3 (in the section “Defining Number Ranges”).
Problem: As a functional consultant, your task is to maintain number ranges for 
controlling documents. Your colleagues told you that it is easier to copy an existing number 
range in the system rather than create your own. Your task is to copy the standard number 
range from company code 1000 and adjust it to meet your requirements.
To copy predefined number ranges, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ General Controlling ➤ 
Organization ➤ Maintain Number Ranges for Controlling Documents. Or use transaction code KANK. In the 
CO Area field on the Number Ranges for CO Document screen, enter the controlling area code 1000 you want 
to copy and then click the 
 Copy button in the middle of the screen. The Copy: CO Area dialog box pops up. 
The system will use the controlling area 1000 that you want to copy the number ranges in the From field. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
365
Enter your controlling area (C900) in the To field. The Transport Number Range Intervals screen pops up 
with messages. Ignore the messages and click the Enter 
 button to confirm that the number ranges should 
be copied from the source to the target company.
■
■Note  The system will notify you that 
 on the status bar at 
the bottom of the screen.
Maintain Versions
Versions allow you to maintain the settings for planned and actual data for independent data groupings. 
In the basic version configuration, you must have one actual version for posting actual data. The planned 
version is optional. The planned/actual version is represented by “0”. This is an operative version that can 
be used in planned/actual comparison and variance analysis between planned/actual activities. Planned 
data is used to calculate planned prices for activity types and to determine the rates for settling activities 
containing actual figures.
To maintain versions, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ General Controlling ➤ Organization 
➤ Maintain Versions. Or use transaction code OKEQ. The General Version Definition screen is displayed 
(Figure 18-3).
Figure 18-3.  The Maintain General Version Definition screen for planned/actual version
The next step is to set the controlling area for the version. To do this, select version “0” plan/actual 
version from the displayed list of versions and click the 
 button at the top of the screen.  
A pull-down menu is displayed. When you click 
 from the pull-down menu, the 
Determine Work Area Entry dialog box comes up. Enter your controlling area code (C900) in the Controlling 
Area field and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen to confirm your settings.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
366
Make sure that Plan and Actual are checked. Using the pull-down arrow by the Valuation View field, 
select Legal Valuation in Valuation View. All postings are therefore done in version 0. Legal valuation will 
enable you to valuate business processes in accordance with your company code statutory accounting 
requirements.
To set the fiscal year for your version, select or highlight the 
 version and 
double-click the next folder down 
 on the left pane of the screen. The Change 
View “Settings for Each Fiscal Year”: Overview screen is displayed. Select the current fiscal year from the list 
of years displayed in the Version Settings for Each Fiscal Year. Your selection will turn yellow; click the 
Details 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Change View “Settings for Each Fiscal Year”: Details 
screen is displayed. Most of the settings you need are set by default. Click the 
 tab to 
display the Price Calculation screen (Figure 18-5).
Figure 18-4.  Specifying the General Version Definition for plan/actual version
Double-click 
 in the left pane. Notice that only version “0” Plan/Actual Version 
is now displayed (Figure 18-4) and the status bar says, “One entry chosen”.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
367
Update the following fields:
Method: The system defaults to average price. You have two price options to 
choose from—Average and Periodic Prices. We recommend that you stick to 
Average Price in the plan section.
Methods: You have three options to choose from—Periodic Price, Average Price, 
and Cumulative Price. Choose the one most appropriate for you. In this exercise, 
we used Periodic Price.
Revaluation: Using the pull-down arrow next to the Revaluation field, select 
Own Business Transaction from the list.
Save 
 your version.
Multiple Valuation Approaches/Transfer Prices
The settings you make when customizing the Multiple Valuation Approach/Transfer Prices allow you to pass 
and clear deliveries of goods using multiple valuation (parallel valuation) approaches between company 
codes and profit centers within a corporate group. By maintaining a currency and a valuation profile, you 
can determine the valuation approaches to use in the accounting components, such as currencies and 
valuations. For example, you can determine the currency managed in legal valuation in the company code 
currency, the currency managed in corporate valuation in the group currency, and the currency managed in 
Figure 18-5.  Specifying the fiscal year price calculations
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
368
profit center valuation in company code. To maintain the currency and valuation profile, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Controlling ➤ General Controlling ➤ Multiple Valuation Approaches/Transfer Prices ➤ Basic 
Settings ➤ Maintain Currency and Valuation Profile.
The Change View “Currency and Valuation Profiles”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 
button at the top of the screen to go to the input screen (Figure 18-6).
Table 18-1.  The Information Needed to Complete the Currency and Valuation Profiles Screen
No.
Currency Type
Valuation View
20
30
Group Valuation
30
30
Profit Center Valuation
Figure 18-6.  The screen where currency and valuation profiles are maintained
Update the following fields:
C+V Profile: Enter a four-digit-character (such as C900) as the identifier key in 
the Currency &Valuation Profile field.
Text: Enter a short description (such as Valuation Profile – C900) here.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries. The system will notify you on the status bar that  
“One entry chosen”.
The next step is to specify the currency type and the valuation view for your currency and valuation 
profile. To do this, make sure that your C+V profile is selected and double-click the 
 folder. The 
Change View “Details”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button.
Update the appropriate fields using the information in Table 18-1.
Save 
 your currency and profile.
Create Versions for Valuation Methods
In this exercise, you can create additional versions for representing parallel valuations in the controlling 
component and make changes to existing ones displayed in the General Version Overview list by controlling 
area. If transfer pricing (the price used to valuate movement of goods between profit centers) is not used, 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
369
you should automatically use version 0 in legal valuation for actual posting. On the other hand, if transfer 
pricing is used, you must maintain parallel actual versions for group valuation and profit center valuation. 
You also have to specify operational actual version 0 in your settings. This specification becomes the leading 
valuation in determining which planning, price calculation, planned/actual comparisons, and variance 
analysis are based.
To maintain currency for valuation methods, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling➤ General 
Controlling Organization ➤ Multiple Valuation Approaches/Transfer Prices ➤ Basic Settings ➤ Create 
Versions for Valuation Methods.
The General Version Definition screen is displayed. From the General Version Overview list, select 
 and double-click on 
 in the left pane. The Determine 
Work Area: Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your controlling area (C900) identifier key in the Controlling 
Area field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm. Make sure Plan and Actual are checked and that 
Valuation View is set to Legal Valuation. All postings are done in version 0. Save 
 and then click on the 
Back 
 button to return to the previous page.
On the General Version Definition screen, click the 
 button to define additional versions for 
your valuations. Update the screen using the information shown in Figure 18-7. 
Figure 18-7.  Creating versions for your valuation methods
■
■Note  Version keys are freely definable. You can use any version key in this exercise. The version keys we 
used in the definition of our version are for illustration purposes and are not the standard. We used G-1 for 
group valuation and P-1 for profit center accounting.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your work. Select or highlight the versions 
for the valuation method you have just created (G-1 and P-1) and then double-click the 
 folder. The Confirm Transfer from Version dialog box pops up with the question, 
“Version G-1 does not exist in CO Area C900. Transfer version to CO Area?” Click the 
 button on 
the bottom-right side of the screen. A second Confirm Transfer from Version dialog box pops up with the 
question, “Version P-1 does not exist in CO Area C900. Transfer version to CO Area?” Click the 
 
button again and then save 
 your work.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
370
Cost Element Accounting
The Cost Element function is very important and plays a significant role when reconciling costs and postings 
between FI and the Controlling (CO) module. Cost Element is a function in CO that reconciles costs and 
revenue in FI and primary costs in CO. Simply put, all cost and revenue flows via its cost element between FI 
and CO.
In SAP, cost element is classified into two categories:
• 
Primary cost element: The primary cost element allows costs and revenues to 
flow between FI and CO when a corresponding G/L account exists in FI. This cost 
element can only be created in an environment where costs/revenues exist in a  
G/L account in the chart of accounts in FI.
• 
Secondary cost element: This is the opposite of the primary cost element. Costs that 
arise in controlling are purely for internal cost allocations, overhead apportionments, 
and other internal costs.
A cost element can be created in IMG (Using Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost 
Elements) or in Accounting. In this exercise, you will set default settings for Automatic Creation of Primary 
and Secondary Cost Elements, Create Batch Input Session, and Execute Batch Input Session.
Make Default Settings for Automatic Creation of Primary and  
Secondary Cost Elements
In this exercise, you will use the automatic cost element’s default settings to maintain cost elements 
individually or as intervals with a corresponding cost element category. To set a default, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Element Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Elements ➤Automatic Creation 
of Primary and Secondary Cost Elements ➤ Make Default Settings. Or use transaction code OKB2. The 
Determine Work Area Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) in the Chart of 
Accounts field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The Change View “Automatic 
Generation of Cost Elements: Default Setting screen is displayed. To set the default settings for the automatic 
postings, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries Overview of Added Entries 
screen is displayed (Figure 18-8).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
371
Specify the account ranges you want to include in your default settings in the Account fields. Begin with 
the lowest number in the account number range in the Acct from and Account to fields and include all the 
numbers in the specified range. Also, specify the Cost Element category for your account range. For example, 
for accounts ranging from 3000 to 4000, the assigned cost element is 1, as these accounts are expenses 
(primary cost/cost-reducing revenues).
SAP comes with a predefined list of cost element categories to choose from. A list of cost elements 
supplied by SAP is in Table 18-2.
Figure 18-8.  Default settings for automatically generating cost elements
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
372
The Cost Element category controls the nature of your posting to a cost element directly (this will allow 
transactions to be posted to all the accounts you specify in the primary cost elements) or indirectly (the 
system determines whether to post transactions internally at the time of posting).
When you click Enter 
 to confirm your entries, the Short Texts field automatically describes the cost 
elements you selected. Save 
 your specifications.
Since you have completed the process of customizing the default settings of cost elements, the next 
step is create a batch input session for the cost element defaults you have specified. This will complete the 
creation of your primary cost elements for your controlling area.
Create Batch Input Session
Batch input provides a way to transfer huge amounts of data into the SAP R/3 system. To create a batch 
input section, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Elements Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost 
Elements ➤ Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost Elements ➤ Create Batch Input Session. 
Or use transaction code OKB3. The Create Batch Input Session to Create Cost Elements screen is displayed 
(Figure 18-9).
Table 18-2.  Cost Element Categories Supplied by SAP
Cost Element Category
Short Description
1
Primary cost/cost –reducing revenues
3
Accrual/deferral per surcharge
4
Accrual/deferral per debt, actual
11
Revenues
12
Sales deduction
21
Internal settlement
22
External settlement
31
Order/project results analysis
41
Overhead rates
42
Assessment
43
Internal activity allocation
90
Statistical cost element for balance sheet account
50
Project-related incoming order: sales revenue
51
Project-related incoming order: other revenues
52
Project-related incoming order: costs
61
Earned value
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
373
Click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen; the system will execute your batch input 
session. The Create Batch Input Session to Create Cost Elements screen will be displayed showing a list of 
accounts you have created (Figure 18-10). 
In Figure 18-9, notice that the system has set the Valid To date as the current date by default, as well as 
the session name and batch input user (as user ID). Use the information in Table 18-3 to update the screen.
Figure 18-9.  Specifying the controlling area and validity date for executing a batch input session
Table 18-3.  The Data Needed to Update the Create Batch Input Session to Create Cost Elements Screen
Field
Value
Description
Controlling Area
C900
Enter your controlling area ID.
Valid From
01.01.2011
Enter an earlier date than the current fiscal year.
Valid To
31.12.9999
This defaults to the future year. You can override this if desired.
Session Name
USER5
The system defaults to your user ID.
Batch input user
USER5
The system defaults to your user ID.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
374
Execute a Batch Input Session
When a batch input session is generated, the system will automatically determine the chart of accounts to be 
processed and the cost elements to be created based on the company code and chart of accounts assigned 
to the controlling area. To generate a cost element you created, you can execute a batch input session. 
Follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Elements Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Elements 
➤ Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost Elements ➤ Execute Batch Input Session. Or use 
transaction code SM35. The Batch Input: Session Overview screen is displayed (Figure 18-11).
Figure 18-10.  A batch input session displaying accounts created in cost elements 
Figure 18-11.  Processing a batch input session
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
375
Select the following indicators:
• 
Display Errors Only: When this radio button is clicked, the system will allow you to 
check for errors resulting from faulty transactions and correct them online. It allows 
you to run transactions in background mode.
• 
Extended Log: This is an additional function in batch input processing. When 
you select this checkbox, all messages encountered when a transaction is run are 
displayed. This includes warning messages, error messages, information messages, 
and other messages returned by SAP.
• 
Expert Mode: This is an additional function. Expert mode only works in interactive 
batch input. 
■
■Note  A session that you want to process immediately is scheduled as a background process using the 
Background mode. It enables transactions to be processed in the background, freeing your entry screen for 
data input.
Click the 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen for your batch input session to apply 
the set indicators. An Information dialog box appears with the message, “Processing of batch input session 
completed’. Confirm the message by clicking the 
 button at the bottom of the 
screen. Notice that the Status 
 button is checked (Figure 18-13), indicating that the status of your batch 
input session is completed.
Select or highlight your cost element from the list of the session names and then click the 
 
button on the top-left side of the screen. The Process Session screen pops up (Figure 18-12). This screen 
allows you to set other options for your batch input session. 
Figure 18-12.  The screen where the processing mode and additional functions are specified for batch input 
processing
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
376
Primary Cost Element
The Primary Cost Element function is a cost/revenue item in the chart of accounts. Costs/revenues that form 
part of the cost elements must have a corresponding G/L account in FI.
Primary cost elements are relevant costs in the chart of accounts. For example:
• 
The cost of raw materials
• 
Utility costs (electricity, gas, heating, water, and so on) 
■
■Note  To be able to create a cost element, you must make sure that a corresponding G/L accounts exists in 
the chart of accounts. Otherwise, you have to create the appropriate G/L account first in the chart of accounts. 
Problem: Now that you have set defaults for automatic creating of primary and secondary 
cost elements, your next task as a functional consultant is to create a primary cost element 
for Cash Purchase – Office Material using the G/L account 460000. Make sure that the 
validity date includes the current year.
To create a primary cost element, follow this menu path: IMG: Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Controlling 
➤ Cost Element Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Element ➤ Individual Processing ➤ Create Primary. Or 
use transaction code KA01. The Create Cost Element: Initial Screen is displayed. Update the appropriate 
fields using the data in Table 18-4. 
Table 18-4.  The Initial Data Needed to Create a Primary Cost Element
Field
Value
Description
Cost Element
460000 (Cash purchase of 
office materials)
Enter the G/L account for cash purchases.
Valid From/To
01.01.2011 - 31.12.9999
Enter a date range for your primary cost element. Make 
sure that the date range includes the company code’s 
current fiscal year. For example, if your company code 
fiscal year is 01.01.2012, set your valid from date to a year 
earlier (01.01.2011) and the end date to any date after the 
fiscal year (31.12.9999).
Figure 18-13.  The Batch Input Session Overview screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
377
In the Basic Data section of the screen, select 1 for the Cost Element Category (Primary Cost/Cost –
Reducing Revenues) using matchcode. Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and then save 
 
your cost element master data. The system will notify you on the status bar 
that
.
■
■Tip  When you enter a valid from date into the Valid From field and click the Enter button, the system will 
automatically set the Valid To date for you. Although you can modify the Valid To date, we recommend that you 
use the default.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to create the cost element master record. 
The Create Cost Element: Basic Screen is displayed. The system will automatically set the Name and 
Description of the cost element in the Basic Data section of the screen (Figure 18-14).
Figure 18-14.  Creating a primary cost element master record
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
378
Secondary Cost Elements
Secondary cost elements are costs that arise within the controlling module due to internal cost allocations, 
overhead apportionment, and other internal costs.
Problem: As a functional consultant your task is to create a secondary cost element for IT 
service costs (called 600000). Make sure that the valid date includes the current year.
To execute the batch input section, follow this menu path: IMG: Easy Access: Accounting ➤  
Controlling ➤ Cost Element Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Element ➤ Individual Processing ➤ Create 
Secondary. Or use transaction code KA06. The Set Controlling Area dialog box pops up. Enter your 
controlling area (C900) in the Controlling Area field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the 
screen. The Create Cost Element: Initial Screen is displayed. Update the following fields: 
Cost Element: Enter the G/L account (600000—IT Service Cost) for your  
cost element.
Valid From/To: Enter a range of valid dates that will include the company code 
current fiscal year 01.01.2011 to 31.12.9999.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen.
■
■Note  Unlike when you create a primary cost element, you do not have to create a G/L account before you 
create a secondary cost element. This is only an internal cost in CO and does not have any implication on the FI.
The Create Cost Element: Basic Screen is displayed (Figure 18-15).
Figure 18-15.  Creating a secondary cost element
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
379
Update the following fields: 
Name: Enter the IT Serv. Cost. This is a short description of your secondary cost 
element.
Description: Enter the IT service cost. This is a full description of your secondary 
cost element.
CElem Category: Enter 42 – Assessment as your cost element category.
After updating the screen, click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
  
your work.
■
■Note  You can change, display, and delete cost elements after saving and you can also display any  
changes you made.
Cost Center Accounting
A cost center, simply put, is a function in an organization that incurs its own costs, which may or may not 
add to its profit. Typical examples include Production, Administration, R&D, Marketing, and so on. Cost 
center accounting helps to monitor costs to ensure they are within budget.
In order to customize the Cost Accounting feature, you will configure the following settings:
• 
Define the standard hierarchy
• 
Create a cost center group
• 
Define cost elements for activity allocation
• 
Create activity types
• 
Use statistical key figures
• 
Change activity output/price planning
• 
Compare cost centers: actual/plan/variance
Define the Standard Hierarchy
A standard hierarchy is simply a tree structure that allows you to structure cost centers in a controlling area 
in a systematic manner.
Problem: As its functional consultant, Company C900 plc has asked you to define the 
standard hierarchy for their controlling area C900, which contains all their cost centers 
and the appropriate cost center groups using the standard hierarchy structure.
■
■Note  It is possible to change an existing hierarchy supplied by SAP system or create a new one.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
380
To define the standard hierarchy, use this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting 
➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Centers ➤ Define ➤ Standard Hierarchy. Or use transaction code OKEON. The Set 
Controlling Area dialog box pops up. Enter your controlling areas (C900) in the Controlling Area fields. Click 
the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The Standard Hierarchy for Cost Center Change screen is 
displayed, where you will define the standard hierarchy for your cost centers. Follow the five steps (levels) 
outlined in the next sections.
Level 1: Update the Standard Hierarchy Group Name
Your standard hierarchy H-C900 created in the Maintain Controlling Area section earlier should be displayed 
and automatically selected by the system (the selection is yellow). Otherwise, you have to select it by clicking 
on it. In the Details for Cost Center Group section of the screen (Figure 18-16), update the group name by 
entering a descriptive name (for example, Standard Hierarchy) in the Group Name field.
In this exercise, you will maintain the relevant standard hierarchy for your controlling area. Before you start 
this exercise, let’s first map out the costs hierarchy you will be using for your cost center standard hierarchy. 
There is no standard way of doing this. In practice, standard hierarchy can be very lengthy and cumbersome. 
It is important that you spend quality time mapping out your standard hierarchy before commencing your 
configuration. We have provided a standard hierarchy mapping in Table 18-5 to help you define the standard 
hierarchy for your cost centers. You can refer back to this table as you build the hierarchy levels.
Table 18-5.  Mapping for Defining the Standard Hierarchy
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
381
To create a lower group in the standard hierarchy, select the cost center group for standard hierarchy 
 and then click the Create 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. A pull-down menu 
appears with a list of the following options:
• 
Lower level group
• 
Group at the same level
• 
Cost center
Since you a creating a lower cost group level in the standard hierarchy for the cost center group, 
select Lower Level Group from the pull-down menu. A new lower level cost center group is created under 
the standard hierarchy cost center group. The system will automatically highlight the new group you just 
created. In the Details for Cost Center Group section, enter a code (C900) for the group and overwrite the 
field’s content. (Change “New group” to your own group name; in this case, Company C900 Plc, as shown in 
Figure 18-18). 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. 
Level 2: Create a Cost Center Group for Your Company Code
The next step is to create a lower group level for a cost center group for your company code in the Standard 
Hierarchy section (Figure 18-17).
Figure 18-16.  Defining a standard hierarchy for the cost centers
Figure 18-17.  Creating a lower group level under the standard hierarchy
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
382
Save 
 your entries.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen.
Level 3: Create Divisions
In this level you will create lower group levels under the company code for Divisions. Select Cost Center Group 
for the company code 
 and click the Create 
 button. From the pull-down menu, select Lower Level 
Group. The system will create a cost center group as a lower level under the company code cost center group. 
Enter code 1000 for the group and overwrite the field’s content with the group name —Corporate.
Click the Enter 
 button.
For this exercise, you also need to create the following Divisions: 2000 – Admin & Finance, 3000 – Marketing 
& Sales, and 4000 – Technical Area. These should be at the same Cost Center Group Level as 1000 - Corporate.
Select the corporate cost center group you just created and then click the Create 
 button. This will 
allow you to create a same level group for the remaining divisions. Click 
 on the pull-
down menu. Update the group name with information for the next division—2000 – Admin & Finance—and 
then click the Enter 
 button. Repeat this step to complete the remaining cost center groups for the division 
using the data in Table 18-5, which you saw earlier in the section “Define the Standard Hierarchy.” Upon 
completion, your hierarchy will look like the one in Figure 18-19. 
Figure 18-18.  Creating a new cost center group as a lower level under the standard hierarchy cost center 
group
Figure 18-19.  Maintaining a cost center group for divisions
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
383
Save 
 your work. 
Level 5: Create Cost Centers
At this level, you create cost centers for the cost groups that you created in level 4. To create cost centers, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Centers ➤ 
Create Cost Centers. Or use transaction code KS01. The Choose Activity screen pops up with two options 
on the screen. You can create or change a cost center. Double-click the Create Cost Center option. The Set 
Controlling Area screen pops up. Enter your controlling area (C900) in the Controlling Area field and click 
the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to set the controlling area. The Create Cost Center Initial 
Screen is displayed. Update the following fields:
Cost Center: Enter a cost center identifier (1110) in the cost center field. This is 
the number we suggested for the executive board in Table 18-5.
Valid From: Enter the date you want the cost center to be valid from, such as 
01.01.2011 (we advise that you use a date a year earlier than your fiscal year). Make 
sure that the valid from date includes your company code’s current fiscal year.
Valid To: This defaults to 31.12.9999. We recommend that you stick to this date.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Create Cost Center: Basic Screen is 
displayed (Figure 18-21).
Level 4: Create Cost Groups
In this level you create cost groups Table 18-5) at a lower group for the divisions you just created in level 3. 
First, create the cost groups for 1000 – Corporate on the standard hierarchy. To do this, select 1000 - Corporate 
on the standard hierarchy and click the Create 
 button. From the pull-down menu, select Lower level 
group. Update the Group Name field with 1100 – Executive Board and click the Enter 
 button. The 
Executive Board Cost Group will be included in the standard hierarchy under corporate as a lower level. 
Using Table 18-5 as a reference, create the remaining cost groups. You can display the entire standard 
hierarchy that you have created by clicking the 
 bar. Your 
standard hierarchy you have created so far should look like the one in Figure 18-20.
Figure 18-20.  Details for the cost center group process
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
384
Update the following fields:
Name: Enter the name of your cost center, such as Exec. Board, in this field. This 
can be an abbreviation.
Description: Enter your cost center description, such as Executive Board. This 
can be the full name of the cost center. This will allow you to easily distinguish 
your cost centers.
Person Responsible: Enter the name of the staff responsible for the cost center. 
We used John in this field. This is optional.
Cost Center Category: Enter the appropriate cost category. In this case, we used 
5 (management). The cost center category could be, for example, Production, 
Sales, Administration, or Management. You can access the cost center category 
using the matchcode next to the cost center field.
Hierarchy Area: Select the hierarchy area from the standard hierarchy—1100 
(Executive Board)—that you created in level 4.
Figure 18-21.  The Cost Center Basic Screen dialog box
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
385
Currency: Enter the currency key (GBP) that you want to apply to your cost 
center. This field is required.
Profit Center: You cannot enter the profit center for your cost center at this level, 
because a profit center has not been created. Leave this field blank for now. It will 
be visited again later in Profit Center section.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and then click Save 
. After you save, the system will 
take you back to the Create Cost Center: Initial Screen. 
■
■Note  The system will issue this warning: 
.
Ignore the warning and click on 
 again. Then save 
 your efforts.
Using the information in Table 18-5, create the remaining 16 cost centers. Once you have created all the 
cost centers, you can display the standard hierarchy using this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center 
Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Standard Hierarchy ➤ Display. Or use transaction code OKENN. The Standard 
Centers for Cost Centers Display screen appears. Click the 
 bar to display 
your standard hierarchy list (Figure 18-22).
Figure 18-22.  The standard hierarchy list display 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
386
Click the Standard Hierarchy 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Go to Change? screen is 
displayed, informing you that “The object already exists…” (Figure 18-24).
Create Cost Center Group
A cost center group combines cost centers according to organizational and/or functional requirements into 
groups, thereby making cost center management easy. It also builds groups into cost center hierarchies, 
which aids reporting summaries for decision-making. After you have created the cost center hierarchy 
for your controlling area in the master data, when you display Create Cost Center Group: Initial Screen 
and click the Standard Hierarchy button, the system will automatically generate the cost center group for 
your standard hierarchy. There must be at least one cost center group in the standard hierarchy and you 
can add as many alternative or independent groups, as you require. They can be structured according to 
organizational or functional specific requirements.
The advantages of cost center groups include:
• 
For performing reporting of activities in specific cost centers in the information 
system. Information system enables you to generate reports delivered with the 
system or to create your own reports.
• 
Processing multiple cost centers in a single transaction, including cost center 
planning, distribution, and assessment (we will be looking at distribution and 
assessment later in this chapter).
To create a cost center group, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ 
Master Data ➤ Cost Centers ➤ Define Cost Centers Group. Or use transaction code KSH1. The Choose 
Activity screen pops up. You can create or change a cost center group. Select Create Cost Center Group from 
the list by double-clicking it. The Create Cost Center Group: Initial Screen is displayed (Figure 18-23). The 
system will automatically pick your standard hierarchy (H-C900) as the cost center group. 
Figure 18-23.  The default cost center group 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
387
Activity Types
Activity types allow the system to classify similar activities performed at a cost center in a controlling area.
Valuation of activity types for each cost center and period with a given charge rate consist of both fixed 
and variable portions. This allows costs incurred at a cost center to be distributed adequately to products 
based on activities performed in relation to products.
In this exercise, you will define cost elements for activity allocation and create activity types.
Define Cost Elements for Activity Allocation
The cost element allocation serves as an activity allocation. It takes the receiver debits and treats them 
internally as direct or indirect allocations. To define cost elements for activity allocation, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Activity Types ➤ Define Cost Elements 
for Activity Allocation. The Choose Activity dialog box is displayed. You can change an existing cost element 
for activity allocation or create a cost element for activity allocation.
Click the 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen; the Change Standard Hierarchy (Cost 
Center Group): Structure screen is displayed showing the defaulted cost groups (Figure 18-25). You can 
expand each cost to display details of cost centers by clicking 
.
Figure 18-24.  The screen where you can accept or reject existing objects for cost center group in standard 
hierarchy 
Figure 18-25.  The default standard hierarchy cost center group 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
388
Click the 
 option and then click the 
 
button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Create Cost Element: Initial screen is displayed. Update 
the following fields:
Cost Element: Enter your cost element identifier. In this exercise, we used 
710000 as the cost element number. The cost element used here is only for 
illustration. You can use the cost element identifier of choice. In practice you can 
obtain this number from the cost accounting team.
Valid From: Enter a valid from date. Make sure that the valid from date includes 
your company code’s fiscal year.
Valid To: The system will automatically choose a valid to date. 
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Create Cost Element: Basic Screen is 
displayed (Figure 18-26). 
Figure 18-26.  The basic screen for creating cost elements
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
389
Update the following fields: 
Name: Enter the name of your cost element—Prod.Hrs. (this can be an 
abbreviation).
Description: Enter a full description of your cost element—Production Hour
Cost Element Category: Select the appropriate cost category—43 for internal 
Activity Allocation. You can access this number using matchcode.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your work.  
Create Activity Types
Before creating your activity types, you must make sure that the following activities have been maintained/
created:
• 
Controlling area.
• 
Allocation of cost element.
To create an activity type for your cost center, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center 
Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Activity Types ➤ Create Activity Types. Or use transaction code KL01. The 
Choose Activity screen pops up with the option to create or change an activity type. Select Create Activity 
Type and then click the 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Create Activity Type: 
Initial Screen is displayed. Update the following fields:
Activity Type: Enter your Activity Type identifier. For this activity, we used 
PROD1 as the activity type. There is no special rule to the activity type identifier 
you can use. It is advisable to use as simple an activity type name as you can 
remember.
Valid From: Enter the date you want your activity type to be valid from. Make 
sure that the date entered in this field includes the period you want your activity 
type to apply to.
Valid To: The system automatically chooses this date.
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Create Activity Type: Basic Screen is 
displayed (Figure 18-27).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
390
Update the following fields: 
Name: Enter the name—Assembly—for your activity type. This is can be 
abbreviated if desired.  
■
■Note  Activity types is a classification of activities produced in the cost centers within a controlling area. The 
name (Assembly) we used in this exercise is for illustration purposes only. In practice, you should use a name 
that reflects your organization’s activity types. 
Figure 18-27.  The basic screen for creating activity types
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
391
Description: Enter a description—Assembly—of your activity type.
Activity/Unit: Enter the measurement unit key—HR (Hours)—that you want to 
apply to your activity type. For example, Hours, Sales Percentage, and so on. The 
system has a list of cost center category to choose from. You can access these cost 
categories using matchcode.
CCtr Categories: Enter the cost center category you want to use for your activity 
type. The system comes with a list of cost center categories to choose from using 
matchcode.
ATyp Category: Select the appropriate activity type category—1 (manual entry, 
manual allocation). The system comes with four activity type categories to 
choose from.
Allocation Cost Elem: Enter the cost element allocation number—7100000. This 
is the number you defined in the Define Cost Elements for Activity Allocation 
section.
Price Indicator: Enter 1 (plan price, automatically based on activity). This 
specification allows you to calculate an allocation price by planned price 
automatically based on activity type for a cost center. You also can decide 
whether allocation calculation should be based on capacity or be determined 
manually by the user. You can access this indicator using the matchcode.
Average Price: By setting the average price indicator, this will allow the system to 
determine how price of activity type or business process calculation is performed 
for a cost center.
Actl Acty Type Cat: Select manual entry, manual allocation from the list of 
variant activity type categories for actual posting list. This is used to determine 
how the activity type is allocated.
Act. Price indicator: Select actual price indicator for actual allocation  
price— 5 (actual price, automatically based on activity). This price indicator  
also determines how the activity type is calculated. 
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your activity type.
Use Statistical Key Figures
Statistical key figures provide vital information relating to a business activity measured in non-monetary 
terms. For example, it can show number of employees, machine hours, and so on. This serves as the basis for 
internal allocation, which is defined either as a fixed value or as total values.
Statistical key figures can be used for the following internal allocations:
Distribution: Method of cost allocation used to allocate FI costs (primary costs) 
to a cost center, which is applicable to primary cost elements.
Assessment: This is the process of cost allocation generated internally in 
controlling to cost center. This method of allocation can be used for both primary 
and secondary costs. Costs allocated are posted to a secondary assessment cost 
element.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
392
Update the following fields:
Name: Enter a description—Output Allocation—for your statistical key figure.
Stat. Key Fig. UnM.: Enter EA (Each) as the unit of measurement for your 
statistical figure by selecting it from the list supplied by the system using the 
matchcode.
Key fig. Cat.: You are presented with two options to choose from, either as fixed 
values or total values, which will serve as a basis for internal allocation for your 
statistical key figure.
To create statistical key figures, use this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ 
Master Data ➤ Statistical Key Figures ➤ Create Activity Types ➤ Maintain Statistical Key Figures. Or use 
transaction code KK01. The Choose Activity Screen is displayed with the option to create or change the 
statistical key figures. Select Create Statistical Key Figures and click the 
 button on the bottom-
right side of the screen. The Create Statistical Key Figure: Initial Screen is displayed. Enter an identifier for 
your statistical key figure in the Stat. Key Figure field (STAT01) and then click the 
 button on the 
top-left side of the screen. This will allow you to enter details in the statistical key figure master data. The 
Create Statistical Key Figure: Master Data screen is displayed (Figure 18-28). The system will automatically 
set the statistical key figure and the controlling area.
Figure 18-28.  Basic screen for creating statistical key figures: master data 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
393
Figure 18-29.  The initial screen for change activity type/price planning
■
■Note  The Fixed Val. indicator allows you to fix the value used for measurement to be carried forward to a 
future period. This value can be the number of employees, production hours, and so on.
The Tot. Values indicator enables you to indicate that the total values will vary from period to period. This means 
for each period you have to specify a new value. This would work well for machine hours, for example.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
 your statistical key figure customizing.  
Change Activity Output/Prices Planning
The Activity Output/Prices Planning option allows you to create multiple plan versions that you can use to 
compare different plan values or business processes. Go to the Change Activity Type/Price Planning: Initial 
Screen (Figure 18-29) by following this menu path: Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Controlling ➤ Cost Enter 
Accounting ➤ Planning ➤ Activity Output/Prices ➤ Change. Or use transaction code KP26.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
394
When you save 
 your work, the system will notify you in the status bar at the bottom of the screen that 
.
Compare Cost Centers: Actual/Plan/Variance
This exercise will allow the system to compare actual costs with planned costs, generate variances between 
actual and planned costs, and execute a report displaying actual/planned costs and variances relating to 
activities in the cost center. By allowing you to generate reports that compare the actual with the planned 
business activities, this helps you make precise and prompt decisions and effectively plan and coordinate 
the business activities efficiently. Use this menu path: Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Controlling ➤ Cost 
Accounting ➤ Information System ➤ Reports for Cost Accounting ➤ Plan/Actual Comparisons ➤ Cost 
Center: Actual/Plan/Variance. Or use transaction code S_ALR_87013611.
The Cost Centers: Actual/Plan/Variance: Selection screen is displayed. Using the data in Table 18-6, 
update the fields listed.
Update the following fields:
Version: Enter Plan/Actual version 0. This is a standard version supplied by SAP 
for this purpose.
From/To Period: Enter the starting and ending period that you want your 
activity output/price to cover. This is usually 1-12-month periods.
Fiscal Year: Enter the fiscal year you want to cover (the current fiscal year). This 
will usually be your company code’s fiscal year.
Cost Center: Enter the cost center you want to take into consideration in your 
activity type planning.
Activity Type: Enter the activity type you created.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries. To display your activity type planning overview, click 
the Overview Screen 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Change Activity Type/Price Planning: 
Overview Screen is displayed (Figure 18-30).
Figure 18-30.  The overview screen for change activity type/price planning
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
395
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries. To execute the actual/plan comparison, click the 
Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Cost Centers: Actual/Plan/Variance screen is 
displayed (Figure 18-31). 
Table 18-6.  The Data Needed to Complete Cost Center: Actual/Plan/Variance Selection Screen
Field
Value
Description
Controlling Area
C900
Enter your controlling area.
Fiscal Year
2012
Enter the fiscal year you want to compare here.
From Period
1
This is the period you want to compare actual costs with plan costs.
To Period
12
The end period for actual/planned/variance.
Plan Version
0
This is the planned version you created in the “Maintain Plan 
Version” section.
Figure 18-31.  The Cost Centers Actual/Plan Comparison report screen
Profit Center Accounting
A profit center is a department or unit within an organization that generates revenues. Profit centers can 
generate revenues and perhaps costs to arrive at a profit.
Under profit center accounting, you will configure the following settings:
• 
Maintain controlling area settings
• 
Create a dummy profit center
• 
Set control parameters for actual data
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
396
• 
Maintain plan versions
• 
Define a standard hierarchy for profit centers
• 
Define profit centers
• 
Define number ranges for local documents
• 
Assign profit centers to cost centers
Basic Settings
First, you need to define the setting for the controlling area necessary to set up profit center accounting. 
Secondly, you need to maintain the global settings for profit center accounting in the controlling area. To set 
your controlling area, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting ➤ Basic Settings 
➤ Set Controlling Area Settings. Or use transaction code OKKS.
The Set Controlling Area dialog box is displayed. Enter your controlling area (C900) in the Controlling 
Area field and click the Enter 
 button to confirm.
Maintain Controlling Area Settings
Problem: You are tasked with maintaining the controlling area setting for your client’s 
company code C900. As additional information, you were told by the accounting team 
that the settings for the profit center currency type should be based on controlling area 
currency and the valuation view should be based on legal valuation.
Settings in this exercise will define the general control parameters for your current controlling area as 
it relates to a profit center in SAP R/3. To go to the maintain controlling area settings, follow this menu path: 
IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting ➤ Basic Settings ➤ Controlling Area Settings ➤ Maintain 
Controlling Area Settings. Or use transaction code OKE5.
The Change View “EC-PCA: Controlling Area Settings”: Overview screen is displayed (Figure 18-32). 
The system will use defaults based on the controlling area section of the page.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
397
Update the following fields:
Standard Hierarchy: Enter a meaningful key as your profit center standard 
hierarchy. The profit center standard hierarchy will be used to define the tree 
structure of the profit center belonging to your controlling area. In this exercise 
we used P-C900.
Dummy Profit Center: All postings in the system to objects that are not assigned 
to a profit center are received by a dummy profit center. The dummy profit center 
here is inactive. We will be defining dummy profit center in the next section.
Figure 18-32.  The overview screen for controlling area settings 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
398
Elim. of Int, Business Vol.: Allows you to eliminate internal business volume in 
the controlling area. If you click this checkbox, the system will update transaction 
data between objects not assigned to the same profit center in the account based 
EC-PCA (Enterprise Controlling - Profit Center Accounting).
PCtr Local Currency Type: This defines the currency type you want to use as 
the special profit center report currency. For example, GBP for British pound 
sterling.
The transaction data in profit center accounting is updated in up to three 
currencies: 
• 
Transaction currency
• 
Company code currency
• 
Third currency 
Profit Center Local Currency: This allows you to set the currency type you 
want to use in your profit center. This displays values in the set currency for your 
standard report. You can choose from: 
• 
30 - Group currency
• 
20 - Controlling area currency
• 
90 - Profit center currency 
Store Transaction Currency: When you choose Store Transaction Currency, 
the transaction data to profit center accounting in the transaction currency will 
be updated.
Valuation View: This allows you to determine whether the data is stored  
using transfer price from legal view, the group view, or the profit view in the 
controlling area.
ALE Distribution Method: This determines how data in the profit center 
accounting is distributed across systems using ALE (Application Link Enable).
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and then save 
 your controlling area settings. 
Create Dummy Profit Center
All postings in the system to objects that are not assigned to a profit center are received by a dummy profit 
center. This ensures that the data in the profit center accounting is complete. Data on the dummy cost center 
can later be sent to the other profit centers using the assessment or distribution function.
Problem: Not all cost centers are assigned to profit centers. You have been asked to create a 
dummy profit center that the system will automatically post all unassigned cost centers to.
To create a dummy profit center, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting  
➤ Master Data ➤ Profit Center ➤ Create Dummy Profit Center. Or use transaction code KE59. The Choose 
Activity screen pops up and you can create a dummy profit center or change a profit center. Select 
 and click the 
 button on the bottom-right side of the 
screen. The Create Dummy Profit Center: Initial Screen is displayed (Figure 18-33).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
399
Table 18-7.  Data to Set Control Parameters for Actual Data
Field
Value
Description
From Year
2011
The year entered here must not be greater than your company’s fiscal year.
Line Items
Tick
Determines whether actual line items are updated.
Online Transfer
Tick
Controls how actual data is transferred to the R/3 system.
Enter an identification key for your dummy profit center in the Dummy Profit Center field (this could be 
numeric, alphabetic, or alphanumeric). We used Dummy-C900 in this exercise for illustration purposes. 
Click the 
 button. The Create Dummy Profit Center: Basic Screen is displayed. The system will 
set the profit center, controlling area, and validity date by default. Update the following fields:
Name: Enter a suitable name, such as Dummy, for your dummy profit center.
Description: Enter a description, such as Dummy – Profit Center, for your 
dummy profit center.
Profit Center Group: Enter a key as an identification (P-C900) for the profit 
center group. This is used to group similar profit centers together, based on 
company specific criteria in a hierarchical structure of profit centers.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
.
Set Control Parameters for Actual Data
In this exercise, you will set all the control parameters for actual postings in profit center accounting. To set 
control parameters for the actual data, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting 
➤ Basic Settings ➤ Controlling Area Settings ➤ Activate Direct Postings ➤ Set Control Parameters for Actual 
Data. Or use transaction code 1KEF.
The Change View “EC-PCA: Control Parameters for Actual Postings”: Overview screen is displayed. To 
be able to set the indicators for line items and for online transfer, click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears. Update the appropriate fields using the 
information listed in Table 18-7.
Figure 18-33.  The initial screen for creating a dummny profit center
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
400
For this exercise, select 
 from the list of displayed versions. Double-click the 
 folder on the left pane of the screen.
The Determine Work Area: Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your controlling area code (C900) in 
Controlling Area field and click the Enter 
 button on the bottom-left side of the screen. The Change View 
“Settings for Profit Center Accounting” Overview screen comes up. Click the 
 button to bring up the 
New Entries screen (Figure 18-35).
Maintain Plan Versions
The Plan Versions option allows you to maintain and manage several plans at the same time in the same 
profit center. You can then use more than one version simultaneously. To maintain plan versions, follow  
this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting ➤ Basic Settings ➤ Controlling Area  
Settings ➤ Activate Direct Postings ➤ Plan Versions ➤ Maintain Plan Versions. Or use transaction code 
OKEQ. The General Version Definition screen is displayed (Figure 18-34). Select the appropriate version you 
want to include in your profit center. SAP comes with several plan versions.
Figure 18-34.  The General Version Definition screen, where you specify the version for your profit centers 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
401
Update the following fields:
Years: Enter the years you want to maintain versions for in your profit center. 
Make sure this includes the fiscal year.
Line Items: This option allows you to display line items in your report.
ExRateType: The system comes with predefined exchange rates to choose 
from for your cost planning. Exchange rate type “M” used in this exercise is for 
standard transactions at average rates.
Click the Enter 
 button to confirm your entries and save 
.
Define Standard Hierarchy for Profit Centers
A standard hierarchy is simply a tree structure that allows you to structure profit centers in a controlling area; 
it shows the divisions responsible for generating profit in profit center accounting.
Before you define a standard hierarchy, it is important to map out the profit center’s hierarchy that you 
will be using as a guide. Because of the complexities involved in customizing standard hierarchies, there 
is no standard way of doing this. It is important that you spend time mapping out your standard hierarchy 
before commencing your configuration. We provide a standard hierarchy mapping in Table 18-8 as an 
illustration to help you define a standard hierarchy for your profit centers.
Problem: Company C900 Plc has asked you as their functional consultant to define the 
standard hierarchy for their profit centers in controlling area C900, using the data in Table 18-8.
Figure 18-35.  The screen where you update the profit center accounting settings
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
402
Since you want to create a lower level node under your standard hierarchy, select P-C900 – Controlling 
Area on the standard hierarchy and click the 
 button in the middle of the screen to create 
a node under Dummy – Profit Center you created earlier. A node appears in the hierarchy under Dummy 
Profit Center. Update the node with your profit center group using the data in Table 18-8. Enter the profit 
center code 1000 and a description (such as Vehicles) in respective fields (Figure 18-37).
To define a standard hierarchy for your profit centers, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit 
Center Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Profit Center ➤ Define Standard Hierarchy. Or use transaction code 
KCH1. The Set Controlling Area dialog box pops up. This will allow you to set the controlling area for your 
profit center. Enter your controlling area (C900) in the Controlling Area field and confirm your entries by 
clicking the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The Change Standard Hierarchy (Profit Center 
Group): Structure screen is displayed (Figure 18-36), which is where you define the standard hierarchy for 
your profit center.
Table 18-8.  Mapping for Defining the Standard Hierarchy for Profit Centers
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Controlling Area
Company Code
Divisions
Profit Centers
P-C900 Standard Hierarchy - HC900
 
1000 - Vehicle
1100 – Car
 
 
1200 - Lorry
 
 
1300 - Bus
 
2000 - Services
2100 - Training
 
2200 - ERP Consulting
 
 
2300 - Support & Advice
 
3000 - Corporate
3100 - Cafeteria
 
4000 - Miscellaneous
Figure 18-36.  Defining a standard hierarchy for the profit center group 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
403
You need to create another node at the same level with 1000-Vehicles for 2000-Services. Select the 
1000-Vehicles node from the hierarchy by clicking on it and then click the 
 button. A blank 
node appears at the same level under 1000-Vehicles. Update the node by entering the code for profit center 
(2000) and a description of the profit center (Services).
Repeat this process to create the followings profit center groups:
• 
3000 – Corporate
• 
4000 – Miscellaneous
The hierarchy structure for your profit center groups should look like the one shown in Figure 18-38.
Figure 18-37.  Updating a standard hierarchy for a profit center group
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
404
Save 
 your work. 
Define Profit Center
In this exercise, you will define a profit center and change the profit center master data.
■
■Note  Before creating a profit center, make sure that you have defined the standard hierarchy for your profit 
center in the controlling area’s basic settings.
To define a profit center, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling – Profit Center Accounting – Master 
Data – Profit Center – Define Profit Center. Or use transaction code KE51. The Create Profit Center Choose 
Activity screen is displayed with the option to create or change a profit center. Select EC-PCA: Create Profit 
Center from the activity list by double-clicking it or selecting it and then clicking the 
button on 
the bottom-right side of the screen. An initial Create Profit Center screen comes up. Enter your profit center. 
It is advisable to use a numeric value. We used 1100 as our profit center. To specify details for the proft center, 
click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Create Profit Center screen for further 
specifications is displayed (Figure 18-39). On this screen, notice the defaults used in the following fields—
Controlling Area – C900, Profit Center -1100, and Analysis Period – 01.01.2012-31.12.9999. You can change 
the analysis period if you choose to.
Figure 18-38.  The complete standard hierarchy for the profit center groups
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
405
Update the following fields:
Name: Enter the name of your profit center. In this exercise we used Car as our 
profit center name. You can use an abbreviation.
Long Text: Enter the full name or a detailed description of your profit center, 
such as Car (Vehicle).
User Responsible: This is the name of the user of the profit center. This is 
optional.
Person Respons.: Enter the name of the key staff responsible for the profit 
center, such as Zoe.
Department: This is the department in your organization that’s in charge of the 
profit center. This field is optional.
Figure 18-39.  The screen where you enter details for your profit center and ensure that the profit center status 
is active
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
406
Profit Ctr Group: Enter the profit center group 1000 (Vehicles) that your profit 
center relates to. The profit center group was defined in the standard hierarchy 
earlier (for example, Vehicles). You can access profit center group by using the 
matchcode.
Segment: Enter the area or division in your company that creates its own 
financial statement for external reporting relating to the profit center. 
At this point the profit center is inactive, as shown in the Status field. To activate the profit center, click 
the Activate 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Status field will turn from ‘Inactive’ to ‘Active’.
Repeat the steps in this section to define the remaining profit centers using the information in Table 18-8.
■
■Note  To view or display the profit centers you have created, return to the standard hierarchy and expand 
each of the profit center groups.
Define Number Ranges for Local Documents
The same process for maintaining number intervals for G/L documents is applicable when you’re defining 
number ranges for local documents. The idea here is to assign number intervals to the documents you 
created and the ones delivered by the system. Number assignment functions with company code and your 
company code fiscal year.
In this exercise, you will copy existing number ranges from company code 1000. You can refer back to 
the section “Define Number Ranges” in Chapter 3 to define number ranges. To define number ranges for 
your profit centers, follow this menu path: IMG: Controlling ➤ Profit Center Accounting ➤ Planning ➤ Basic 
Settings for Planning ➤ Define Number Ranges ➤ Define Number Ranges for Local Documents. Or use 
transaction code GB02.
The Number Ranges for Local G/L Documents screen comes up with a list of predefined number 
ranges. Select the company code you want to copy number ranges from and click the Copy 
 button left of 
the screen. The Copy Company Code Number Ranges screen pops up. Notice that the company code you 
want to copy from (Source Company code - 1000) is entered in the From field. Enter your company code 
(target company code is C900) in the To field and then click the Copy 
 button at the bottom of the screen. 
The Transport number range intervals screen pops up with a message. Ignore the message and click the 
Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your action. The system will then notify you 
that
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
407
Assign Profit Centers to Cost Centers
The final stage in creating profit centers is to assign the profit centers to the cost centers you created in the 
“Create Cost Centers” section in the “Cost Center Accounting” section, earlier in this chapter.
■
■Note  Not all cost centers generate profits. Only cost centers that generate profits are assigned to profit 
centers. The cost centers that are not assigned to a specific profit center will be automatically assigned to a 
dummy profit center.
To assign profit centers to cost centers in the cost center master data, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Master Data ➤ Cost Centers ➤ Change Cost Centers. Or use 
transaction code KS02.
The Choose Activity screen is displayed with options to create or change a cost center. Select the option 
to 
 master data and click the 
 button on the bottom-left side of the 
screen. The Set Controlling Area dialog box pops up. Enter your controlling area (C900) in the Controlling 
Area field and click the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen to confirm your entries. The Change Cost 
Center Initial Screen is displayed.
■
■Note  For illustration purposes, we assume that the following cost centers generate profits and costs and 
should therefore be assigned profit centers: Cafeteria, Car, Lorry, Bus, Training, and ERP Consulting.
Enter the cost center 1220 (for Cafeteria) in the Cost Center field and then click the 
 button 
on the top-left side of the screen to call up the Change Cost Center: Basic Screen (Figure 18-40). This is 
where you assign the appropriate profit center to the cost center in the cost center master data.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
408
The settings you made in the cost center will be the defaults here. The only change you need to make in 
this exercise is to assign cost centers to profit centers. Using the matchcode, enter the cost center 3100 (Café) 
in the Profit Center field and save 
 your changes.
■
■Note  If the valid date for your profit and cost centers are not the same, you may likely experience problems 
when saving your work. The system will issue an error message on the status bar stating that “Profit Center 
C900/ 3100 does not exist for the validity date 01.01.XX”.
To resolve this issue, go back to the profit center master data and make the validity date the same as the cost 
center master’s date.
Figure 18-40.  Assigning a profit center to a cost center
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
409
■
■Note  The system will automatically update the Profit Center field. You can check to see if the profit center 
is assigned to the document entry by scrolling to the right side of the screen (Figure 18-41).
The Change the field screen pops up with a message relating to the changes you have made in your cost 
center master data. Confirm these changes by clicking the 
 button at the bottom of the screen.
Repeat the steps in the “Assign Profit Centers to Cost Centers” section to assign the remaining cost 
centers to profit centers.
Now let’s post some controlling documents in FI to test what you have done so far. 
Posting Controlling Documents
It is important to note that during FI document posting, cost object’s (for example, cost center, internal order 
and so on) controlling documents are automatically posted in controlling. Use transaction code FB60 to go 
to the Enter Vendor Invoice: Company Code C900 screen. Post a document controlling document using the 
data in Table 18-9. 
Table 18-9.  The Data Needed to Post a Controlling Document in FI
Field
Value
Description
Vendor
300124
Using the matchcode, enter the vendor account you are 
posting the document to.
Invoice Date
21.06.2012
Use today’s date as your invoice date.
Posting Date
Today’s date
Use today’s date as your document posting date.
Amount
1000
Enter the document amount.
Calculate Tax
Check
Check to set the system to calculate tax amount for this 
document.
Tax Code
A2
Enter the tax code for input tax that the system will use when 
calculating the tax amount.
G/L Account
474000
The account the document is posted to.
D/C
Debit
Since this transaction is an expense, the accounting 
treatment is a debit. The system will automatically credit the 
corresponding vendor’s account.
Amount
1000
The document amount that is posted to the expense account 
as a debit.
Cost Center
4110
The cost center that the expense is posted to.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
410
For the system to execute line items, click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The 
Vendor Line Item Display screen appears showing all the open line items for your vendor (Figure 18-42).
 You will notice that profit center 1100 is assigned automatically through the cost center assignment in 
the Profit Center field. Once you are satisfied with your entries, click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen to display your transaction entry and post 
 your invoice entries.
Now that you have posted a controlling document in FI, let’s see how this affects the controlling module.
Display Line Items
To display line items, use transaction code FBL1N. The Vendor Line Item Display screen comes up.
■
■Note  For more information on line items, refer back to Chapter 17 (in the section “Display line items”) to 
see the note on line item display.
Update the screen with the information shown in Table 18-10.
Table 18-10.  Information to Update the Line Item Display Screen
Field
Value
Description
Vendor Account
300124 (your vendor)
Enter the vendor account that you want to display the 
line item.
Company code
C900 (your company code)
Enter your company code.
Open Items
Select
Check this option to display all open items in the 
vendor account.
Figure 18-41.  The Enter Vendor Invoice: Company Code C900 screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
411
Figure 18-42.  The Vendor Line Items Display screen
Check the item you want to consider in the controlling document by selecting the checkbox in the 
Account column. To display the item you selected, click the Display Document 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen. The Display Document: Line Item 001 screen comes up. Click the Call Up Document 
Overview 
 button at the top of the screen. The Display Document: Data Entry View screen is displayed. 
On the menu bar at the top of the screen, click the 
 button; a pull-down menu is 
displayed. Select 
 from the list and then select 
 from the 
sub pull-down menu. The List of Documents in Accounting screen pops up. 
Select 
 from the displayed list of items on the screen and then 
click the 
 button at the bottom of screen. The Display Actual Cost Documents screen appears displaying 
the cost objects posted to the system (Figure 18-43).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
412
Profit Center: Interactive Reporting
Several reports can be displayed in the system. In this exercise, you will only look at the profit center group: 
plan/actual/variance report. To generate the profit center group planned and actual variance report, follow 
this menu path: Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Controlling ➤ Profit Center ➤ Information System ➤ Interactive 
Reporting ➤ Profit Center Group: Plan/Actual/Variance. Or use transaction code S_ALR_87013326.
To expand your document further, click the Expand 
 button in the front of the document number to 
expand the actual cost. Notice that the CO object item (for example, electricity) is displayed.
Finally, let’s see how this transaction will appear in a profit center.
Click the Back 
 button to return to previous screen. The Display Actual Cost Document screen pops 
up with the question, “Do you want to exit this list?” Confirm that you want to exit the list by clicking the 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The List of Documents in Accounting screen is displayed. 
Select 
 from the displayed list and click the Choose 
 (F2) button at the 
bottom of the screen. The Profit Center: Actual Line Items screen is displayed showing the profit center 
documents in the profit center (Figure 18-44).
Figure 18-44.  Profit center’s actual line item display
Figure 18-43.  The Display Actual Cost Documents screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
413
Update the fields and then click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to generate 
the report. 
■
■Tip  Try other reports on your own.
Distribution 
Distribution is the method of cost allocation that you use when allocating primary costs of a cost center 
between the sender and the receiver. In this exercise, we will configure settings for actual distribution. We 
will define distribution in the form of cycles by defining rules for the settlement of primary costs for a cost 
center. Original costs are passed on to the receiver cost center by way of allocation.
You can access the screen to define distribution in two ways, in easy access or using IMG:
• 
Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Period-End 
Closing ➤ Current Settings ➤ Define Distribution
• 
IMG: Controlling ➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Actual Posting ➤ Period-End Closing 
➤ Distribution ➤ Define Distribution
The Choose Activity screen is displayed, where you can create or change an actual distribution. Select 
Create Actual Distribution from the list and click the 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The 
Create Actual Distribution Cycle: Initial Screen is displayed (Figure 18-45). This is where you define the cycle 
ID and the start date of the distribution circle.
Table 18-11.  The Data Needed to Specify Profit Center Interactive Reporting
Field
Value
Description
From
1
Enter the start period that you want to include in the report.
To
12
Enter the period you want the report to end. This is the accounting period 
that you want to include in your report. This is usually between 1 to 12 
months for a given fiscal year.
Fiscal Year
2012
Enter the accounting year you want to include in your report. This is likely 
to be the current fiscal year.
Plan Version
0
Enter the version of your plan version. For this exercise use version 0.
■
■Tip  The system may request a controlling area setting. If this is the case, enter your controlling area (C900) 
in the Set Controlling field in the controlling area screen and then confirm your entry.
The Selection: Profit Center Grp: Plan/Actual/Variance screen is displayed. Using the data in Table 18-11, 
update the appropriate fields.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
414
Update the following fields:
Cycle: Enter an ID (DIST01) for your distribution cycle. This can be a numeric or 
an alphanumeric digit. Whatever you use as your identifier digit must be agreed 
on with the cost accounting team.
Start Date: This is the date you want your distribution cycle to start. This can be 
the start date of your current fiscal year.
Click the Enter 
 button to proceed to the Create Actual Distribution Cycle: Header Data screen. Enter 
a description for your distribution cycle in the Text field (Distribution Circle –C900).
To attach a segment to your distribution cycle, click the 
 button. The Create Actual 
Distribution Cycles: Segment screen is displayed (Figure 18-46).
Figure 18-45.  The initial screen to define the cycle ID and the start date of the distribution cycle 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
415
Enter a key (SEG1) and a name for your segment distribution cycle in the Segment Name field. The 
sender rule defaults to posted amounts, and share in % is set to 100% by default. Change the receiver rule to 
Fixed Amounts. A receiver rule controls how the receiver-tracing factor is determined. By specifying fixed 
amount as a tracing factor, a specific amount allocation is passed to receivers based on the sender rule.
The next step is to specify the cost center and cost element for the sender and receiver. Click the 
 tab at the top of the Create Actual Distribution Cycle: Segment screen to go to 
sender’s section of the screen. Enter the cost center you want to include in your distribution cycle and 
specify the cost element range as well in the respective fields. In the Receiver section, enter the receiving cost 
centers (Figure 18-47). 
Figure 18-46.  The Create Actual Distribution Cycle  (Segment Header) screen
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
416
The final step is to specify the percentage to distribute costs to centers in the Receiver Tracing Factor 
section of the screen. Click the 
 tab. The concept here is that the cost of the cost 
center 4110 (sender) is being passed to other cost centers (receivers). Since this cost is being passed to more 
than one cost center, it is important to distribute the cost to each cost center (the receivers) systematically. 
You can do this by using percentage rates as the basis of apportioning the cost to each receiving cost centers 
4120 – 4130. The total percentages you apply to the cost centers must equal 100%. See Figure 18-48.
Figure 18-47.  The screen to specify the accounts for sender/receiver
Figure 18-48.  The screen where you set the mode of apportionment in percentage rate between cost centers 
(receivers)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
417
Click the Enter 
 button. Notice that the status bar for each of the G/L accounts you have entered are 
ticked green. In order to instruct the system to calculate tax using the tax code you have entered, click the 
 tab at the top of the screen and make sure that the Calculate Tax checkbox is checked 
.
To display your entries, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Document Overview 
screen displays all the items you entered in the G/L account. If you are satisfied with your entries, you can 
post 
 them.
Finally, let’s see how the cost center line items are displayed. 
Save 
 your efforts. The system will notify you that 
 
in the status bar at the bottom of the screen.
Let’s see how the distribution you have created works by posting some expenses in G/L accounts.
G/L Account Posting
Use transaction code FB50 to enter the G/L account documents. Using the Enter G/L Account Document: 
Company Code C900 screen in Figure 18-49 as a model, update your screen.
Figure 18-49.  Entering G/L account documents
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
418
Display Actual Cost Line Items for Cost Centers
To display the cost line items for your cost centers, use this menu path: Easy Access: Accounting ➤ Control 
➤ Cost Center Accounting ➤ Information System ➤ Report for Cost Center Accounting ➤ Line Items ➤ 
Cost Centers: Actual Line Items. Or use transaction code KSB1.
The Display Actual Cost Line Items for Cost Centers: Initial Screen is displayed. You can enter a range of 
cost centers that you want to display in your line items in the Cost Center fields if you choose to display more 
than one cost center in your line item display. For this exercise, enter Cost Center 4110 in the Center field 
and click the Execute
 button on the top-left side of the screen to generate line items report of the cost 
center. The Display Actual Cost Line Items for Cost Center screen comes up showing all items posted in the 
cost center (Figure 18-50).
Figure 18-50.  The Actual Cost Line Items display of cost center 4110
It is possible to see the source document on an item in the line item display. To do this, select the item 
you want to view and then click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The Display 
Document: Data Entry View screen is displayed showing the source document for the item you chose 
(Figure 18-51).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 18 ■ Customizing the Controlling Module
419
Summary
This chapter explained what controlling is. You learned how to maintain a controlling area, how to set 
number ranges for controlling documents, and how to set version approaches/transfer pricing. You also 
learned what a cost element is and how to set defaults for automatic creation of primary and secondary cost 
elements. You learned what a cost center is and how to define standard hierarchy for cost centers, create cost 
center groups, and define statistical key figures. You then learned what a profit center is and went through 
the various steps involved in customizing a profit center. This included the basic settings involved in the 
profit center, including how to maintain controlling areas settings, create dummy profit centers, set the 
control parameters for the actual data, maintain versions for profit centers, and assign profit centers to a cost 
center. You also looked at how to post controlling documents and how to generate interactive reporting for a 
profit center.
In the next chapter, you will look at what a new G/L is, how to define ledgers for the general ledger, how 
to define leading and non-leading ledgers, the benefits of a new general ledger, what scenarios are, and how 
to carry out real-time integration of controlling with FI. You will also learn how to define documents for 
entry view in a ledger, what splitting a document entails, and how to define a splitting document. Finally, 
you will look at the steps involved in closing procedures for foreign currencies valuations, carrying forward 
balances, and reclassifying GR/IR clearing.
Figure 18-51.  Source document display for an individual item in a cost center
www.it-ebooks.info

421
Chapter 19
Customizing New General  
Ledger Accounting
In this chapter, you learn how to define leading and non-leading ledgers based on the totals table in the new 
G/L accounts. These ledgers will enable you to perform parallel accounting to meet different accounting 
disclosure requirements.
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• 
Explain what a new general ledger is
• 
Define ledgers for general ledger accounting
• 
Define leading and non-leading ledgers
• 
Define currencies of a leading ledger
• 
Explain what a scenario is
• 
Assign accounting principles to ledger groups
• 
Describe real-time integration of controlling with FI
• 
Define documents for entry view in a ledger
• 
Define document splitting characteristics for G/L accounts
• 
Define foreign currencies valuation
• 
Perform closing of foreign currency valuation and balance carry forward
• 
Reclassify GR/IR clearing
New General Ledger
Disclosure in financial reporting has increased significantly in recent times. Up until version 4.7, companies 
attempting to meet disclosure requirements had to install different components to meet varied requirements 
and standards. Compliance with IAS/IFRS principles has heightened the need for parallel and segmented 
reporting. In attempt to meet legal and local (company code) accounting and reporting requirements, 
companies must maintain G/L accounts for two or more accounting areas for local and group reporting with 
two retained earnings (X & Y).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
422
The drawback to these settings is that reconciliation between G/L accounts can be cumbersome. The 
new G/L eliminates many of the problems associated with various reporting (parallel accounting) to meet 
disclosure requirements by incorporating additional ledger(s).
Therefore, a new general ledger can be seen as an attempt to provide a full picture of an accounting 
report that meets the standard accounting disclosure. It incorporates other aspects of business operations 
to ensure that comprehensive accounting information is always available. The benefits of the new general 
ledger include:
• 
An extended data structure that allows customer fields to be added to the  
general ledger.
• 
Real-time document splitting, which makes it possible to create balance sheets 
for various entities such as segments reporting in line with IAS (International 
Accounting Standards) and U.S. GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles).
• 
The ability to run real-time reconciliation of management accounting with FI 
(reconciliation with controlling), making it possible to eliminate time-consuming 
reconciliations.
• 
Management of multiple ledgers within the general ledger accounting. This is one of 
the ways to portray parallel accounting in SAP.
• 
The flexibility to define one or more fiscal year variants using non-leading ledgers for 
various financial reporting needs.
• 
Financial statements to be created using standard reporting functions.
• 
A function that allows you to combine classic G/L accounting and special  
ledger objects.
Other features of a new G/L include the leading ledger and the non-leading ledger. Only one leading 
ledger is allowed in a new general ledger, but you can define other non-leading ledgers that can be assigned 
to other objects, such as fiscal year variants/currencies.
Leading Ledger
Leading ledger is a form of consolidation that integrates other non-leading ledgers in all company codes. It is 
important to note that all company codes are automatically assigned the leading ledger. The leading ledger 
gets some of its control parameters from the company code. For example, it uses the fiscal year variant, 
posting period variant, and local currencies assigned to the company code.
Non-Leading Ledger
Non-leading ledgers are termed as parallel ledgers to the leading ledger to allow parallel reporting to meet 
other and local requirements. Once you have defined your non-leading ledger, you have to activate it by the 
company code. The system will automatically create a group ledger for the ledger you just created.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
423
Let’s look at how to define leading and non-leading ledgers by working through a problem.
Problem: Company C900 must create accounting reports for various stakeholders.  
As a SAP financial consultant, your task is to define leading and non-leading ledgers in 
a new general ledger using the standard SAP table called FAGLFLEXT. This will enable 
the finance team to produce various financial reports to meet legal requirements with 
different fiscal years.
The company wants the financial year to run from January to December for global and 
local reporting. It also wants to have separate reporting for a local tax requirement from 
April to March.
You were given the following information to work with:
• 
Company Code: C900
• 
Company Currency: Pound Sterling (GBP)
• 
Chart of Accounts: CA90
• 
Leading Ledger Fiscal Year: January–December
• 
Non-Leading Ledger Fiscal Year: March–April
Define Ledgers for General Ledger Accounting
The ledgers for the general ledger are defined in this exercise. The ledgers you define here are specifically 
for additional reporting, such as for company code and tax reporting with their respective total tables 
FAGLFLEXT. A totals table is a database table that stores totals used in general ledger accounting for parallel 
ledgers. SAP comes with the standard totals table called FAGLFLEXT for general ledger accounting.
The ledgers available here are leading ledger and non-leading ledgers. The Leading Ledger (0L) comes 
with predefined total tables (FAGLFLEXT). You don’t need to define a leading ledger for general ledger 
accounting. It is recommended that you use the pre-defined 0L leading ledger supplied by SAP. On the other 
hand, when you define non-leading ledgers, you should apply the predefined total table called FAGLFLEXT.
Only one leading ledger is assigned to a company code. Make sure that you set the leading indicator 
for the 0L leading ledger. In this exercise, you will define the ledgers based on total tables that are used in 
general ledger accounting. To define ledgers for general ledger accounting, follow this menu path: IMG: 
Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Define 
Ledgers for General Ledger Accounting. The Change View “Define Ledgers in General Ledger Accounting:” 
Overview screen is displayed. To define ledgers in general ledger accounting, click the 
 button at the 
top of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears (Figure 19-1).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
424
Figure 19-1.  Defining additional ledgers for local accounting (company code) and tax reporting for general 
ledger accounting
Update the following fields: 
Ld: Enter two unique identification codes for your ledger. This is a freely 
definable code. There is no hard and fast rule as to what you can use here. You 
can use any two characters of your choice.
Ledger Name: Enter a name describing your ledger. You can enter any 
meaningful name that best describes your ledger.
Totals Table: Enter the Totals tables FAGLFLEXT. This is supplied by the system.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your ledgers. The Information 
dialog box comes up with a message, “Ledger group T1 is created only with ledger T1”. Click the Continue 
 
button at the bottom of the screen and a second information box comes up for ledger T2 with the message, 
“Ledger group T2 is created only with ledger T2”. Click the Continue 
 button again to confirm your entries.
Define Currencies of Leading Ledger
You must specify the currencies that you want to apply to the leading ledger in the new general ledger. 
Normally, an average of three currencies settings is applicable to a company code. This is made up of a 
company code currency and two additional currencies—a group currency and hard currency—(Figure 19-2).  
Group currency is the currency for a consolidation group and hard currency is often country-specific and 
used in countries with high inflation rates.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
425
In this exercise, you will define the additional currencies (the group and hard currencies). The company 
code currency is determined from the company code settings you carried out when you defined your 
company code in Chapter 1. The local and additional currency (parallel currency) settings are unique to 
each company code. To define currencies for the leading ledger, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Define Currencies 
of Leading Ledger. The Change View “Additional Local Currencies for Company Code”: Overview screen 
is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to go to the New Entries: Details of 
Added Entries screen (Figure 19-3) to specify the additional currencies for the leading ledger.
Figure 19-2.  Defining local currency and additional currencies in the leading ledger
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
426
Update the following fields in the second local currency section:
Crcy Type: The following currency types are supplied by SAP:
• 
10 - Company code currency: This currency type is defined when defining the 
company code and managed in FI. It is sometimes referred to as the local currency.
• 
30 - Group currency: This is for consolidation group. Managed as parallel  
currency in FI.
• 
40 - Hard currency: This currency type is used in a high inflation rate environment.
• 
50 - Index-based currency: This currency type is rarely used in practice. It can 
be used in a high inflation economy for comparison purposes to meet statutory 
reporting requirements.
• 
60 - Global company currency: This currency is defined when you define your 
company and is used with internal partners.
Figure 19-3.  Specifying additional currencies for the leading ledger 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
427
Enter group currency type 30 in the currency type field.
Valuation: For legal valuation, leave this field blank. Legal valuation option will 
allow you to evaluate your business processes in line with that of your company 
code while using the company code currency. This makes it possible for you to 
maintain the same financial reporting in FI and PCA (Profit Center Accounting).
ExRate Type: Enter exchange rate type M for standard translation at average 
rate. Exchange rate types were discussed in Chapter 7.
Srce Curr.: Enter 1 (translation taking transaction currency as a basis).  
The source currency 1 is the company code currency.
TrsDte typ: Enter 3 transaction dates in the transaction date type field. This will 
allow the system to apply transaction dates. 
Click the Enter
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
.
Define and Activate Non-Leading Ledgers
In this exercise, you configure settings for non-leading ledgers for company code C900:
• 
To apply a non-leading ledger in the general ledger, you must specify and activate 
the non-leading ledger in your company code.
• 
You can define up to three additional currencies other than the company code 
currency for the leading ledger.
• 
The non-leading ledger allows you to define a fiscal year variant that is different from 
the leading ledger’s. If no fiscal year variant is defined, the system will automatically 
assign the fiscal year variant of the company code.
• 
You can also specify a Post period variant as part of your configuration.
We will be using two steps to illustrate this process. We do this because we are defining two ledgers to 
meet various reporting requirements: one for local (company code) reporting and one for tax reporting.
Step 1: Define Non-Leading Ledger for Company Code Reporting
To define and activate a non-leading ledger, follow this menu path: IMG Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Define and Activate Non-Leading 
Ledger. The Determine Work Area: Entry screen pops up. Enter your first non-leading ledger identifier T1 
(this is the ledger you defined earlier in the section “Define Ledgers for General Ledger Accounting”) in 
the Ledger Work Area field. Confirm your entry by clicking the Enter 
 button. You go to the screen where 
you can assign your company code, currency, and fiscal year variant to the ledger T1 Local (company code) 
reporting. The Change View “Settings for Non-Leading Ledgers in General Ledger”: Overview screen is 
displayed. Click the 
 button. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears. Enter your 
company code (C900) in the company code (CoCd) field and click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of 
the screen to confirm your entries.
The Consistency Check message box comes up with migration information and the question, “Is the 
ledger assigned to a company code that is used productively?” Click the 
 button at the bottom 
of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries Screen Ledger T1 is displayed, as shown in 
Figure 19-4.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
428
■
■Note  The migration service is used only for a production company code. To ensure data consistency for 
a company code that is already in use and to avoid the complication of data migration, it’s best to click the 
 button when the Consistency Check message appears.
You may not need to enter the fiscal year in the FV column on the screen, since the fiscal year for  
T1 Ledger Local (company code) reporting is the same as the company code’s fiscal year. If you leave this field 
blank, the system will automatically use the company’s fiscal year. If you leave the currency field bank, the 
system will automatically use the company code currency as well.
Save 
 the ledger. 
Step 2: Define a Non-Leading Ledger for a Different Fiscal Year Variant
The next step is to define the settings for non-leading ledger T2 for tax reporting purposes with a different 
fiscal year from the company code’s fiscal year (April to March using fiscal year variant V3). To define a 
non-leading ledger for tax reporting requirements, follow this menu path: IMG Financial Accounting (New) ➤ 
Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Define and Activate Non-Leading 
Ledger. The Determine Work Area: Entry dialog box pops up. Enter your second non-leading ledger 
identifier, which is T2 (defined in “Define Ledger for General Ledger Accounting” section) in the Ledger 
Work Area field. Confirm your entry by clicking the Enter 
 button at the bottom of the screen. This action 
will allow you to assign your company code, currency, and fiscal year variant to the ledger T2 for your tax 
reporting requirements.
The Change View “Settings for Non-Leading Ledgers in General Ledger”: Overview screen is displayed. 
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries 
screen appears (Figure 19-5).
Figure 19-4.  Specifying the company code for a non-leading ledger in the general ledger
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
429
Enter your company code (C900) in the company code (CoCd) field and enter V3 (this is a standard 
fiscal year for April – March supplied by SAP) in the FV column. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left 
side of the screen. The Consistency Check message box comes up with migration information and the 
question, “Is the ledger assigned to a company code that is used productively?” Click the 
 button at 
the bottom of the screen and then save 
 your ledger. 
What Is a Scenario in General Ledger Accounting?
Scenarios assigned to each ledger during customizing represent different business views. They control the 
fields that are updated in the ledger based on your settings when postings are made from other application 
components or modules in G/L accounting, for example, from cost center or profit center updates. You must 
use scenarios supplied by SAP, because they contain the predefined settings of business processes that are 
sufficient for your needs.
Scenarios provided by SAP include:
• 
FIN_AASEG – Segment Reporting for Fixed Assets (This function is used to create 
asset reporting at profit or segment level.)
• 
FINN_CCA – Cost Center Updated (This function updates the Sender and Receiver 
Cost Center fields.)
• 
FIN_CONS – Preparation for Consolidation (This function updates the Consolidation 
Transaction Type and Trading Partner fields.)
• 
FIN_PCA – Profit Center Update (This function updates the profit center and partner 
profit center.)
• 
FIN_SEGM – Segmentation (This function updates the Segment, Partner Segment, 
and Profit Center fields.)
• 
FIN_UKV – Cost of Sales Accounting (This function updates the sender and Receiver 
Functional Area fields.) 
Figure 19-5.  Specifying a fiscal year variant for a non-leading ledger
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
430
The scenario in a general ledger plays an important role in general ledger accounting. SAP supplies 
some basic settings that you can adapt and use. You may not need to define them again. So we have provided 
guidelines you may need to consider when customizing scenarios for your general ledger account:
• 
Once the fields are updated in scenarios they can be used to model certain business 
needs, such as segment reporting.
• 
Although SAP comes with predefined scenarios, you can define your own.
• 
It is possible to assign a ledger (leading ledger and non-leading ledger) to one or 
more scenarios at once.
• 
You may not need to assign the six scenarios presented by SAP at once to ledgers. 
The number of scenarios is based on the business process you want to model in the 
G/L account.
• 
Non-leading ledgers are needed in a business process where you want to have an 
accounting disclosure or reporting in accordance with certain accounting principles.
• 
You may not have to create a non-leading ledger when segment and parallel 
accounting is not needed.
Assign Scenarios and Customer Fields to Ledgers for Leading Ledger
In this exercise, you will assign the following objects to ledgers.
• 
Scenarios
• 
Customer fields
• 
Version
SAP comes with standard scenarios and customer fields that are assigned to ledgers in the leading 
ledger. So you do not need to customize the leading ledger. However, you can take a look at the scenarios 
in leading ledger and delete the items you don’t need. To assign scenarios and customer fields to ledgers, 
follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤  
Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Assign Scenarios and Customer Fields to Ledgers. The Display View “Ledgers”: 
Overview screen comes up. On the screen, select 0L Leading Ledger from the list of displayed ledgers 
(Figure 19-6). 
Figure 19-6.  Ledgers overview screen for assigning scenarios – leading ledger
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
431
To go to the screen containing the list of standard scenarios supplied by SAP, double-click the 
 folder on the left pane of the screen. The Change View “Scenarios”: Overview screen is displayed 
containing the list of standard scenarios in SAP (Figure 19-7).
Figure 19-7.  The screen containing the standard list of scenarios supplied by SAP
You may not necessarily use all the scenarios provided by SAP. Let’s assume that you do not need to 
provide a report for business area, so you do not need to include it in your ledger. You will need to delete it 
from the list of scenarios assigned to the leading ledger 0L. To delete unwanted scenarios from the list, select 
business area (in this case) from the list of scenarios and click the Delete 
 button at the top of the screen. 
The Business Area setting is deleted from the scenarios in the Leading Ledger 0L. 
To define setting for versions, double-click the 
 folder on the left pane. The Change View 
“Versions”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. Update 
the following fields: 
Ver.: Enter the version key (1).
Man.Plan: Click the checkbox for Manual Plan. This allows you manually plan 
data for a combination of ledgers and versions.
Integ.Planning: Click the checkbox for Integrated Planning if you want to 
transfer the data from other objects (such as Overhead Cost Controlling or Profit 
Analysis) to combine the ledger and the version.
Version Description: Enter a description (Actual Plan) for the version plan.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your version.
The next step is to define scenarios for non-leading ledgers T1 (Local Reporting) and T2 (Tax Reporting). 
Because the process of specifying scenarios is the same for every ledger, we will only define the scenarios for 
ledger T1. We will be leaving ledger T2 for you to do on your own, by following the same steps. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
432
Non-Leading Ledger T1 for Local (Company Code) Reporting
To assign scenarios and customer fields to non-leading ledger T1, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Assign Scenarios 
and Customer Fields to Ledgers. The Display View “Ledgers”: Overview screen comes up with a list 
containing the ledgers T1 and T2 you defined in the “Define and Activate Non-Leading Ledgers” section 
earlier and other existing ledgers on the screen (Figure 19-8).
Figure 19-8.  Ledgers overview screen for assigning scenarios – non-leading ledger
Figure 19-9.  New Entries screen where you specify scenarios for ledger – T1 for local reporting 
Select or highlight the T1 ledger for local (company code) reporting from the list and double-click the 
 folder. The Display View “Scenarios”: Overview screen is displayed. To specify the scenarios 
for ledger T1, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries 
screen is displayed (Figure 19-9).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
433
You will specify the scenarios for your ledger that meet your requirements. In this exercise, we are using 
the following scenarios as an illustration to guide you through specifying scenarios for additional ledgers: 
• 
Cost Center Update
• 
Preparation for Consolidation
• 
Profit Center Update
• 
Segmentation
Use the matchcode next to the Scenarios field so that the Scenarios for General Ledger Accounting 
screen containing the list of available scenarios is displayed (Figure 19-10).
Figure 19-10.  List of scenarios for general ledger accounting 
To include an item from the list of scenarios, select or highlight the item (Cost Center Update) and click 
the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your selection. Notice that the scenario 
FIN_CCA Cost Center Update is entered into the Scenarios field in Figure 19-11.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
434
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and proceed to the next scenario field below 
FIN_CCA – Cost Center Update. Select FIN_CONS-Preparation for Consolidation. 
Repeat this process to assign the remaining scenarios for the T1 ledger:
• 
FIN_PCA – Profit Center Update
• 
FIN_SEGM – Segmentation
When you have completed your scenarios specifications, the scenarios assigned to the T1 ledger should 
look like those shown in Figure 19-12.
Figure 19-11.  The screen where you specify scenarios for ledgers
Figure 19-12.  Ledgers overview screen displaying assigned scenarios
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
435
Save 
 your scenarios assignment.
As part of this exercise, repeat the same process to specify the scenarios for the non-leading ledger T1 
for Local Reporting to specify scenarios for ledger T2 for tax reporting. 
Define Ledger Group
A ledger group allows you to classify ledgers with similar functions and business processes of general ledger 
accounting together in the same group. You can make postings to multiple ledgers at the same time. It’s also 
possible to impose restrictions in order to update individual postings to a ledger group, so that documents 
are only posted to ledgers in the group. When a ledger group is not specified, the system will automatically 
post to all ledgers. Likewise, when a ledger group is specified, the system will only post to ledgers in the same 
ledger group.
When defining a ledger group, you must specify which ledger will be the representative ledger in the 
group. Only one ledger in a group is used as a representative ledger. Often, the leading ledger is used.  
The system uses a representative ledger to check settings for an open period and to determine if a posting 
period is open.
■
■Note  If the ledger group has a leading ledger, the leading ledger must be used as the representative ledger. 
When there is no leading ledger, you have to designate a representative ledger. If the ledger group has more 
than one ledger, the system will verify during document posting, based on the company’s fiscal year variant, 
that the representative ledger was selected correctly.
Here is how you choose which ledger to use in a group as the representative ledger:
• 
If all the ledgers in the ledger group have different fiscal year variants, use any ledger 
as the representative ledger.
• 
If one of the ledgers has the same fiscal year variant as the company code, use that 
ledger as the representative ledger.
In this exercise, we will not be defining ledger group, because we want the system to automatically post 
to all ledgers. 
When you need to define a ledger group for your company, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Ledger ➤ Define  
Ledger Group. 
Accounting Principles
Accounting principle configuration is part of parallel accounting in SAP. The accounting principles that you 
define in this exercise enable you to perform valuations and closing preparations for your company code 
and produce financial reports for the group and your company code according to accounting principles 
(IAS/US GAAP), which enables you to meet various stakeholders’ needs.
■
■Warning  Do not delete the accounting principles you have defined, because accounting principles have 
relationships with other accounting functions, like currency valuation and others, which can affect your 
customizations.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
436
In this exercise, we will define accounting principles and assign the accounting principles we define 
to appropriate ledger groups. To define accounting principles, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial 
Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Parallel Accounting ➤ 
Define Accounting Principles. The Change View “Accounting Principles”: Overview screen is displayed.  
Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen.
■
■Note   You cannot use an accounting principle key that has already been assigned to another ledger group 
in the system. If accounting principle keys C10, C20, C30 have been used, you can’t use them again. When 
defining accounting principle keys, use keys that have not been used already.
Using the information in Table 19-1, update the New Entries: Overview of Addition Entries screen.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
 your 
accounting principles.
The next step is to assign these accounting principles to the target ledger groups. Follow this menu path 
to do so: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ 
Parallel Accounting ➤ Assign Accounting Principle to Ledger Groups. The Change View “Assignment of 
Accounting Principle to Target Ledger Group” screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen is displayed. Using the information in  
Table 19-2, update the Accounting Principle and Target ledger Group fields, as shown in Figure 19-13.
Table 19-1.  The Information Needed to Update the Screen Where You Define Your Accounting Principles
Accounting Principles
Name/Description of Accounting Principles
C10
Local GAAP – C900
C20
International Accounting Standards (IAS) – C900
C30
Local Tax (CRM) – C900
Table 19-2.  The Data Needed to Update the Accounting Principles to the Target Ledger Group
Accounting Principles
Target Ledger Group
C10
0L – Leading Ledger
C20
T1 – Ledger – Local Reporting C900
C30
T2 – Ledger – Tax Reporting C900
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
437
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
  
your work.
Real-Time Integration of Controlling with Financial 
Accounting
All cost allocation and other postings within a controlling environment usually do not affect financial 
accounting transactions (that is, G/L accounts are not updated with postings carried out in controlling). 
However, there are some cost allocations in controlling which are relevant for evaluation in financial 
accounting that need to be reflected in FI, because of the effect they have on the year-end reporting  
(the profit and loss statement). This type of transaction will call for reconciliation between controlling and 
financial accounting to necessitate the transfer of relevant data from controlling to the new general ledger in 
financial accounting real-time. This is best achieved using real-time integration in SAP.
The advantage of real-time integration is that no reconciliation ledger is required, because the 
reconciliation postings are replaced by real-time integration. Hence, you do not need to set the 
reconciliation ledger active indicator in controlling. To define variants for real-time integration, follow this 
menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ 
Real-Time Integration of Controlling with Financial Accounting ➤ Define Variants for Real-Time Integration. 
The Change View “Variants for Real-Time Integration CO->FI”: Overview screen is displayed. To specify the 
real-time integration, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New Entries: Details of Added 
Entries screen is displayed (Figure 19-14).
Figure 19-13.  Assignment of accounting principles to a target ledger group 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
438
Figure 19-14.  The screen where you specify variants for real-time integration of controlling with FI
Update the following fields: 
Var. for R-T Integ.: Enter an identification key that you want to use for your 
variant for real-time integration (C900). You can use up to four characters for the 
variant key.
R.-Time Integ:Active: Do not click the Real-Time Integration Active checkbox. 
By clicking this checkbox, CO (controlling) postings are posted to FI in real time.
Key Date: Active From: Enter the start date of the current fiscal year (01.01.2012 
CO) of your company code. This will post the documents posted in CO from this 
date to FI.
Acct Deter.: Active: Click the Account Determination: Active checkbox. When 
you click the box, the system carries out account determination during CO 
document transfer to FI.
Document Type: Enter document type SA (General Account document type). 
You can access the list of document types supplied by SAP using the matchcode.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
439
Ledger Group (FI): Enter your leading ledger 0L in this field as the leading 
ledger group for your variant for real-time integration of CO with FI.
Text: Enter a description for your variant (Integration of Controlling with 
Financial Account C900). The description you use here is a matter of choice, but 
use a meaningful description.
You can select document lines for real-time integration CO->FI by clicking the User checkboxes on the 
following objects:
• 
Cross-Company Code
• 
Cross -Business Area
• 
Cross-Functional Area
• 
Cross-Profit-Center
• 
Cross-Segment
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
  
your work.
Assign Variants for Real-Time Integration to Company Codes
To activate real-time integration of controlling with FI for your company code, it is important to assign 
variants for real-time integration of CO with FI to your company code. The variants for real time integration 
you defined earlier can be assigned to one or more company codes. To Assign variants for real-time 
integration to company codes, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Real-Time Integration of Controlling with Financial 
Accounting ➤ Assign Variants for Real-Time Integration to Company Codes. The Change View “Assignment 
of Variants for Real-Time integration for CoCo screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen to assign your variant for real-time integration to your company code. The New Entries: Overview of 
Added Entries screen is displayed (Figure 19-15).
Figure 19-15.  Assigning variants for real-time integration for the company code
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
440
Update the following fields: 
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900).
Variant for Real-Time Integration: Enter your variant (C900).
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to confirm your entries and save 
  
your efforts.
■
■Note  Before you begin defining account determination for real-time integration, go to “Appendix A,  
Chapter 19, New General Ledger” to create the G/L accounts you need for this customization.
Account Determination for Real-Time Integration
To be able to trace postings to FI, you must define account determination for real-time integration of 
controlling to financial accounting. Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Ledgers ➤ Real-Time Integration of Controlling with Financial 
Accounting ➤ Account Determination for Real Time Integration ➤ Define Account Determination for Real 
Time Integration.
The Set Controlling Area dialog box pops up. Enter your controlling area key (C900) in the Controlling 
Area field and click the Continue 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The Reconciliation 
Ledger: Change Account Determination screen is displayed. To maintain accounts determination for 
automatic posting, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Configuration 
Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Rules screen is displayed. Specify the post rule for your account 
determination, click the CO Transaction checkbox, click the Save 
 button, and then click the 
 
button at the top of the screen. The Configuration Accounting Maintain: Automatic Posts – Accounts screen 
appears. Update the CO Transaction and Accounts fields using the details on the screen in Figure 19-16 to 
classify business transactions for postings automatically. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
441
You can access the list of business transactions for actual postings using the matchcode next to each CO 
Transaction field. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 automatic account 
determination. 
Document Types
Document types are standard codes supplied by SAP that play a significant role in differentiating business 
transactions and determining how documents are stored in the system’s database. In this exercise, we will be 
defining document types for entry view in a ledger and defining document types for general ledger view.
Figure 19-16.  Account assignment for automatic postings
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
442
Define Document Types for Entry View in a Ledger
In this exercise, you will specify the document type for posting to the non-leading ledgers you defined earlier 
(Ledger – T2 and Ledger T2). The settings made here—Define Document Type for Entry View in a Ledger—
allow you to define document type for your non-leading ledgers and assign a unique number range to each 
document type. This setting will affect all ledgers and postings to the leading ledger 0L. To define document 
types for entry view in a ledger, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial 
Accounting Global Settings (New) ➤ Document ➤ Document Types ➤ Define Document Types for Entry 
View in a Ledger. The Determine Work Area Entry dialog box pops up. Enter T1 (local reporting ledger), 
which you defined earlier (in the “Define Ledgers for General Ledger Accounting” section) in the Ledger 
field and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen to assign the document type to the  
non-leading ledger T1.
The Change View “Document Types for Entry View in a Ledger”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen to assign a document type and number range to your ledger 
T1. The New Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen appears. Assign a number range to each document 
type, as shown in Figure 19-17. Use the following document types:
• 
AB – Accounting Document
• 
AE – Accounting Document
• 
AF – Dep. Posting
• 
SA – G/L Account Document
• 
SX – Closing Period
Figure 19-17.  Assigning number ranges to document types for entry view in a ledger
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 your efforts. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
443
■
■Note  You may experience a slight problem when saving your work. The system does not allow number 
overlap. You must avoid using the numbers that have already been assigned to document types. You can display 
the list of number ranges that have been used. Look for numbers that have not been used (between 1 and 100) 
and assign them to your document type. Document types were covered in Chapter 4.
To complete this exercise, repeat the same process for ledger T2 (tax reporting) on your own before 
continuing. 
Define Document Types for General Ledger View
In this exercise, you will define document types for non-leading ledgers in the general ledger view. The settings 
here are applicable only to non-leading ledgers whose fiscal year variants are different from the leading ledger 
variant. In most cases, the leading ledger fiscal year variant is usually the same as the company code variant. 
Therefore, any non-leading ledger with a fiscal year variant different from the company code variant is 
considered in this customizing exercise. It is compulsory to define different document types and number 
range intervals for general ledger view for non-leading ledgers.
In this scenario, ledger T2 (tax reporting) has a different fiscal year variant V3 from leading ledger  
0L (K4). Therefore, you need to define document types for general ledger view for non-leading ledger  
(ledger T2). Follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ Financial Accounting Global 
Settings (New) ➤ Document ➤ Document Types ➤ Define Document Types for General Ledger View. The 
Determine Work Area Entry dialog box pops up. Enter T2 (tax reporting ledger) that you defined earlier in 
the Ledger field and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen. This will allow you to assign a 
document type for the general ledger view to non-leading ledger T2. The Change View “Document Types for 
General Ledger View in a Ledger”: Overview screen is displayed. Click the 
 button at the top of the 
screen to assign a document type and number range to your ledger T2. The New Entries: Overview of Added 
Entries screen appears. Enter a document type that meets your requirements in the Type field and assign a 
number range (01) for each document type in the Number Range field, as shown in Figure 19-18. Since you 
are defining Document Types for General Ledger View in a ledger, it is not necessary to assign different 
number range to each document type for the new general ledger.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
444
■
■Note  There is no special rule when assigning numbers to the document type in the general ledger view,  
as number range overlap is not a problem in this case. 
Standard document types are supplied by SAP. You can access them using the matchcode in the  
Type field.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 the definition of document 
types for the general ledger view. 
Document Splitting
Document splitting is a new feature in SAP in new general ledger accounting that provides the flexibility to 
split document line items based on defined dimensions (for example, receivables lines by profit center). 
This makes it possible to produce a financial statement for a given business aspect (such as Profit Centers, 
Business Areas, Segments, Funds, and so on) at any point in time. Document splitting makes it possible for 
the following functions to be carried out when document splitting configuration is completed:
• 
Automatic document splitting of line items based on defined dimensions.
• 
Online document splitting.
Figure 19-18.  Further assignment of number ranges to document types for entry view in a ledger
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
445
• 
Document splitting during posting of documents.
• 
Support financial statements reporting for legal purposes (for IAS, GAAP, and so on) 
and segmental reporting to display a partial balance sheet according to business 
functions.
• 
Create a zero balance setting in the document for any dimension such as segment. 
You have the option of displaying the document in its original form with the generated clearing lines in 
the entry view or in the general ledger view from the ledger perspective. For the system to perform splitting, 
individual document items and all documents involved must be classified in accordance with a rule that 
defines how document splitting is to be performed and for which line items. SAP comes with a predefined 
set of standard rules that will satisfy your document splitting requirements. It is also possible to define your 
own set of rules and adapt them to meet your requirements.
The following are part of document splitting functions:
• 
Passive document splitting: All document-splitting processes are carried out by 
the system using a predetermined internal program with reference to the original 
document. Passive document splitting is not controlled by the settings you 
conducted in your customizing and does not take the settings in your configuration 
into consideration.
• 
Active document splitting: All document-splitting processes in active document 
splitting are carried out based on the settings you conducted in your customizing 
without reference to the original document.
Limitations to document splitting include:
• 
Only documents that are specifically assigned to a business process can be split 
when using the document-splitting function.
• 
When there are multiple business processes within one document, it becomes 
difficult to establish a valid relationship between the business process and the 
document.
Classify G/L Accounts for Document Splitting
Transactions entered into the system are automatically analyzed by the system based on predefined criteria 
to determine how individual line items in the system are to be treated during document processing (such as 
by splitting or to remain unchanged). You need to classify document items by assigning them to appropriate 
item categories. This categorization will allow the system to recognize how to handle document items 
splitting and manage the document-splitting processes based on your classifications in this exercise. 
In this exercise, you will assign accounts to the appropriate category in the document-splitting 
procedure, which the system will post documents to.
The following categories are supplied by SAP so that you can assign them to your G/L accounts:
• 
01000 – Balance Sheet Account
• 
01001 – Zero Balance Posting (Free Balancing Units)
• 
01300 – Cash Discount Clearing
• 
02000 – Customer
• 
02100 – Customer: Special G/L Transaction
• 
03000 – Vendor
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
446
• 
03100 – Vendor: Special G/L Transaction
• 
04000 – Cash Account
• 
05100 – Taxes on Sales/Purchases
• 
05200 – Withholding Tax
• 
06000 – Material
• 
07000 – Asset
• 
20000 – Expense
• 
30000 – Revenue
• 
40100 – Cash Discount (Expenses/Revenue/Loss)
• 
40200 – Exchange Rate Difference
• 
8000 – Customer-Specific Item Category
To classify G/L accounts for document splitting, follow this menu path: IMG: Financial Accounting 
(New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Account ➤ Document Splitting ➤ Classify 
G/L Accounts for Document Splitting. The Determine Work Areas: Entry screen pops up. Enter your chart of 
accounts (CA90) in the chart of accounts field and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen. 
The Change View “Classify G/L Accounts for Document Splitting”: Overview screen comes up. To perform 
the classification for document splitting, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. We have 
provided a list of G/L accounts and categories you will need to update the screen in Table 19-3.
Table 19-3.  The List of G/L Accounts and Categories to Classify G/L Accounts for Document Splitting
G/L Account
Long Text
Category
Description
100000
Petty Cash
04000
Cash Account
111410
Barclays Bank
04000
Cash Account
111411
Barclays -Chk rec
04000
Cash Account
111412
Barclays - Chk out
04000
Cash Account
111414
Barclays - Out trans
04000
Cash Account
111415
Barclays - In trans
04000
Cash Account
111416
Barclays - Other int
04000
Cash Account
111417
Barclays - In cash
04000
Cash Account
111419
Barclays - Out cash
04000
Cash Account
113130
Barc. BK - Outg cash
04000
Cash Account
113131
Barc. BK - Inc cash
04000
Cash Account
119000
Trade deb foreign
01000
Balance Sheet Account
119030
Trade receivables
02000
Customer
119099
Trade receivables-for
02000
Customer
120000
Other debtors
02000
Customer
154000
Input tax
05100
Taxes on Sales/Purchases
(continued)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
447
Table 19-3.  (continued)
G/L Account
Long Text
Category
Description
159000
Prepayments - other
02000
Customer
170000
Advanced customer pa
02000
Customer
175000
Out tax
05100
Taxes on Sales/Purchases
191100
Goods rcvd/invoice R
01000
Balance Sheet Account
196000
Payment requests
01000
Balance Sheet Account
196100
Guarantees-customer
02100
Customer: Special G/L Transaction
196400
Guarantees-vendors
03100
Vendor: Special G/L Transaction
212000
Other creditors
03000
Vendor
213000
Trade cred. foreign
01000
Balance Sheet Account
213030
Trade payables
03000
Vendor
213040
Trade payables
03000
Vendor
213099
Trade payables - for
03000
Vendor
230000
Exc.rate expense
20000
Expense
276000
Discount received
30000
Revenue
300000
Inventory - Raw mat
01000
Balance Sheet Account
400000
Consumption - Raw mat
20000
Expense
470100
Bank chgs
20000
Expense
472000
Admin Cost a/c
20000
Expense
473000
Water Supp. a/c
20000
Expense
474000
Electricity a/c
20000
Expense
475000
Gas a/c
20000
Expense
476000
Office sup
20000
Expense
477000
Office exp
20000
Expense
481000
Loss-Sale FA
20000
Expense
790000
Semi-fin prod
06000
Material
792000
Finished goods invent
01000
Balance Sheet Account
800000
Sales rev
30000
Revenue
800001
Cash sales
30000
Revenue
810000
Sales rev
30000
Revenue
810001
Sales deduction
20000
Expense
820000
Sales -FA
30000
Revenue
880000
Customer discount
20000
Expense
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
448
After classifying the G/L accounts for document splitting, your screen should look like the one shown in 
Figure 19-19.
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
.
Figure 19-19.  Account assignment to document splitting categories 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
449
Classify Document Types for Document Splitting
When a transaction is entered into the system, it’s analyzed by the system to determine the splitting rule 
that is applicable to the document. For the system to determine the splitting rule that is applicable to 
a document, each document type must be assigned with the appropriate business transaction variant. 
Appropriate requirements have to be in place for splitting rules to function effectively. When a document is 
posted, the system checks each posting against the defined business transaction variant. If the conditions set 
out are not met, the system will automatically reject the posting.
The system does not provide the flexibility to define further business transactions, but it is possible to 
define your own business transaction variants. The system comes with standard business variants (0001). 
In this exercise, we will not be defining any variants. It is advisable that you stick to the standard business 
variants supplied by the system. To specify the document type for document splitting, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ 
Document Splitting ➤ Classify Document Types for Document Splitting.
Zero-Balance Clearing Account
The Zero-Balance Clearing Account function enables you to define document-splitting characteristics for 
the balance sheet. When document splitting is performed, the system checks if the account assignment 
object that you want to zero-balance actually has a zero balance after document splitting. If the account 
assignment does not have a zero balance, the system will generate additional clearing items (Figure 19-20) 
and post the items initiated in the document to the clearing account assigned for the zero-balance clearing 
account.
Document Splitting
Zero Balance
Check
Is
Balance
Zero?
End
Generate
Additional Clearing
Items
No
Yes
Figure 19-20.  Flowchart depicting the zero-balance clearing process when document splitting
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
450
To define a zero-balance clearing account for your document-splitting process, follow this menu 
path: IMG: Financial Accounting (New) ➤ General Ledger Accounting (New) ➤ Business Transactions ➤ 
Document Splitting ➤ Define Zero-Balance Clearing Account. 
■
■Note  Before you define a zero-balance clearing account for document splitting, go to “Appendix A  
(Chapter 19)” to create the G/L account 199600.
The Change View “Posting Key”: Overview screen is displayed. Select account key 000 for Standard 
Account for Zero Balance from the list of account keys onscreen (this is a standard key supplied by SAP ). 
Double-click the 
 folder on the left side of the screen. The Set Chart of Accounts dialog box pops 
up. Enter your chart of accounts (CA90) and click the Continue 
 button at the bottom of the screen. The 
Change View “Account”: Overview screen is displayed. To go to the input screen where you can specify the 
G/L account for the zero-balance clearing setting, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The New 
Entries: Overview of Added Entries screen comes up (Figure 19-21). Enter the G/L account you have defined 
for Zero-Balance Clearing in the G/L Account field (199600).
Figure 19-21.  Assigning a G/L account to a zero-balance clearing account 
Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the screen and save 
 the zero-balance account 
clearing you have defined. 
Posting General Ledger Accounting Documents
Having completed the required configuration process for the new general ledger accounting, let’s now look 
at how to post general ledger accounting documents and how to reverse documents in the new general 
ledger accounting.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
451
Enter G/L Account Documents 
Problem: Assume that $1,000 of the office supplies account (G/L account 476000) was 
mistakenly posted to the office expenses account (G/L account 477000) created in Chapter 5  
(in the section “Creating G/L Account Master Record”). You have been asked to carry out 
the appropriate adjustment to correct this error.
G/L account document posting is part of the SAP R/3 Enjoy document. G/L account posting is  
the same as the conventional journal posting. To post a G/L account document, follow this menu path:  
Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Posting➤ FB50 – G/L Account Document. Or use 
transaction code FB50. The Enter G/L Account Document: Company Code C900 screen is displayed. Using 
the data in Table 19-4, update the screen.
Table 19-4.  Data Needed to Post G/L Account Documents
Field
Value
Description
Document Date
Today’s date
Enter the current date in this field.
Posting Date
Today’s date
Enter the current date in this field.
Currency
GBP
The currency code is set by default. You can overwrite it.
G/L (1)
476000
This is the account for office supplies.
G/L (2)
477000
This is the account for office expenses.
D/C (1)
Debit
When you select debit, the document amount will be posted to the 
debit side of the account.
DC (2)
Credit
When you select credit, the document amount will be posted to 
the credit side of the account.
Amount
1000
This is the document amount.
Tax Code
B2
This is the input tax code that the system will apply to calculate 
the tax amount applicable to the document amount.
Cost Center
4110
This is the cost center (Car - Vehicle) that the document amount 
will be posted to in the cost center.
Click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen to confirm your entries. To display your entries, click 
the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Document Overview screen appears displaying your 
entries. Look through the displayed entries and then click Post 
 if you are satisfied with your entries. 
Enter G/L Account Document for Ledger Group
Let’s look at how to post to a specific ledger. For example, you can post documents to group reporting, local 
reporting, or tax reporting ledgers.
Problem: Post $1,000 from the office supplies account (G/L account 476000) to the office 
expenses account (G/L account 477000) in ledger T2.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
452
To post a G/L account document for a ledger group, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial 
Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Posting ➤ G/L Account Document for Ledger Group. Or use transaction 
code FB50L. The Enter G/L Acct Document for Ledger Group: Company Code C900 screen is displayed 
(Figure 19-22).
Figure 19-22.  The screen to enter a G/L account document for the ledger group for your company code
Update the following fields:
Document Date: Enter the document date. For this exercise, we used today’s 
date.
Posting Date: Enter today’s date as your posting date. 
Currency: This defaults to your company code’s currency (GBP).
Ledger Grp: Enter the ledger group T2 for tax reporting that you want to post the 
document to in this field.
G/L (1): Enter the account number (476000) that you want to post the document 
to (debit).
G.L (2): Enter the corresponding account number (477000) that you want to post 
the document to (credit).
Amount: Enter the document amount ($1000) in this field.
Tax Code: Enter the tax code B2 in this field. This is the input tax code that the 
system will use to calculate the tax amount applicable to the document amount.
Cost Center: Enter the cost center 4110 in this field. This is the cost center that 
the document amount will be posted to in the cost center. (Car –Vehicle is a cost 
center that absorbs office supplies in this exercise).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
453
Click the Enter 
 button at the top of the screen to confirm your entries. To display your entries, click 
the 
 button at the top of the screen. The Document Overview screen appears displaying your 
entries (Figure 19-23).
Look through the displayed entries and click Post 
if you are satisfied with your entries. 
■
■Note  The system will issue a warning that 
.  
This is because of the difference in fiscal year variant. Click the Enter 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen to confirm the adjustments.
Reverse Document
You can reverse an FI document that’s been incorrectly entered by using the Reverse Document function. 
Document reversal was covered in depth in Chapter 14 (Adjustment Posting/Reversal). We will look at how 
to reverse documents using the negative reversal method in this exercise.
Figure 19-23.  Displaying the documents entered for ledger group T2
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
454
■
■Note  For the system to carry out negative reversal, the following conditions must be satisfied:
•	 The company code must be defined to allow negative postings.
•	 The document type should also allow negative postings.
Using transaction code FB70 and the data in Table 19-5, enter a customer invoice that you will reverse in 
this exercise. 
Table 19-5.  Details Needed to Post a Customer Document for Document Reversal
Field
Value
Invoice Date
Today’s date
Posting Date
Today’s date
Amount
3000
Calculate Tax
Click the checkbox (and specify the tax code 20% for output tax)
G/L Acct
477000
D/C
Credit
Amount
3000
Tax Code
A2
Cost Center
4110
Segment
SEG-A
■
■Note  When you post your document, the system will notify you in the status bar at the bottom of the 
screen that your document was posted and will issue a document number. Take note of this document number, 
because you will need it when reversing the document.
To carry out individual document reversal, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting 
➤ General Ledger ➤ Document ➤ Reverse ➤ Individual Reversal. Or use transaction code FB08. The 
Reverse Document: Header Data screen is displayed (Figure 19-24).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
455
Update the following fields: 
Document Number: Enter the document number (1800000021) that you want to 
reverse. This number is usually displayed on the status bar the bottom of the 
screen when a document is posted. If you cannot remember the document 
number, use the 
 button at the top of the screen to display the list 
of documents and search for your document and enter it in the document  
number field.
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900) in this field.
Fiscal Year: Enter your company’s financial year or fiscal year 2012 in this field.
Reversal Reason: Enter reason 01 (the standard reversal reason supplied by SAP)  
for reversing the document. You can access the list of reason codes using the 
matchcode next to the Reversal Reason field.
Before posting reversed documents, it is advisable to for check them to make sure that they are the 
documents you actually want to reverse. Reversing the wrong document could have a detrimental effect. To 
display the document you want to reverse, click the 
 button at the top of the screen. The 
Display Document: Data Entry View screen displaying the document you want to reverse is displayed 
(Figure 19-25).
Figure 19-24.  Reverse document and post reverse document using negative reversal method
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
456
Click the Back 
 button at the top of the screen to return to the previous screen (Document: Header Data), 
where you can post the reverse document. Click the Post 
 button for the system to reverse the document.
■
■Note  The system will notify you on the status bar that 
.
Document Display
In this exercise, you learn how to display the G/L Account balance and line items in new general ledger 
accounting.
To display balances in new general ledger accounting, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial 
Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Account ➤ Display Balances (New). Or use transaction code FAGLB0. The 
G/L Account Balance Display screen appears. Update the following fields: 
Account Number: Enter the account number range (476000 – 477000) that you 
want to display in the account number fields.
Company Code: Enter the company code (C900) that you want to display the 
balance in this field.
Fiscal Year: Enter the financial year or fiscal year 2012 that you want to display 
the account balance in this field.
Figure 19-25.  The document to be reversed using the Negative Reversal method 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
457
The system will automatically default to leading ledger 0L. You need to change this since you are 
displaying the ledger group T2 in this exercise. Click the 
 button at the top of the screen; the 
Set Ledger dialog box pops up. This screen will allow you to set the appropriate non-leading ledger for your 
account balance display. Enter the non-leading ledger code T2 that you want to display the G/L account 
balance in the Ledger field. Click the Continue 
 button on the bottom-right side of the screen. The 
non-leading ledger T2 will be entered into the Ledger field in the G/L Account Balance Display screen.  
Click the Execute 
 on the top-left side of the screen to display the G/L account balance for ledger T2.  
The Balance Display: G/L Accounts for the Ledger T2 screen comes up with list of balances relating to 
non-leading ledger T2, as shown in Figure 19-26.
Figure 19-26.  G/L accounts balance display for non-leading ledger T2 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
458
It is also possible to display line items from the balance display screen. To do this, double-click the 
displayed account balance 12000 in the period (Period 5) you want to take into consideration. The G/L 
Account Line Item Display G/L View screen is displayed (Figure 19-27), showing all the line items relating to 
the balances you selected. 
Closing
Some activities in FI need to be closed periodically. SAP provides a closing operations component that 
prepares and performs the activities needed for closing. Closing operations fall into three categories:
• 
Day-end closing
• 
Month-end closing
• 
Year-end closing
The primary purpose for performing closing is to enable the system to generate several reports needed 
by management from the posted account balance. The system supports the following closing operations:
• 
Foreign currency valuation
• 
Balance carry forward (receivables/payables and general ledger accounts)
• 
Reclassify GR/IR clearings
• 
Open and closing posting periods
• 
Creating financial statements
Figure 19-27.  General ledger view G/L account displaying line items for ledger T2 in period 5 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
459
In this exercise, we will be looking at the closing processes involved in foreign currency valuation, 
balance carried forward, and reclassifying of GR/IR. We will not be looking at open and closing posting 
periods and the creation of financial statements, because that was already covered in Chapters 12 and 13.
During year-end closing operations, new posting periods are opened and balances from the previous 
year are carried forward into the new fiscal year. Once balances are carried forward, you can then prepare 
and generate several reports (including financial statements for the period) and archive documents online 
that are no longer needed.
Foreign Currency Valuation
At month’s end, foreign currency valuation is usually carried out. This operation is important as it valuates 
all transactions in the period posted in foreign currency. When performing monthly foreign currency 
valuation, an exchange rate is entered for the month’s end.
In order to generate financial statements , closing operations for foreign currency valuation have to be 
performed. For accounts run in foreign currency, you have to prepare and create the following items:
• 
Foreign currency balance sheet accounts for the G/L accounts that are valuated in 
foreign currency
• 
Open items in foreign currency open at a key date
The system also allows you to perform the following optional activities:
• 
Currency valuation per company code (local currency valuation)
• 
Currency valuation per group currency (parallel currency valuation)
• 
Use valuation procedure (for example, lowest value principle, strict lowest value 
principle, always valuate, and so on). 
■
■Note  When financial statements are required on a monthly basis, you must generate foreign currency 
valuation for open items for G/L accounts and vendor/customer accounts.
It is advisable that each valuation be run individually, since valuations are posted as batch input sessions.  
For example, separate batch input sessions are generated for G/L accounts and vendor/customer open items. 
Problem: Post some invoices for accounts receivable and accounts payable with foreign 
currency (for example, in USD or EUR).
To execute foreign currency valuation, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ 
General Ledger ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Closing ➤ Valuate ➤ Foreign Currency Valuation (New). Or use 
transaction code FAGL_FC_VAL. The Foreign Currency Valuation screen (Figure 19-28) is displayed. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
460
Update the following fields:
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900) in this field.
Valuation Key Date: This date defaults to today’s date. This is the date the 
currency valuation is carried out.
Valuation Area: Enter the valuation area key (GR) for your foreign currency 
valuation closing in this field. GR entered in the Valuation Area is standard for 
Group Valuation.
Create Postings: Click the Create Postings checkbox. This will enable you to 
create valuation documents.
Batch Input Session Name: Enter a name for your batch input session 
(FCV012015) in this field. There is no specific batch input session name, so you 
can enter any name that is meaningful to you.
Figure 19-28.  Specifying foreign currency valuation 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
461
Document Date: Enter your document date (today’s date) in this field.
Posting Date: Enter the date the document is posted. Preferably,  
use today’s date.
Reversal Posting Date: Enter today’s date plus one month (the first day of the 
next month) in this field.  
■
■Note  The date to post a reversal is usually the first day of next month.
Click the 
 tab at the middle of the screen under General Data Selection to go to the open 
item part of the screen. Click the Valuate Vendor Open Item and Valuate Customer Open item checkboxes 
and then click the Execute 
 button.
■
■Tip  You can select only particular vendor/customer accounts to be valuated. If you leave the selection fields 
empty (as in this example), all the accounts in your company code will be selected for valuation.
When the Execute button is clicked, the system will automatically create a batch input session. The 
system will then generate and display valuated vendor and valuated customer open items. When you click 
the Postings button, the system will display the accounting documents.
Your valuation is not yet posted. To post it, you need to process the batch input session by using this 
menu path: System ➤ Services ➤ Batch Input ➤ Sessions. 
In the Batch Input: Session Overview screen, select the item you want to execute (FCV012012) and then 
click the Process button. The Process Session FCV012012 dialog box appears. In the processing mode, select 
the Display Errors Only radio button. This action will allow the system to display errors during processing. 
Click the Process button to allow the system to commence posting documents. The system will then notify 
you that, “Processing of batch input session is completed.”
To display the document, use transaction code FB03. 
Balance Carry Forward
It is an accounting practice to carry forward balances from the old fiscal year to the new. The Balance Carry 
Forward function allows you to carry the following items forward from the previous fiscal year:
• 
Balance sheet account balances
• 
Profit and loss account balances to a retained earnings account
• 
G/L account balances
• 
Customer and vendor account balances
Balance Carry Forward (Customer/ Vendor)
For customers and vendors, a manual balance carry forward has to be performed. Postings in the current 
fiscal year do not necessarily update the balance carried forward. Hence, it is important that you perform a 
manual balance carry forward function for all customer and vendor accounts.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
462
■
■Note  The Balance Carry Forward function is performed at the beginning of the new fiscal year.
To perform balance carry forward (customer/vendor), follow this menu path:  
Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ Accounts Payable ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Closing ➤ Carry  
Forward ➤ Balance Carryforward. Or use transaction code F.07. The Carry Forward Receivable/Payables 
screen is displayed (Figure 19-29).
Update the following fields:
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900) in this field.
Carryforward to Fiscal Year: Specify a future fiscal year (current fiscal year) that 
you want to carry balances forward to.
Select Customers: Click this checkbox. Receivables then will be included in the 
balance carry forward.
Customer: Specify the customer number range (1 to 9999999999) you want to 
include in your selection.
Select Vendors: Click this checkbox. Payables will then be included in the 
balance carry forward.
Figure 19-29.  The screen carry forward receivables/payables 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
463
Vendor: Specify the vendor number range (1 to 9999999999) you want to include 
in your selection.
Test Run: Click this checkbox. This will allow you to preview the figures carried 
forward before they are posted.
Detail Log: Click this checkbox so the system will display further information 
relating to carry forward receivables/payables.
To execute carry forward receivables/payables, click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the 
screen. Since the Test Run checkbox is clicked, only a test run version of carry forward receivables/payables 
is displayed (Figure 19-30). 
This is a test run. To carry out a productive run, click the Back 
 button to return to the previous 
screen, uncheck the 
 checkbox, and then click the Execute 
 button. 
Figure 19-30.  Carry forward receivables and payables test run (preview)
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
464
Balance Carry Forward (General Ledger)
Balance carry forward for the new fiscal year also needs to be performed manually for general ledger 
balances, like the balance carry forward for customer/vendor. Once this function is performed, G/L balances 
are carried forward to the new fiscal year. This function can be performed several times. It is ideal to repeat 
this function when there are inconsistencies between the previous and current fiscal year G/L account 
balances.
Once balance carry forward for G/L accounts are performed, the following G/L balances are 
automatically carried forward:
• 
Balance sheet account balances
• 
Profit and loss account balances to a retained earnings account
• 
G/L account balances
To execute the BALANCE carry forward (general ledger), follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ 
Financial Accounting ➤ General Ledger ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Closing ➤ Carrying Forward ➤ Balance 
Carry Forward (New). Or use transaction code FAGLGVTR. The Balance Carryforward screen is displayed 
(Figure 19-31).
Update the following fields: Balance carry forward function:general ledger
Ledger: Enter the ledger 0L you want to take into consideration in your balance 
carry forward. In this case, it is the leading ledger.
Company Code: Enter company code C900.
Carry Forward to Fiscal Year: Enter the fiscal year (current fiscal year) that you 
want to carry forward balances to in this field.
Figure 19-31.  Executing a balance carry forward (general ledger) for the leading ledger 0L 
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
465
Test Run: This is set by default (it is important to perform a check run before 
performing production run). By selecting this checkbox, this will allow you to 
preview carry forward figures before actually performing actual carry forward.
Output List of Results: By selecting this checkbox, the system will allow you to 
display balance sheet accounts and retained earnings accounts.
Balance in Retain.Earng.Acct: By checking this checkbox, you can display 
detailed retained earnings accounts. 
■
■Tip  In order to see how balance carry forward works effectively, use the next year as your fiscal year.
To execute the balance carry forward, click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen.  
The Balance Carryforward Ledger 0L for the Year X Test Run screen is displayed with the option to display 
the Balance Sheet Accounts or Retained Earnings Accounts. To display the balance sheet accounts, click the 
 button on the top-left side of the screen. The system will then display the balance sheet 
accounts (Figure 19-32). 
Figure 19-32.  Displaying the balance sheet accounts
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
466
To display the retained earnings accounts, click the Back 
 button at the top of the screen to return to 
the previous screen and then click the 
 button at the top of that screen. The system 
will then display the Display of Retained Earnings Accounts screen.
■
■Note  This is a test run. To carry out a productive run, click the Back 
 button to return to the previous 
screen, unclick the 
 checkbox and then click the Execute 
 button.
To complete this exercise, carry out the balance carry forward steps for the remaining parallel ledgers 
(T1 and T2). 
Reclassify GR/IR Clearing 
The reclassify (goods receipt)/IR (invoice receipt) clearing function:
• 
Analyzes the GR (goods receipt)/IR (invoice receipt) during the specified period
• 
Clears GR/IR accounts at a specific key date
• 
Generates the necessary adjustment postings 
■
■Note  The GR (goods receipt)/IR (invoice receipt) clearing is covered in detail Chapter 8.
The importance of GR/IR classification is for the system to separate G/L account balances for IR  
(which is usually a debit balance) and treat them as assets in the balance sheet. Consequently, this 
classification also treats the GR net balance as a liability in the balance sheet. To go to the screen where  
GR/IR clearing analysis is executed, follow this menu path: Accounting ➤ Financial Accounting ➤ General 
Ledger ➤ Periodic Processing ➤ Closing ➤ Reclassify ➤ GR/IR Clearing. Or use transaction code F.19. The 
Analyze GR/IR Clearing Account and Display Acquisition Tax screen is displayed (Figure 19-33).
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
467
Figure 19-33.  Analyzing GR/IR clearing accounts and display acquisition tax screen
Update the following fields in the G/L Account Selection section of the screen: 
G/L Account: Enter the G/L account number range (219910 – 219916) that you 
want to cover in the GR/IR clearing accounts.
Company Code: Enter your company code (C900) in this field.
Update the following fields in the Parameters section of the screen:
Key Date: Enter the run date in the key date field. This date is usually the end of 
the month. (For this exercise, use today’s date.)
GR/IR Clearing: Click the checkbox for GR/IR clearing. This is set by default by 
the system.
The next step in this exercise is to post specifications for the GR/IR clearing. To do this, click the 
 tab next to the Parameters tab and update the following fields: 
Create Postings: Click the Create Postings checkbox.
Name of Batch Input Session: Enter your own code (GR/IR-2012). This 
will enable you to identify your GR/IR account clearing during batch input 
processing.
Ledger Group: Enter the ledger group that you want to execute. In this exercise, 
it is assumed that you want to execute GR/IR for the leading ledger 0L.
www.it-ebooks.info

Chapter 19 ■ Customizing New General Ledger Accounting 
468
Document Date: Document date is usually set by default.
Document Type: Enter document type SA for G/L account posting.
Posting Date: The posting date is set by default by the system.
Reversal Posting Date: Reversal posting date is usually the first day of the 
following month (01.09.2012).
To post the GR/IR clearing adjustments, the batch input session needs to be processed. To process 
batch input sessions, click the Execute 
 button on the top-left side of the screen or use this menu path: 
System ➤ Services ➤ Batch input ➤ Sessions. Or use transaction code SM35. On the Batch Input: Session 
Overview screen that’s displayed, select the item you want to execute: GR/IR-2012. Click the Process button 
on the top-left side of the screen. The Process Session GR/IR-2012 dialog box appears. From the Processing 
Mode section, click the Display Errors Only radio button. This action will allow the system to display errors 
during processing. Click the Process button at the bottom of the screen to allow the system to commence 
posting documents. The system will notify you that, “Processing of batch input session is completed.” 
Summary
This chapter explained what the new general ledger is and took a brief look at the benefits of the general ledger. 
You learned how to define ledgers for general ledger accounting. In an attempt to define a non-leading 
ledger for the new general ledger, you worked through an exercise. You then learned about ledgers for 
general ledger accounting for local reporting and tax reporting. We taught you how to define currencies of 
a leading ledger. In doing so, we defined group and hard currency for the leading ledger in the new general 
ledger. In that exercise, we defined and activated the ledger for global and local reporting.
Next, you learned what a scenario is. As part of the customizing of scenarios, we taught you how to 
assign scenarios and customer fields to ledgers for the leading ledger. You learned about the accounting 
principles for parallel accounting for local GAAP, International Accounting Standards (IAS), and local tax 
reporting. We also looked at the real-time integration of controlling with financial accounting, assigning 
variants for real-time integration to company codes, and carrying out account determination for real-time 
integration.
You also learned about the document types needed for the general ledger. In that process, we defined 
the document types for entry view in a ledger and document types for general ledger view. In that exercise, 
you learned about document splitting in a new general ledger. You learned what document splitting is, the 
importance of it, and the limitations of it. You then went on to look at the classification of G/L accounting for 
document splitting, document types for document splitting, and defining a zero-balance clearing account 
for account document splitting.
You also learned how to post general ledger accounting documents to the user side of the SAP system. 
During this process, you posted a G/L account document for a ledger group and a reverse document and 
looked at how to display posted documents to the system.
Finally, we taught you how to perform closing procedures by looking at foreign currency valuation, 
balance carry forward for customers/vendors, and balance carry forward for the general ledger.
Now that you have completed the customizing activities covered in this book, we are optimistic that you 
can apply what you learned in this book to real-world scenarios. This was our primary objective for writing 
this book. Good luck; we wish you the very best in the world of SAP FICO consultancy.
www.it-ebooks.info

469
Appendix A
Useful General Ledger Accounts
Chapter 5
General Ledger
Water Supplies Account 
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
470
Electricity Account 
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in  
Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
471
Gas Account 
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
472
Sales Revenue - Domestic
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
473
Sales Revenue - Foreign
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
474
Share Capital
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
475
Retained Earnings
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
476
Chapter 6
Automatic Clearing Differences
G/L Clearing Differences - Credit
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
477
G/L Clearing Differences - Debit
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
478
Foreign Currency valuation
Exchange Rate Expense
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
479
Exchange Rate Gain
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
480
Trade Debtor - Foreign
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Recon. Account for Acct Type
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
481
Bal. Sheet Adj. (Trade Debtors)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
482
Trade Creditor - Foreign
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Recon. Account for Acct Type
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
483
Bal. Sheet Adj. (Trade Creditor)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
484
Foreign Exchange Valuation Realized 
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
485
Foreign Exchange Valuation
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
486
Chapter 8
GR/IR Clearing
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Own Production)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
487
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Own Prod. Adj. Acc.)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
488
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd – Not Yet Delivered
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
489
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd (Third Party)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
490
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd Recon. (Acqrd Externally)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
491
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd Recon Not Yet Invoiced
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
492
Chapter 9
House Bank
Barclays Bank
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Relevant to Cash Flow
House Bank
Account ID
■
■Note  Since you have not defined the House Bank and Account IDs, when saving your G/L Account, the 
system will issue a warning that the House Bank and Account ID have not been defined. You can simply ignore 
the warning and press Enter on your Keyboard repeatedly until the system allows you to save your Account.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
493
Your House Bank and Account ID will be defined in Section 1.2 of Chapter 9 when creating your House 
Bank. Press Enter twice on your keyboard and the system will allow you to save your G/L Account. Ignore the 
warning and click Save 
.
HSBC Bank
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Relevant to Cash Flow
House Bank
Account ID
Press Enter repeatedly on your keyboard until the system allows you to save. Ignore the warning and 
click Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
494
Bank Statement
Check Received
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
495
Other Interim Posting
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
496
Check Issued Out - Barclays
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
497
Check Issued Out - HSBC
G/L Account
113155
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
HSBC - chk out
G/L Acct Long Text
HSBC bank – check issued out
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
498
Incoming Wire Transfer
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
499
Outgoing Wire Transfer - Barclays
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
500
Outgoing Wire Transfer - HSBC
G/L Account
113158
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
HSBC – out trans
G/L Acct Long Text
HSBC Bank – Outgoing transfer
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
501
Incoming Cash
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
502
Outgoing Cash
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
503
Bank Charge
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
504
Chapter 10
Tax on Sales/Purchases
Input/Purchases Tax
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
505
Output/Sales Tax
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
506
Chapter 11
Cash Journal
Petty Cash
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
507
Cash Transfer from Bank
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
508
Cash Transfer to Bank
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Bank/Financial Details in Company Code
Planning Level
Relevant to Cash Flow
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
509
Cash Purchase – Office Mat
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
510
Cash Sale
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
511
Chapter 13
Integration of FI with Other Modules
Consumption, Raw Material
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
512
Finished Goods Inventory
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Posting Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
513
Goods Rcvd/Invoice Rcvd
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
514
Inventory - Raw Material
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
515
Sales Distribution
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
516
Semi-Finished Products
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Accounts
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
517
Chapter 14
Terms of Payment
Accounts for Net Procedure
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
 .
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
518
Cash Discount Granted
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
 .
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
519
Discount Received
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
520
Discount Lost
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
521
Overpayments/Underpayments
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Posting Without Tax Allowed
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
522
Define Sort Method and Adjustment Accts to Regrouping
Trade Payables – Foreign – Adj. Account
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
523
Trade Receivables – Foreign – Adj. Account
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
524
Vendor with a Debit Balance
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
525
Customers with a Credit Balance
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
526
Trade Payables - Foreign – Due b/w 1-5 Years
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
527
Other Creditors – Due b/w 1-5 Years
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
528
Trade Payables - Foreign – Due > 5 Years
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
529
Trade Receivables - Foreign – Due > 1 Year
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
530
Other Debtors, Due > 1 Year
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
531
Other Creditors, Due Within 1-5 Years
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
532
Other Creditors Due > 5 Years
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Account Management in Company Code
Open Item Management
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
533
Chapter 16
Special G/L Transaction
G/L Account (Guarantees – Customers)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Recon. Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
534
G/L Account (Guarantees – Vendors)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Recon. Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
535
Clearing Guarantees – Customers
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Recon. Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
536
Clearing Contingent Claim for Bills of Exchange
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
537
Clearing Guarantees – Vendors
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
538
Down Payments
Advanced Customer Payments
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Recon Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
539
Payments Requests – Customer
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Tax Category
Recon Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
540
Tax Clearing to Customer Down Payment
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
541
Other Down Payments – Current Assets
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balance In Local Crcy
Tax Category
Recon Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
542
Payment Requests – Vendor
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Recon Account for Acct Type
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
543
Input Tax Clearing – Other Prepayments
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Only Balances in Local Crcy
Tax Category
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
Post Automatically Only
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
544
Chapter 19
New General Ledger
Reconciliation FI-CO (Internal Posting)
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
P&L Statement Acct
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Account Management in Company Code
Line Item Display
Sort Key
001
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
G001
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix A ■ Useful General Ledger Accounts
545
Zero-Balance Clearing Account
G/L Account
Company Code
Click the Create 
 button.
Control in Chart of Accounts
Account Group
Balance Sheet Account
Description
Short Text
G/L Acct Long Text
Account Control in Company Code
Account Currency
Control of Document Creation in Company Code
Field Status Group
G001
Save 
.
www.it-ebooks.info

547
Appendix B
Some Useful Transaction Codes
FI
Organizational Structure
Description
Transaction Code
Display IMG
SPRO
Company Code
OX15
Change View “Company Code” Overview
OX02
Assign Company Code to Company
OX16
Business Area
OX03
Fiscal Year Variant
OB29
Assign Company Code to Fiscal Year Variant
OB37
Posting Periods Variant
OBBO
Assign Posting Periods Variants to Company Code
OBBP
Open and Closing Posting Periods
OB52
Master Data
Description
Transaction Code
Edit Chart of Accounts List
OB13
Assign Company Code to Chart of Accounts
OB62
Define Account Group
OBD4
Define Retained Earnings Account
OB53
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
548
Document Control
Description
Transaction Code
Define Document Number Ranges for Entry View
FBN1
Define Field Status Variants
OBC4
Assign Company Code to Field Status Variant
OBC5
Tolerance Groups
Description
Transaction Code
Define Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts
OBA0
Define Tolerance Groups for Employees
OBA4
Assign Users to Tolerance Groups
OB57
General Ledger
Description
Transaction Code
Create G/L Account Centrally
FS00
Clearing Open Items
Description
Transaction Code
Automatic Open Item Clearing
OB74
Create Accounts for Clearing Differences
OBXZ
Maximum Exchange Rate Difference
Description
Transaction Code
Define Maximum Exchange Rate Difference per Company Code
OB64
Company Code Global Data
OBY6
Define Valuation Methods
OB59
Prepare Automatic Postings for Foreign Currency Valuation
OBA1
Foreign Currency Valuation
Description
Transaction Code
Define Valuation Methods
OB59
Prepare Automatic Postings for Foreign Currency Valuation
OBA1
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
549
Currencies
Description
Transaction Code
Define Standard Quotation for Exchange Rates
ONOT
Enter Prefixes for Direct/Indirect Quotation Exchange Rate
OPRF
Define Translation Ratios for Currency Transaction
OBBS
Enter Exchange Rates
OB08
GR/IR Clearing Account
Description
Transaction Code
Define Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing
OBYP
Bank
Description
Transaction Code
Define House Bank
FI12
Make Global Settings for Electronic Bank Statements
OT83
Manual Bank Statement – Create and Assign Business Transaction
OT52
Define Variants for Manual Bank Statement
OT43
Create and Assign Business Transactions for Check Deposit
OT53
Define Variants for Check Deposit
OT45
Tax Sales/Purchases
Description
Transaction Code
Check Calculation Procedure
OBYZ
Assign Country to Calculation Procedure
OBBG
Define Tax Codes for Sales and Purchases
FTXP
Define Tax Accounts
OB40
Assign Taxable Codes to Non-Taxable Transactions
OBCL
Cash Journal
Description
Transaction Code
Define Number Range Intervals for Cash Journal Documents
FBCJC1
Define Number Range Intervals for Cash Journal Documents
FBCJC1
Set Up Cash Journal
FBCJC0
Create, Change, and Delete Business Transactions
FBCJC2
Set Up Print Parameters for Cash Journal
FBCJC3
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
550
Financial Statement Versions (FSV)
Description
Transaction Code
Define Financial Statement Version
OB58
Integration of FI with Other Modules
Description
Transaction Code
Define Accounts for Material Management
OBYC
Prepare Revenue Account Determination
VKOA
Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
Description
Transaction Code
Define Accounts Groups with Screen Layout (Customers)
OBD2
Create Number Ranges for Customer Accounts
XDN1
Define Account Groups with Screen Layout (Vendors)
OBD3
Create Number Ranges for Vendor Accounts
XKN1
Assign Number Ranges to Vendor Account Groups
OBAS
Maintain Terms of Payment
OBB8
Define Terms of Payment for Installment Payments
OBB9
Define Document Types for Enjoy Transaction
OBZO
Define Tax Code per Transaction
OBZT
Define Account for Net Procedure
OBXA
Define Accounts for Cash Discount Granted
OBXI
Define Accounts for Cash Discount Taken
OBXU
Define Accounts for Lost Cash Discount
OBXV
Define Accounts for Overpayments/Underpayments
OBXL
Define Accounts for Bank Charges (Vendors)
OBXK
Define Tolerances (Vendors)
OBA3
Define Reason Codes (Manual Outgoing Payments)
OBBE
Define Accounts for Payment Differences (Manual Outgoing Payments)
OBXL
Customizing: Maintain Payment Program
FBZP
Define Correspondence Types
OB77
Assign Programs for Correspondence Types
OB78
Define Sender Details for Correspondence Form
OBB1
Determine Call-Up Functions
OB79
Define Dunning Procedures
FBMP
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
551
Special G/L Transactions
Description
Transaction Code
Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Customers
OBXY
Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Vendors
OBXT
Define Accounts for Automatic Offsetting Entry
OBXS
Down Payments
Description
Transaction Code
Define Reconciliation Accounts for Customer Down Payments
OBXR
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Customers)
OBXB
Define Alternative Reconciliation Account for Down Payments
OBXY
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Vendors)
OBXD
Define Sort Method and Adjustment Accts for Regrouping
Description
Transaction Code
Define Sort Method and Adjustment Accts for Regrouping  
Receivables/Payables
OBBU
Adjustment Accounts for Receivables/Payables by Maturity
OBBV
End User: Accounting Document Posting
Customer
Description
Transaction Code
Customer Master Record – Create
FD01
Customer Master Record – Change
FD02
Customer Master Record – Display
FD03
Customer Master Record – Block/Unblock
FD05
Customer Master Record – Set Deletion Indicator
FD06
Customer Invoice
FB70
Customer Credit Memo
FB75
Park/Edit Invoice
FV70
Display Parked Document
FBV3
Incoming Payment
F-28
Down Payment Request
F-37
Down Payment Received
F-29
(continued)
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
552
Description
Transaction Code
Down Payment Clearing
F-39
Customer Balance Display
FD10N
Display/Change Line Items
FBL5N
Change Line Items
FB09
Invoice - General
F-22
Manual Outgoing Payment
F-53
Correspondence
Description
Transaction Code
Correspondence Request
FB12
Print Correspondence as per Requests
F.61
Dunning
F150
Vendor
Description
Transaction Code
Vendor Master Record – Create
FK01
Vendor Master Record – Change
FK02
Vendor Master Record – Display
FK03
Vendor Master Record – Block/Unblock
FK05
Vendor Master Record – Set Deletion Indicator
FK06
Vendor Invoice
FB60
Invoice – General
F-43
Post Parked Document
FBV0
Display Balances
FK10N
Balance Confirmation – Print Letters
F.18
Down Payment Request
F-47
Down Payment
F-48
Down Payment Clearing
F-54
Invoice Clearing
F-44
Incoming Payment
F-28
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
553
Automatic Payment
Description
Transaction Code
Check Lots
FCHI
Automatic Payment Program
F110
Cash Journal
FBCJ
Controlling
Organizational Structure
Description
Transaction Code
Maintain Controlling Area
OKKP
Maintain Number Ranges for Controlling Documents
KANK
Maintain Versions
OKEQ
Cost Elements
Description
Transaction Code
Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost  
Elements – Default Settings
OKB2
Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost  
Elements – Create Batch Input Session
OKB3
Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost  
Elements –Execute Batch Input Session
SM35
Individual Processing – Create Primary
KA01
Individual Processing – Create Secondary
KA06
Cost Center
Description
Transaction Code
Define – Standard Hierarchy
OKEON
Display – Standard Hierarchy
OKENN
Create Cost Centers
KS01
Change Cost Centers
KS02
Display Cost Center
KS03
Delete Cost Center
KS04
Define Cost Centers Group
KSH1
Create Activity Types
KL01
(continued)
www.it-ebooks.info

Appendix B ■ Some Useful Transaction Codes
554
Description
Transaction Code
Create Statistical Key Figures
KK01
Change Statistical Key Figures
KK02
Activity Output/Prices – Change
KP26
Cost Centers Actual Line Items
KSB1
Profit Center
Description
Transaction Code
Set Controlling Area Settings
OKKS
Maintain Controlling Area Settings
OKE5
Create Dummy Profit Center
KE59
Maintain Plan Versions
OKEQ
Define Standard Hierarchy
KCH1
Define Profit Center
KE51
Number Ranges for Local Documents
GB02
Set Control Parameters for Actual Data
1KEF
www.it-ebooks.info

555

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A
Account, 474–475, 480–483, 486–508, 512, 515, 517, 
522–543, 545
Account clearing, 82
Account determination, SD module
accounting keys, 198
FI, 198
fields to update, 200
G/L accounts, 199
revenue posting, 199
SAP access sequences, 199
SAP ERP, 198
Account groups, 469–545
screen layout
customer, 205–206
vendors, 212–213
Accounting clerk identification code
customers, 208–209
vendors, 214–215
Accounting principle configuration
definition, 435
target ledger group, 436–437
update, 436
Accounts payable and receivable
adjustment accounts, 254
adjustment posting/reversal, 258
available amounts, 250–251
business partners, 203
creditor, 203
incoming invoices/credit memos enjoy 
transactions, 224
sort methods, 252
Accounts payable (AP) transactions, 281
Accounts payable-document entry, 336–337
Accounts receivable (AR)  
transactions, 281
Accounts receivable-document entry, 302–305
Account symbols
assign accounts, 127–128
check deposits, 143–145
creation, 126–127
Activity types
controlling area, 387, 389
cost element allocation, 387–389
fields to update, 389–391
price planning, 393–394
Actual and planned cost variances, 394–395
Adjustment accounts, 254
Automatic clearing function
account type, 83
assign G/L accounts, 84
chart of accounts, 83
definition, 83
from/to account, 84
Automatic cost elements, 370–371
Automatic outgoing payments
bank determination, 247
company codes, 238–240
paying company codes, 240–242
payment methods, 243–246
ranking order, 247–248
Automatic payment program
company code, 344
creation, 345
description, 340
identification, 343
logging type and additional  
account, 345
next payment date, 344
parameters, 343
posting date, 344
print program, 346
print variants, 346–348
run date, 343
transaction code, 343
vendor account, 344
Automatic postings, foreign currency valuation
configuration accounting, 95
exchange rate differences
exchange rate key (KDB), 95–96
open items/account payable, 99–100
open items/GL accounts, 96–99
Index
www.it-ebooks.info

■ index
556
Automatic postings, MM module
checkboxes, 196–197
double entry record, 192
FI, 193
GBB, 195
G/L accounts, 192
goods receipt (GR), 192
GR/IR clearing account, 194
inventory, 192–193
transaction codes, 192–193
Valuation class, 191
VBR, 195

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 B
Balance carry forward function
customers and vendors, 461–463
general ledger, 464–466
GR/IR clearing reclassification, 466–468
Balance confirmations reply, 277–278
Bank, 492–502, 505–508, 510–511, 550
Bank accounts, 248–250
account ID, 122
company code and house bank, 122
currency, 122
definition, 121
G/L account, 122
HSBC bank, 122–123
Bank charges (vendor), 230
Bank determination, payment transactions, 247
Bank statements, 123–124
Batch input session, 372, 374–375
Business area
definition, 14
organizational unit, 14
Business transactions
check deposits, 148
manual bank statement, 136–138

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C
Call-up functions, 277
Cash discounts
definition, 228
incoming invoices, 224
Cash journal
amount limit, 164–165
create, change and delete business 
transactions, 168–170
G/L accounts creation, 164
number range intervals, 165–166
payments, 355–356
print parameters, 170–171
receipts, 354–355
SAP ERP, 163
Set Up, 167–168
transactions, 353
Cash payments, 123
Chart of accounts
assets, 32
benefits, 27
classification, 33
company codes, 31–32
creation, 29–31
expenditure, 32
functions, 28
general ledger (G/L), 27
groups, 34
liabilities, 32
list of groups, 34
management, 32
retained earnings account
carry forward, 37
G/L account, 37–38
income statement and balance sheet, 37
P&L statement, 37–38
SAP R/3, 27–28
selection, 36
structure, 27
types, 32
updated list, 36
values, 35
Check deposits
account symbols, 143–145
business transactions, 148
posting rules, 145, 147
variants, 148–150
Check payments, 123
Clearing open items
account creation, 84, 86
automatic clearing function, 83–84
automatic postings, foreign currency valuation 
(see Automatic postings, foreign currency 
valuation)
business partners, 81
company code global data
default value date, 91
description, 89
negative postings permitted, 91
propose fiscal year, 90
VAT registration number, 90
exchange rate types, 91
foreign currency valuation, 91
manual, 82
maximum exchange rate difference, 86–88
SAP ERP, 100
SAP R/3, 81
valuation methods, 92–94
www.it-ebooks.info

■ Index
557
Closing operations
category, 458
foreign currency valuation, 459, 461
system supports, 458
Company codes, 469–545
address and contact details, 10–11
characters and details, 6–7
configuration process, 8, 238
creation, 8
editing data, 9
new entries screen and details, 9
organizational unit, 5
payment methods, 243–246
payment transactions, 239
relevant fields, update, 12
SAP, 240
Controlling area maintenance
activating components/control  
indicators, 362–363
basic settings, 361
company code assigning, 362
cost accounting, 360
critical transport, 364
fields to update, 361–362
fiscal year, 363
plan activities, 360
Controlling (CO) module
cost element function, 370
definition, 359
management, 360
organizational structure, 360
problems, 360
Controlling documents posting. See FI document 
posting
Control parameters, actual data, 399
Correspondence
printing, 328–330
request, 327–328
SAP
account statements, 272
ad-hoc, 272
balance confirmations reply, 277–278
call-up functions, 277
open item lists, 272
payment notices, 272
program assigning, 274–275
sender details, 275–276
Cost center accounting
activity types, 387, 389–391
actual and planned cost variances, 394–395
cost elements, activity allocation, 387–389
group creation, 386–387
price planning, 393–394
standard hierarchy (see Standard  
hierarchy, cost center)
statistical key figures, 391–393
Cost center groups, 386–387
Cost element function
activity allocation, 387–389
automatic generation, 370
background mode, 375
batch input session
creation, 372–373
execution, 374–375
FI and CO module, 370
primary, 376–377
SAP, categories, 372
secondary, 378–379
Credit, 529
Credit memo, 306–307
Creditor, 203
Currency, 469–545
codes, 101
ISO, 101
SAP ERP accounting, 101
SAP R/3, 101
Currency. See Exchange rates
Currency and valuation profiles, 368
Customer, 543, 551
Customer account groups
benefit, 204
field status, 206–208
IMG, 204
number ranges assignment, 211
number ranges creation, 209–210
SAP, 204
Customer down payments
clearing, 321–322
posting, 319–321
request posting, 318–319
Customer invoice posting
company code, 302–303
documents, 304–305
G/L account, 303–304
transaction code FB70, 302
Customer master record
account group, 298
company code data, 299
creation, 298–299
menu path, 298
payment transactions, 300

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D
Debit, 528
Debtors, 482, 534
Default tolerance groups, employees, 60–62
Display, 474–477, 486–503, 506–508, 511, 513, 
517–539, 541–542
Display account balances
customer, 323–325
types, 323
www.it-ebooks.info

■ index
558
Display actual cost line items, 418–419
Distribution, cost allocation
cycles, 413–415
easy access, 413
fields to update, 414
G/L account documents, 417
IMG, 413
primary cost settlement, 413
sender and receiver, cost centers, 413, 415–416
Document control
business operations, 41
document type, 42
ERP system, 41
posting keys, 43
SAP system, 41
Document display
G/L account balance, 456
ledger T2, 458
non-leading ledger T2, 457
Document splitting
feature, 444
functions, 444–445
G/L accounts classification, 445–446, 448
limitations, 445
types, 449
zero-balance clearing account function, 449–450
Document types
entry view, ledger, 442–443
general ledger view, 443–444
splitting, 449
transactions, 225
Down payments
customer requests, 286–287
made, 289–290
received, 284–286
tax clearing, customer accounts, 287–288
tax clearing, vendor accounts, 291
vendor requests, 290–291
Dummy profit center, 398–399
Dunning
data, 331
definition, 331
document details, 334–335
parameter specification, 331
printing, 335
print, scheduling options, 332–333
run’s status, 333
Dunning procedures
area, 263
charges, 268
G/L indicator, 271–272
levels, 267–268
minimum amounts, 269
SAP, 264
sending notice, 263
special G/L transactions, 264
text assigning, 270–271
dv10-domestic vendor, 217

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E
Electronic bank statement
accounts symbols creation, 125–127
assign/account symbols, 127–128
posting rules (see Posting rules)
SAP R/3, 124
transaction types (see Transaction types)
Employees, tolerance groups
description, 60
menu paths, 60
End user-accounting document posting
check lots, 340–342
display payment  
proposal, 350–351
outgoing payment, 338–340
payment proposal, 348–349
payment runs, 349
print jobs schedule, 351–352
spool request, 352–353
Exchange rates
added entries, 108
base currency, 102
direct/indirect quotation, 104–105
inversion, 102
menu path
add entries, 108
direct/indirect quotation prefix  
assigning, 105
display, 103
M type, 108
period base transaction, 108
quotations
direct, 103
indirect, 103
ratio, 109
SAP, 108
spreading, 102
external, 491
External transaction types, 134

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 F
FI document posting
actual cost documents display, 412
actual line items display, 412
controlling documents, 409
data posting, 409
line items display, 410
planned and actual variance report, 412–413
vendor line item display, 410–411
www.it-ebooks.info

■ Index
559
Field status group, 469–545
Field status variants
company code, assigning, 52
copying, 50
displaying, 52
editing, 51
FI integration, SAP modules
asset accounting (FI-AA), 190
local general ledger, 190
MM (see Material management (MM) module)
payroll, 190
SD (see Sales and distribution (SD) module)
Financial accounting configuration, SAP ERP
assign company code to company, 12–14
assign fiscal year variant to company code, 21
business area, 14
client, 2
company code (see Company codes)
customization, 3–5
fiscal year variant (see Fiscal year variant)
opening and closing posting periods, 21–22, 24
organizational structure, 1–2
segment, 16
year independent, 17
year specific/dependent, 18
Financial statement version (FSV)
Change Texts screen, 178–179
credit/debit shift
Barclays bank account node, 184
G/L accounts assignment, 185
customization process, 175
definition, 174
fields update, 175
hierarchical structure, items, 175
items creation, 176–177
Liab+Equity, 179–180
nodes, 180–183
SAP ERP, 173
specifications
chart of accounts, 175
maint.language, 175
subordinates, 177, 181
transaction code OB58, 174
Fiscal year variant
another entry, 18
calendar year, 20
copying, 19
definition, 16
description, 20
entering, 18
FV, 20
posting periods, 20
searching, 18
types, 17
update, 19
year dependent, 20
Foreign currency valuation, 91
activities, 459
financial statements, 459
specification, 459–460
transactions, 459
Foreign customer, 205–206, 208
FSV. See Financial statement version (FSV)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 G
General ledger (G/L) accounting
document posting, 451
group, 435
guidelines, 430
leading ledger, 430–431
ledger group, 452–453
non-leading ledgers, 432–435
SAP, 429
General ledger (Gl) accounts
administration cost accounting, 78
business transactions, 65
classification, 65
displaying, 78–79
dual control (debit and credit), 65
editing, 68
fields to update
account currency, 73
account group, 70
account number, 69
balance sheet, 71
company code, 69
display business transactions, 74
long text, 71
Only Balances In Local Currency, 73
P&L statement, 71
short text, 71
tax category, 73
without tax, 73
master records
copying, 67
data transfer workbench, 67
manual creation, 67
with reference, 67
menu path, template (office expenses), 76
problems, 68
reconciliation accounts, 65
sub-ledgers, 65
using template (office expenses), 76–78
G/L accounts, 122, 164, 538–539
assigning items, 182
Barclays bank account node, 182
change accounts, 182
www.it-ebooks.info

■ index
560
fields update, 183
nodes, 185–186
G/L accounts, tolerance groups
account-clearing process, 56
change view screen, 59
configurations, 57
default configuration, 57
definition, 57
Local Currency section, 58
Save button, 59
GR/IR clearing
account determination, automatic  
posting, 114, 116
accounting transaction, 112
automatic postings, 113
chart of accounts, 115
configuration accounting, 115
financial accounting, 115
SAP ERP, 111
Guarantees
automatic offsetting entries accounts, 294
customers accounts, 292
vendors accounts, 293

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 H
Holding documents
calling up, 309–310
customer invoice, 308–309
definition, 308
House bank
accounts, 121–123
check deposits (see Check deposits)
company code, 119–120
country and key, 121
definition, 119
directory, 118
electronic bank statement (see Electronic bank 
statement)
manager, 121
manual bank statement (see Manual bank 
statement)
payment transactions, 119
SAP R/3 structure, 117–118
statements, 123–124
telephone number, 121

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I, J, K
IMG. See Implementation guide (IMG)
Implementation guide (IMG), 204
Incoming payments
bank data section, 313
clearing, 313–314
open item selection section, 313
posting, 312–315
partial, 315–316
residual items, 317–318
Installment payments, 223–224
Installment plan
customization, 221
payment terms, 222–223
International Organization  
Standardization (ISO), 101
Invoice, 487–492, 516, 552

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 L
Leading ledger
company codes, 422
currency, 425–427
customer fields, 430
definition, 425
SAP, 431
scenarios, 430
version, 430
Ledger group, 435
Line item display
account types, 326
customer change, 326–327
Line items display, 410
Lost cash discounts, 229

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 M
Maintain Field Status Group, Account 
Management, 207
Management, 474–477, 486, 489, 492–503, 506–508, 
511, 513, 517–539, 541–542
Manual bank statement
allocation number (Ass), 141
business transactions, creation, 136–138
customizing process, 140
incoming/outgoing checks, recording, 141
property, 140
variant name, 142
variants, 138
Manual clearing
accounts, 82
posting, 82
Manual outgoing payments, 338
automatic posting, 237
code assignment, 235–236
company code, 235
CorrT, 236
optional functions, 235
partial payment, 235
RCd, 236
residual item, 235
G/L accounts (cont.)
www.it-ebooks.info

■ Index
561
short and long text, 236
tolerances, 232–234
Master records
G/L accounts
copying, 67
creation, 67
data transfer workbench, 67
manual creation, 67
office supplies, 68
with reference, 67
menu path, G/L accounts creation, 68
table data, 67
transaction data, 67
vital information, 66
Material, 517
Material management (MM) module
G/L accounts, 191–192
transaction codes, 192
Valuation class, 191
Maximum exchange rate difference, 86–88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 N
Net procedure setting, 227
New general ledger (G/L)
accounting, 423–424
benefits, 422
drawback, 422
leading ledger, 422
non-leading ledgers, 422
Non-leading ledgers
assignment, 435
company code reporting, 427–428
definition, 423
fiscal year variant, 428–429
G/L accounting, 433
local reporting, 432
requirements, 433
scenarios assignment, 432
T1 ledger, 434
Number ranges
accounting documents, 44
controlling documents, 364
copying, 48–49
delete, intervals, 47–48
display, intervals, 47
intervals, 44–46
local documents, 406

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 O
One-time customer, 205–206, 208
Open posting periods
and closing
account types, 22
advantages, 22, 24
company code, 23
IMG, 24
time intervals, 24
update, 25
variants, 22–23
definition, 22
name, 23
variant, 23
Overpayments/underpayments accounts, 229

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 P, Q
Parking documents
customer invoice, 310–311
definition, 308
editing, 311
Payable accounts
due after five years, 257–258
due between 1-5 years, 257
due within one year, 256
periodic intervals, 253–254
Paying company codes
outgoing/incoming payments, 241
payment advice/EDI accompanying sheet 
forms, 242
search function, 241
sender details, 242
Payment, 469, 550, 552–553
Payment block reasons, 231–232
Payment methods
company codes, 243–246
in country, 243
Payment terms
account type, 218, 220
baseline date, 218, 220
business partners, 217
customization, 218–219
day limit, 218–219
definition, 220
document date, 218
document entry date, 218
document posting date, 218
installment plan (see installment plan)
own explanation, 219
Payment transactions, 208
Permit negative postings, 259
Planned and actual variance report, 412–413
Plan versions
fields to update, 401
profit center, 400
Posting rules
account symbols, 131, 147
bank charges, 132
check deposits, 145
definition, 130
document type, 131, 147
www.it-ebooks.info

■ index
562
G/L account, 146
interim posts, 132
keys creation, 128–129
SAP, 147
types, 131
wire transfer out, 132
Primary cost element function, 376–377
Profit center accounting
activation, 406
assigning, 407–408
basic settings, 396
controlling area maintenance, 396–398
control parameters, actual data, 399
cost centers, 407–409
definition, 404
dummy profit center, 398–399
fields to update, 405–406
master data, 404
number ranges, 406
planned and actual variance report, 412–413
plan versions maintenance, 400–401
standard hierarchy, 401–404
Purchases tax
accounts, 160–161
category, 152–153
tax codes, 158–160
taxable codes to non-taxable  
transactions, 161–162
VATs, 151–152

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R
Real-time integration
account determination, 440–441
advantage, 437
company codes, 439–440
SAP, 437
variants, 437–438
Reasons for reversal, 259–260
Receivable accounts
due after one year, 255–256
due within one year, 254–255
periodic intervals, 252–253
Revenue, 472–473, 550
Reverse document function
customer document, 454
negative reversal method, 454–456

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S
Sales and Distribution (SD) module
account determination (see Account 
determination, SD module)
billing transaction, 197
double entry accounting, 197
FI transactions, 197
order, delivery, 197
SAP, 197
Sales tax
category, 152–153
taxable codes to non-taxable transactions, 161–162
tax accounts, 156, 158
tax codes, 154–156
VATs, 151–152
SAP ERP, document control
company code, 41
document number, 41
document type, 42
fiscal year, 41, 43
posting key, 43
Secondary cost element function, 378–379
Segment, financial accounting configuration, 16
Sender details, correspondence form, 275–276
Sort methods, 252
Special G/L transactions
AR transactions, 281
business relationships, 281
SAP ERP system, 281
technical factors, 281–283
Standard hierarchy, cost centers
cost center group, 381
cost centers, 383–385
cost groups, 383
definition, 379
divisions, 382
group name update, 380–381
mapping, 380
Standard hierarchy, profit centers
controlling area, 401
grouping, 402–404
mapping, 401–402
Statistical key figures, 391–393

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T, U
Tax accounts
automatic posting procedure, 156, 160
G/L account, 157–158, 161
non-deductible tax code, 161
Tax codes
definition, 154, 158
financial accounting, 154
input/purchases, 158
output/sales tax, 154
percentage tax rate, 159
per transaction, 226
properties, 155, 159
tax percentage rate, 155
Technical factors, Special G/L transactions
automatic offsetting entry, 283
down payment requests, 283
Posting rules (cont.)
www.it-ebooks.info

■ Index
563
exchange payment requests, 283
free offsetting entry, 283
Tolerance groups
advantage, 56
business transaction, 55
employees (see Employees, tolerance groups)
employees group key, 62–63
G/L accounts (see G/L accounts,  
tolerance groups)
materiality, 55
payment difference, 55
user assigning, 63–64
Transaction types
bank accounts, 135–136
creation, 133–134
posting rules, 134–135
Transfer prices. See Valuation approaches
Translation ratio, currency translation, 106–107

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 V, W, X, Y
Valuation approaches, 367–368
Valuation methods, 92–94
Vendor, 528, 550
Vendor account group
business partners, 211
field status, 213–214
number ranges assignment, 217
number ranges creation, 215–217
SAP, 212
Vendor invoice posting, 336–337
Vendor line item display, 410–411
Vendor master record, 300, 302
Versions maintenance
fields to update, 367
fiscal year price  
calculations, 367
planned/actual version, 365–366
settling activity rates, 365
valuations, 368–369
variance analysis, 365

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Z
Zero-balance clearing account  
function, 449–450
www.it-ebooks.info

SAP ERP Financial 
Accounting and 
Controlling
Configuration and Use Management
Andrew Okungbowa
www.it-ebooks.info

SAP ERP Financial Accounting and Controlling: Configuration and Use Management
Copyright © 2015 by Andrew Okungbowa 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the 
material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with 
reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed 
on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or 
parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its 
current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be 
obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under 
the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-0717-8 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-0716-1
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol 
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and images only 
in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the 
trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are 
not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject to 
proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, 
neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or 
omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the 
material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr
Acquisitions Editor: Susan McDermott
Developmental Editor: Anne Marie Walker
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Gary Cornell, Louise Corrigan, James DeWolf,  
Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Susan McDermott, 
Matthew Moodie, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Gwenan Spearing,  
Matt Wade, Steve Weiss
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando 
Copy Editor: Kezia Endsley
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505,  
e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a California LLC  
and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance Inc).  
SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation. 
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. 
eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our Special 
Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is available to  
readers at www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your book’s source code,  
go to www.apress.com/source-code/.
www.it-ebooks.info

This book is dedicated to God Almighty for His Greatness  
and for seeing me through the difficulties encountered when writing this book.
www.it-ebooks.info

vii
Contents
About the Author....................................................................................................xxi
Acknowledgments................................................................................................xxiii
Introduction...........................................................................................................xxv
■
■Chapter 1: Customizing Organizational Structure in SAP ERP.............................. 1
Organizational Structure.................................................................................................. 1
The Client................................................................................................................................................2
Company Code........................................................................................................................................2
Let’s Start Customizing.................................................................................................... 3
Define a Company..................................................................................................................................5
Define a Company Code.........................................................................................................................9
Assign Company Code to Company......................................................................................................12
Business Area................................................................................................................. 14
Define a Business Area.........................................................................................................................14
Segment......................................................................................................................... 15
Define a Segment.................................................................................................................................15
Fiscal Year Variant.......................................................................................................... 16
Year Independent..................................................................................................................................17
Year Specific or Year Dependent..........................................................................................................18
Maintain Fiscal Year Variant.................................................................................................................18
Assign the Fiscal Year Variant to the Company Code..................................................... 21
www.it-ebooks.info

viii
■ Contents
Opening and Closing Posting Periods............................................................................. 21
Define Variants for Open Posting Periods.............................................................................................22
Assign Variants to Company Code........................................................................................................23
Specify Open and Closing Periods........................................................................................................24
Summary........................................................................................................................ 26
■
■Chapter 2: Defining the Chart of Accounts.......................................................... 27
The Chart of Accounts.................................................................................................... 27
Create the Chart of Accounts......................................................................................... 29
Assign Company Code to Chart of Accounts.................................................................. 31
Define Account Group..................................................................................................... 32
Define Retained Earnings Account................................................................................. 37
Summary........................................................................................................................ 39
■
■Chapter 3: Document Control.............................................................................. 41
Document Control........................................................................................................... 41
Document Type.....................................................................................................................................42
Posting Key...........................................................................................................................................43
Defining Number Ranges............................................................................................... 44
How to Display Number Intervals.........................................................................................................47
How to Delete Number Range Intervals................................................................................................47
How to Copy Document Number Ranges..............................................................................................48
Understand and Manage Field Status Variants.............................................................. 49
Define Field Status Variants..................................................................................................................50
Display Field Status Variants................................................................................................................52
Assign Company Code to Field Status Variants....................................................................................52
Summary........................................................................................................................ 53
www.it-ebooks.info

ix
■ Contents
■
■Chapter 4: Defining Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts and Employees............. 55
Tolerance Groups............................................................................................................ 55
Define Tolerance Groups for G/L Accounts..................................................................... 56
Define Tolerance Groups for Employees......................................................................... 60
Define Default Tolerance Groups for Employees...................................................................................60
Define Tolerance Groups for Employees with a Group Key...................................................................62
Assign Users to Tolerance Groups.................................................................................. 63
Summary........................................................................................................................ 64
■
■Chapter 5: Creating a General Ledger (G/L)......................................................... 65
General Ledger............................................................................................................... 65
What Is a Master Record?.............................................................................................. 66
Creating G/L Account Master Records............................................................................ 67
Create a G/L Account: Office Supplies..................................................................................................68
Create a G/L Account (Called Office Expenses) Using a Template........................................................76
Display G/L Accounts............................................................................................................................78
Summary........................................................................................................................ 79
■
■Chapter 6: Clearing Open Items........................................................................... 81
Clearing Open Items....................................................................................................... 81
Manual Clearing Overview....................................................................................................................82
Prepare Automatic Clearing..................................................................................................................83
Create Accounts for Clearing Differences...................................................................... 84
Define a Maximum Exchange Rate Difference.....................................................................................86
Checking the Company Code Settings........................................................................... 89
Foreign Currency Valuation............................................................................................ 91
Exchange Rate Types............................................................................................................................91
Define Valuation Methods.....................................................................................................................92
www.it-ebooks.info

x
■ Contents
Prepare Automatic Postings for Foreign Currency Valuation.......................................... 94
Exchange Rate Difference Using the Exchange Rate Key (KDB)...........................................................95
Exchange Rate Differences for Open Items/GL Accounts.....................................................................96
Exchange Rate Difference for Open Items–Account Payable...............................................................99
Summary...................................................................................................................... 100
■
■Chapter 7: Maintaining Currency Types and Currency Pairs............................. 101
Currencies.................................................................................................................... 101
Exchange Rate Types.................................................................................................... 102
Define a Standard Quotation for Exchange Rates........................................................ 103
Enter Prefixes for Direct / Indirect Quotation Exchange Rates...................................... 104
Define Translation Ratios for Currency Translation....................................................... 106
Enter Exchange Rates.................................................................................................. 108
Summary...................................................................................................................... 110
■
■Chapter 8: Defining Adjustment Accounts for GR/IR Clearing........................... 111
GR/IR Clearing.............................................................................................................. 111
Invoiced But Not Yet Delivered..................................................................................... 113
Delivered But Not Yet Invoiced..................................................................................... 115
Summary...................................................................................................................... 116
■
■Chapter 9: Defining the House Bank.................................................................. 117
House Bank.................................................................................................................. 117
Define House Banks..................................................................................................... 119
Define Bank Accounts for Your House Banks............................................................... 121
Bank Statements.......................................................................................................... 123
Electronic Bank Statement.................................................................................................................124
Make Global Settings for Electronic Bank Statements.......................................................................125
Configure a Manual Bank Statement..................................................................................................136
www.it-ebooks.info

xi
■ Contents
Check Deposits............................................................................................................. 142
Define Posting Keys and Posting Rules for Check Deposits...............................................................143
Create and Assign Business Transactions..........................................................................................148
Define Variants for Check Deposits....................................................................................................148
Summary...................................................................................................................... 150
■
■Chapter 10: Defining Tax on Sales and Purchases............................................ 151
Sales and Purchases Tax.............................................................................................. 151
Basic Settings.............................................................................................................. 153
Define Tax Codes for Sales .......................................................................................... 154
Define Tax Accounts for Sales...................................................................................... 156
Define Tax Codes for Purchases................................................................................... 158
Define Tax Accounts for Purchases.............................................................................. 160
Assign Taxable Codes to Non-Taxable Transactions..................................................... 161
Summary...................................................................................................................... 162
■
■Chapter 11: Customizing a Cash Journal.......................................................... 163
Cash Journal................................................................................................................ 163
Create G/L Accounts for a Cash Journal....................................................................... 164
Specify the Amount Limit for a Cash Journal............................................................... 164
Define Number Range Intervals for Cash Journal Documents..................................... 165
Set Up the Cash Journal............................................................................................... 167
Create, Change, and Delete Business Transactions...................................................... 168
Set Up Print Parameters for the Cash Journal............................................................. 170
Summary...................................................................................................................... 171
■
■Chapter 12: Financial Statement Versions (FSV)............................................... 173
Financial Statement Versions....................................................................................... 173
Define Financial Statement Versions............................................................................ 174
Step 1: Create Items...........................................................................................................................176
Step 2: Reassign Items as Subordinates............................................................................................177
www.it-ebooks.info

xii
■ Contents
Step 3: Assign FSV Nodes to G/L Accounts ........................................................................................182
Step 4: Define the Credit/Debit Shift...................................................................................................183
Check Assigned G/L Accounts to FSV........................................................................... 185
Summary...................................................................................................................... 187
■
■Chapter 13: Integration of FI with Other SAP ERP Modules.............................. 189
Integrate FI with Other SAP Modules........................................................................... 189
Material Management (MM)......................................................................................... 191
Configure Automatic Postings............................................................................................................192
Sales & Distribution (SD).............................................................................................. 197
Prepare Revenue Account Determination...........................................................................................198
Summary...................................................................................................................... 201
■
■Chapter 14: Defining FI Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable................ 203
Accounts Payable and Accounts Receivable................................................................ 203
What Is a Customer Account Group?............................................................................ 204
Define Account Groups with Screen Layout (Customer).....................................................................205
Maintain the Field Status Group for the General Data of the Customer Account Group.....................206
Enter Accounting Clerk Identification Code for Customers.................................................................208
Create Number Ranges for Customer Account Groups.......................................................................209
Assign Number Ranges to Customer Account Groups........................................................................211
What Is a Vendor Account Group?................................................................................ 211
Define Account Groups with Screen Layout (Vendors) ......................................................................212
Maintain the Field Status Group for General Data for the Vendor Account Group..............................213
Enter a Accounting Clerk Identification Code for Your Vendors..........................................................214
Create Number Ranges for Vendor Accounts......................................................................................215
Assign Number Ranges to Vendor Account Groups............................................................................217
Terms of Payment ..............................................................................................................................217
Installment Plan..................................................................................................................................221
www.it-ebooks.info

xiii
■ Contents
Defining a Cash Discount Base for Incoming Invoices................................................. 224
Incoming Invoices/Credit Memos Enjoy Transactions.................................................. 224
Defining Document Types for Enjoy Transactions...............................................................................225
Defining Tax Code per Transaction......................................................................................................226
Defining Accounts for Net Procedures......................................................................... 227
Defining Accounts for Cash Discounts......................................................................... 228
Defining Cash Discounts Granted.......................................................................................................228
Defining Account for Cash Discount Taken.........................................................................................228
Defining an Account for a Lost Cash Discount....................................................................................229
Defining Account for Overpayments/Underpayments.........................................................................229
Manual Outgoing Payments......................................................................................... 232
Define Tolerances for Vendors............................................................................................................232
Define Reason Codes for Manual Outgoing Payments.......................................................................234
Define Accounts for Payment Differences (Manual Outgoing Payments)...........................................237
Automatic Outgoing Payments..................................................................................... 238
All Company Codes.............................................................................................................................238
Paying Company Codes......................................................................................................................240
Payment Methods in Country.............................................................................................................243
Payment Methods in Company Codes................................................................................................243
Bank Determination for Payment Transactions..................................................................................247
Bank Accounts....................................................................................................................................248
Sort Methods and Adjustment Accounts for Regrouping Receivables/Payables.......... 251
Define Sort Methods...........................................................................................................................252
Define Adjustment Accounts for Receivables/Payables by Maturity..................................................254
Adjustment Posting/Reversal....................................................................................... 258
Permit Negative Postings...................................................................................................................259
Define Reasons for Reversal..............................................................................................................259
Summary...................................................................................................................... 260
www.it-ebooks.info

xiv
■ Contents
■
■Chapter 15: Defining the Dunning Procedure and Correspondence.................. 263
Dunning........................................................................................................................ 263
Define the Dunning Area.....................................................................................................................263
Define the Dunning Procedures..........................................................................................................264
Correspondence........................................................................................................... 272
Define Correspondence Types............................................................................................................273
Assign Programs to the Correspondence Types.................................................................................274
Define Sender Details for a Correspondence Form............................................................................275
Determine Call-Up Functions..............................................................................................................277
Define Reply Addresses for Balance Confirmation.............................................................................277
Summary...................................................................................................................... 279
■
■Chapter 16: Customizing Special G/L Transactions........................................... 281
Special G/L Transactions.............................................................................................. 281
Technical Factors................................................................................................................................282
Down Payments........................................................................................................... 283
Down Payment Received....................................................................................................................284
Down Payment Requests (Customer).................................................................................................286
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Customer Down Payments)............................................................287
Down Payment Made..........................................................................................................................289
Down Payment Requests for Vendors.................................................................................................290
Define Account for Tax Clearing (Vendor Down Payments).................................................................291
Guarantees................................................................................................................... 292
Define Alternative Reconciliation Accounts for Customers (Guarantees)...........................................292
Define Alternative Reconciliation Accounts for Vendors (Guarantees) ...............................................293
Define Accounts for Automatic Offsetting Entry.................................................................................293
Summary...................................................................................................................... 295
www.it-ebooks.info

xv
■ Contents
■
■Chapter 17: End User - Accounting Document Posting..................................... 297
Customer/ Vendor Master Record................................................................................. 297
Create Customer Master Record........................................................................................................298
Create Vendor Master Record.............................................................................................................300
Accounts Receivable—Document Entry...................................................................... 302
Customer Invoice Posting...................................................................................................................302
Posting a Credit Memo.......................................................................................................................306
Holding and Parking Documents.................................................................................. 308
Holding Documents............................................................................................................................308
Calling Up a Held Document...............................................................................................................309
Parking Documents............................................................................................................................310
Parking/Editing a Document...............................................................................................................311
Incoming Payments...................................................................................................... 311
Posting a Standard Incoming Payment...............................................................................................312
Posting a Partial Payment..................................................................................................................315
Posting Residual Items.......................................................................................................................317
Customer Down Payments........................................................................................... 318
Posting a Customer Down Payment Request.....................................................................................318
Posting Customer Down Payments....................................................................................................319
Clearing Customer Down Payments...................................................................................................321
Display Account Balances............................................................................................ 323
Display Customer Account Balances..................................................................................................323
Display Line Items........................................................................................................ 326
Display/Change Customer Line Items.................................................................................................326
Correspondence........................................................................................................... 327
Request Correspondence...................................................................................................................327
Print Correspondence.........................................................................................................................328
Execute Dunning.......................................................................................................... 331
Display Dunning Details......................................................................................................................334
Print Dunning......................................................................................................................................335
www.it-ebooks.info

xvi
■ Contents
Accounts Payable—Document Entry........................................................................... 335
Vendor Invoice Posting.......................................................................................................................336
Manual Outgoing Payment........................................................................................... 338
Outgoing Payment..............................................................................................................................338
Automatic Payments.................................................................................................... 340
Check Lots..........................................................................................................................................340
Automatic Payment Program..............................................................................................................342
Use the Cash Journal................................................................................................... 353
Cash Receipts.....................................................................................................................................354
Cash Payments...................................................................................................................................355
Summary...................................................................................................................... 357
■
■Chapter 18: Customizing the Controlling Module.............................................. 359
The Controlling Module................................................................................................ 359
General Controlling.............................................................................................................................360
Organizational Controlling..................................................................................................................360
Cost Element Accounting............................................................................................. 370
Make Default Settings for Automatic Creation of Primary and Secondary Cost Elements.................370
Create Batch Input Session................................................................................................................372
Execute a Batch Input Session...........................................................................................................374
Primary Cost Element.........................................................................................................................376
Secondary Cost Elements...................................................................................................................378
Cost Center Accounting................................................................................................ 379
Define the Standard Hierarchy...........................................................................................................379
Create Cost Center Group...................................................................................................................386
Use Statistical Key Figures.................................................................................................................391
Change Activity Output/Prices Planning.............................................................................................393
Compare Cost Centers: Actual/Plan/Variance.....................................................................................394
www.it-ebooks.info

xvii
■ Contents
Profit Center Accounting.............................................................................................. 395
Basic Settings.....................................................................................................................................396
Maintain Controlling Area Settings.....................................................................................................396
Create Dummy Profit Center...............................................................................................................398
Set Control Parameters for Actual Data..............................................................................................399
Maintain Plan Versions.......................................................................................................................400
Define Standard Hierarchy for Profit Centers.....................................................................................401
Define Profit Center............................................................................................................................404
Define Number Ranges for Local Documents.....................................................................................406
Assign Profit Centers to Cost Centers.................................................................................................407
Posting Controlling Documents.................................................................................... 409
Display Line Items..............................................................................................................................410
Profit Center: Interactive Reporting....................................................................................................412
Distribution .................................................................................................................. 413
G/L Account Posting...........................................................................................................................417
Display Actual Cost Line Items for Cost Centers.................................................................................418
Summary...................................................................................................................... 419
■
■Chapter 19: Customizing New General Ledger Accounting............................... 421
New General Ledger..................................................................................................... 421
Leading Ledger...................................................................................................................................422
Non-Leading Ledger...........................................................................................................................422
Define Ledgers for General Ledger Accounting..................................................................................423
Define Currencies of Leading Ledger.................................................................................................424
Define and Activate Non-Leading Ledgers.........................................................................................427
What Is a Scenario in General Ledger Accounting?..................................................... 429
Assign Scenarios and Customer Fields to Ledgers for Leading Ledger.............................................430
Define Ledger Group...........................................................................................................................435
Accounting Principles................................................................................................... 435
Real-Time Integration of Controlling with Financial Accounting.................................. 437
Assign Variants for Real-Time Integration to Company Codes...........................................................439
Account Determination for Real-Time Integration..............................................................................440
www.it-ebooks.info

xviii
■ Contents
Document Types........................................................................................................... 441
Define Document Types for Entry View in a Ledger............................................................................442
Define Document Types for General Ledger View...............................................................................443
Document Splitting....................................................................................................... 444
Classify G/L Accounts for Document Splitting....................................................................................445
Classify Document Types for Document Splitting...............................................................................449
Zero-Balance Clearing Account..........................................................................................................449
Posting General Ledger Accounting Documents.......................................................... 450
Enter G/L Account Documents ...........................................................................................................451
Enter G/L Account Document for Ledger Group..................................................................................451
Reverse Document....................................................................................................... 453
Document Display........................................................................................................ 456
Closing......................................................................................................................... 458
Foreign Currency Valuation.................................................................................................................459
Balance Carry Forward.......................................................................................................................461
Summary...................................................................................................................... 468
■
■Appendix A: Useful General Ledger Accounts.................................................... 469
Chapter 5...................................................................................................................... 469
General Ledger...................................................................................................................................469
Chapter 6...................................................................................................................... 476
Automatic Clearing Differences..........................................................................................................476
Foreign Currency valuation.................................................................................................................478
Chapter 8...................................................................................................................... 486
GR/IR Clearing....................................................................................................................................486
Chapter 9...................................................................................................................... 492
House Bank........................................................................................................................................492
Bank Statement..................................................................................................................................494
Chapter 10.................................................................................................................... 504
Tax on Sales/Purchases......................................................................................................................504
www.it-ebooks.info

xix
■ Contents
Chapter 11.................................................................................................................... 506
Cash Journal.......................................................................................................................................506
Chapter 13.................................................................................................................... 511
Integration of FI with Other Modules..................................................................................................511
Chapter 14.................................................................................................................... 517
Terms of Payment...............................................................................................................................517
Define Sort Method and Adjustment Accts to Regrouping..................................................................522
Chapter 16.................................................................................................................... 533
Special G/L Transaction......................................................................................................................533
Down Payments..................................................................................................................................538
Chapter 19.................................................................................................................... 544
New General Ledger...........................................................................................................................544
■
■Appendix B: Some Useful Transaction Codes.................................................... 547
FI.................................................................................................................................. 547
End User: Accounting Document Posting...........................................................................................551
Controlling.................................................................................................................... 553
Index..................................................................................................................... 555
www.it-ebooks.info

xxi
About the Author
Andrew Okungbowa is an accountant, an expert in SAP Financial, and 
a trainer. He is currently the CEO of Wonderful Consulting, a company 
offering FI/CO, Business Analysis, and Project Management consulting 
services to medium and large corporations. He holds a Master’s Degree in 
Investment and Finance.
www.it-ebooks.info

xxiii
Acknowledgments
It is obvious that without the contribution of other people, this book would not have been possible.  
Hence, I want to offer my thanks to some wonderful people who have contributed immensely to the success 
of this book by way of their talented insights, critical reviews, and support.
First, I thank Rita Fernando, our Coordinating Editor, for the effective coordination of the book project 
from start to finish.
I particularly want to acknowledge Anne Marie Walker, our Developmental Editor, for painstakingly 
editing the initial draft and the final draft of the manuscript. My thanks goes to Kezia Endsley, our Copy 
Editor, who spotted every typographical error and pointed them out in good time. I also want to thank Susan 
McDermott, our Acquisitions Editor, for her invaluable contribution and SPi Global for converting the 
manuscript into this book.
My thanks goes to my dear wife Hephzibah and my beautiful daughter Zoe-Chelsea for their 
encouragement and support. I love you guys.
I also want to acknowledge the following people for their contribution to the success of this book.  
Jeff Olson who started the journey of this book with me. To my pastors, Pastor Olukayode and Iwalola 
Owolabi, for their prayers and encouragement. To my brothers, Osasu, Frank, and Ben Soko, for their support.
I will not forget to say thank you to my friend John Adjara, who sparked the idea to write this book by 
advising me to convert my lecture notes into a book. 
Finally, I also want to thank all those who have contributed one way or another to the success of this 
book but whose names are not mentioned. 
www.it-ebooks.info

