
Tethers
By
Sara Reinke
 
This  book  is  a  work  of  fiction.  The  names,  characters,  places,  and  incidents  are
products of the writer’s imagination or have been used fictitiously and are not to be
construed as real. Any resemblance to persons, living or dead, actual events, locale
or organizations is entirely coincidental.
 
Samhain Publishing, Ltd.
2932 Ross Clark Circle, #384
Dothan, AL 36301
 
Tethers
Copyright © 2006 by Sara Reinke
Cover by Anne Cain 
ISBN: 1-59998-168-8
www.samhainpublishing.com 
 
All Rights Are Reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical articles and reviews.
 
First Samhain Publishing, Ltd. electronic publication: November 2006
 
  
Tethers 
  
  
  
Sara Reinke 

Dedication
To Kirk, for all the countless times you’ve been my hero.
 
Prologue
4.9.2056 
Commercial Stellar Transport: Daedalus 
Crew Members: 
Captain Alexander Horne (retired) (277-231-9)—First Officer 
Kathryn Emmente (352-210-0)—Second Officer 
Lieutenant Eric Nagel (retired) (424-111-7)—Pilot 
Xian  Tren,  P.E.  (268-199-0)—Seismic  and  Mechanical  Engineering
Specialist 
Leia Nicholsan, P.E. (325-989-1)—Payload Specialist 
Franklin Brown, M.D. (517-532-5)—Medical Officer 
  

Additional On-board: 
Jerica Emmente 
  
Mission : 
Complete  construction  of  terra-farming  colony  facility  on  Jupiter  satellite,
X-1226 
 
Funny, Kat  thought,  studying  the  stellar display,  watching the  computer  trace
lines across the monitor, plotting and arranging course adjustments so minute by the
readings she’d almost question their necessity. Funny, it doesn’t feel like Easter.
But there it was, undeniable on the monitor displays. At least seven months  in
cryostasis away on Earth, it was Easter Sunday. Back there, in Illinois, she imagined
her family would just now be settling in for the traditional Easter feast. Her mother
would be bringing out a turkey, steaming and probably too dry, and the table would
be laden with mashed potatoes, gravy, homemade cornbread dressing, rolls and her
sister Allison’s green-bean casserole.
The  dressing  will  be  too  runny,  Kat  told  herself.  The  gravy  too  lumpy,  and
Jerica would  just  wrinkle  her  nose  at  it  all  anyway.  And  then  we’d  have  to  sit
through an hour or so of Allison bitching about her job and how her ex doesn’t
pay his child support, and snapping at her kids for picking at each other. Some
fun.
Some fun, but she found herself missing it anyway.  Easter  had  always been  a
difficult time for her, full of unpleasant memories she didn’t feel much like thinking
about, and she had somehow found a comfort and strange sort of solace from being
with her family. No matter how weird they could seem.
She pressed a couple of buttons on the terminal in front of her, locking in the
new coordinates the ship had plotted out. They  were  running late; a  small system
glitch just prior to their coming out of cryostasis  had  left them a  little over  a  day
behind schedule.
“Good thing it happened then and not earlier,” Alex had remarked. “Or Christ
only knows where we might have ended up. Uranus or something.”
She’d laughed. They all had, but none of them had really found it funny.  And
they’d all been keeping a watchful, wary eye on the bridge since then, making sure
the system didn’t decide to make another odd decision and send  them off-course
again and out into space.
“It’s not like out here, you get lost, you stop in at the nearest Denny’s and ask
for directions,” Alex had told her.

Kat agreed with him. The trip was already going to cost her five years, and she
knew she’d have to get used to the lonely, empty feeling deep down in the pit of her
belly that came with spending a holiday away from the familiar bustle of her family,
because there were a lot more ahead of her. She didn’t feel like getting lost in deep
space and never finding her way back home.
Ordinarily, her crew would have rendezvoused with the one previously stationed
at the X-1226 terra-farming colony post, but because they were running behind, the
other crew had already launched from the moon’s surface, heading toward them and
the stellar platform Kat’s crew had departed from four days earlier.
Already,  the  on-board  computer,  STELA,  was  picking  up  the  other  crew’s
transport vehicle, moving in a nearly parallel path, coming toward the Daedalus. The
two ships had been sending each other routine hailing messages from  the  moment
they approached  within range  of  one  another,  and  now  a  small  red  light  flashed,
distracting Kat. Someone on the other ship, the Icarus, wanted to say howdy.
Kat had a pretty good idea who it may be, and smiled to herself.
She pulled her terminal closer to her and typed: COMM OPEN.352-210-0.
STELA  thought  about  this  for  a  millisecond  and  said:  ENTER  COMMAND
ACCESS FOR COMM OPEN.
Kat typed: SIMONSAYS KAT.
“Open sesame, STELA,” she murmured, watching the monitor in front of her tile
into a small frame. A woman’s face materialized in the window, like some kind of
Las Vegas show magic trick. Kat recognized the black woman in the image and her
smile widened. “Hey, Trina.”
“Hey, yourself,” Trina said. “Happy Easter.”
“Yeah.”  Kat  rolled  her  eyes,  spinning her  index  finger in  a  small  circle.  “Big
hurrah.”
“Didn’t the Easter Bunny bring you anything special?”
“I managed to sneak a couple of chocolate eggs for Jerica,” Kat said. “She’s not
buying the whole bit about the Easter Bunny finding her way up here, but she was
glad to have them.”
“I bet,” Trina said. “Is she up?”
Kat shook her head. “She’s not sleepy, but I try to at least get her in her room
around bedtime. I’m afraid to get her too out of whack with her Earth routine just
yet. Even a couple hours’ sleep and I’m glad.”
“You writing anything yet?”
Kat laughed. “Not yet, no.”
Trina arched her brow. “You said you were going to use this trip to start on that

novel you’ve been wanting to—”
“We’re less than two weeks out of cryostasis, Trina,” Kat said. “And four days
past the stellar platform. I’ve barely  had  time to  stretch  my  legs,  much  less  think
about writing.” Trina looked disapproving, which only made Kat laugh again. “I’ve
got five years to write the novel. I think I’ll eventually find some free time for it.”
Trina sighed,  looking weary.  “I’m half-tempted  to  turn  this  barge  around  and
meet you back down at the colony, to tell you the truth. I don’t know if I want to go
back to Earth.”
“How come?”
“Don’t  you  check  out  the  news  transmissions?  That  group  Legion’s  been
bombing government buildings again.”
Kat knew the name. There weren’t many people who didn’t. Over  the  last  ten
years, Legion had grown from a small, grass-roots campaign for government reform
in  the  United  States  into  a  full-fledged  militia,  complete  with  armed  troops  and
military-grade weaponry. They had tried to get the government to turn the entire state
of  Texas  over  to  them  several  years  earlier,  as  an  independent  country,  a  “true
democracy,” as Kat had read in the newspapers. Whatever the hell that means.
Legion had lost that battle, but the war hadn’t been over for them, apparently.
What they hadn’t been able to accomplish through legislation, they continued to try
and achieve by force. They’re all fucking nuts, Kat thought. “When’d this happen?”
“Couple of weeks ago. They blew up federal depositories  in six  states.  Killed
several  hundred  people.  Really  gruesome.  I  think  it’s  safer  up  here,  personally.
Where freaks like that can’t get to you.”
Kat was nearly inclined to agree. “Well, maybe you can switch professions, get
into terra-farming. Get yourself stationed up here for at least the next three decades.”
Trina laughed. “Don’t think I like it out here that much.”
Kat smiled and touched the monitor with her fingertip. “It’s good to hear your
voice, Trina. Damn it all. I  was  really looking forward  to  seeing  you,  too,  so  we
could at least have one evening to spend over a pot of coffee, having some girl talk.”
“Everything okay there, Kat?”
Kat nodded. “Yeah, I just…it’s all fine, I just…”
“Things still going on with you and Alex?”
“Yeah,” Kat said quietly, almost ashamedly.
Trina frowned. “I don’t get you sometimes, girl.”
Kat laughed. “And why is that?”
“Because you keep messing around with that married man.”
Kat laughed again, covering her mouth. “Alex isn’t happily married.”

“So he tells you.”
“Yeah,  well, if he  was  happily married,  why would  he  want  to  sign  up  for  a
five-year assignment?”
Trina shrugged. “Yeah, well, I still say you don’t  need  him to  be  your  ‘white
knight’.”
Kat chuckled. “Then who should be?”
“You, Kat.” Trina reached out and touched the screen. “You need to be your
own hero.” Her eyes cut momentarily away from the  screen.  “Uh-oh.  Got  to  run.
Got a priority message coming in from the platform.”
“Okay.” Kat glanced at her watch. “My shift’s about over with anyway. I’ll give
you a transmittal tomorrow sometime.”
“Sure enough, Kat,” Trina said. “Chat with you then.”
Kat heard the bridge doors slide open behind her, hissing softly, and she turned.
“No fair.” Kat pouted insincerely. “My time’s not up yet.”
Eric Nagel, the  ship’s  pilot,  paused  in  the  doorway.  “I  can  come  back,”  he
offered hopefully and she laughed.
“Forget it,” she said, and he sighed. “It’s all yours, Lieutenant.”
“Muchas gracias there, pal.” He walked toward her, mockingly dejected.
She seldom thought about, much less noticed his leg anymore. It was a little bit
harder sometimes for her not to think about or notice how handsome he was. How
much more so than Alex.
She stood, relinquishing her seat and the helm to him. “I’ve done  all the  dirty
work for you,” she said, and he raised a brow at her, inquisitively. “I went ahead and
programmed the course corrections.”
“I could’ve done that,” he told  her.  “That’s  what  they  pay  me  the  big  bucks
for.”
She laughed. “Yeah, well. Did you get Jerica to bed?”
He nodded. “Tucked her in myself. Threatened to tickle her until she pissed her
pants if she didn’t at least try to sleep.”
“Thanks. She’s probably already up and sneaking around, but at least you tried.
Have you had any luck sleeping?”
He shook his head. “Nope. I mean, I feel tired, but not sleepy. I tried a couple
times, lying down, but…”
That was the bitch of cryostasis, in Kat’s opinion. Once under, a person slept in
a  deep,  persistent,  nearly  vegetative  state.  Upon  rousing,  however,  it  could  take
days, if not weeks, before the body’s Circadian rhythm readjusted, and normal sleep
patterns returned.

“How long now?” Eric asked.
“Without sleep?” Kat thought for a moment. “Going on thirty-seven hours. How
about you?”
“Thirty-nine.” He arched his brow, interested. “Why? Are we having a contest or
something? You think you can outlast me?”
She shrugged. “I don’t know. What’s the prize?”
“For going the longest without sleep? I’d say oral sex. Definitely.”
She laughed. “I’d say definitely not.”
“Perfectly platonic oral sex,” he said, his dark brown eyes  round  and  earnest.
“Scout’s honor. Won’t even expect you to swallow.”
Kat laughed again. “Please. You couldn’t handle it. You’d fall in love.”
“Too late for that.” The corners of his mouth lifted into a wry smile that was at
once fetching and infuriating. “You’re going down, Kat. Literally.”
“Screw you, Nagel.” Kat smiled and shook her head, walking toward the door.
“Hey, that’ll work, too.”
“Yeah, you keep telling yourself that,” she replied, heading out of the bridge. He
chuckled gently behind her.
Chapter One
There was a terrible, searing pain in Kat’s face.
It radiated out from  somewhere  just  above  her  left eye.  She  tried  to  blink, to
open her  eyes  and  look  around,  but  they  burned,  agonizing. She  heard  a  woman
screaming.
Leia. That sounds like Leia… 
And then she blacked out again.
 
***
 
Kat dreamed of before, of Alex in his crisp, starched uniform, leaning back in
the captain’s chair and folding his hands neatly behind his head. His breath came in a
long and tired sigh.
“I’m getting too  old  for  this  shit,  Kat,”  he  said  and  she  remembered  hoping

futilely that this would segue into something more—a promise that this would be his
last mission, that he would leave his wife and build a new life on Earth with Kat.
He moved out of the chair, close to her, pushing his body up against hers. He
kissed her. His hands were busy with her breasts, fumbling with the fastens on her
flight suit.
“Alex,  no,”  she  protested,  but  she  didn’t  mind.  “Jerica  could  walk  in  any
minute.”
He looked at her, leaning forward so the tip of his nose rested against hers. His
eyes were bright, mischievous. “Shhh.” He pressed his fingertip over her lips. She
giggled.
He kissed  her  throat,  and  she  put  her  hand  against  the  growing  swell  of  his
crotch, gripping him, stroking, making him groan softly, hungrily against her.
And then there was a sound—bammmmph—like an enormous plastic bag filled
with air being sat on from somewhere deep in the dark, empty belly of the ship.
“What was that?” Startled, Kat pulled away from Alex.
“What the hell—?” he said, his voice overlapping hers.
The cruiser moved gently under their feet, as if it had been nudged by the edge
of a breaking wave. They stumbled, arms pinwheeling out for balance.
The claxon began to shriek, a high, nasal voice.
WHHOOONNNKK! 
WHHOOOOONNNKKK! 
The red security alert lights flashed suddenly.
WHHOONNNNNKKK!
They ran into the corridor outside, hurrying toward the bridge. They met Leia as
she rushed out of the rec room.
“What’s going on?” Leia screamed over the din of the alarm. Her  hands  were
pressed over her ears.
“I don’t know!” Alex yelled.
“Where’s Jerica?” Kat cried, and then she saw the little girl standing behind Leia
in the doorway. Her blue  eyes  were  large and  frightened,  seeming to  swallow her
whole face.
“Mommy!” Jerica ran and Kat scooped her up. Her little arms wrapped vise-like
around Kat’s throat.
The ship moved again underneath them, more violently this time, sending them
sprawling. Kat tried to shield Jerica as they smacked into the wall.
“You  okay?”  she  asked,  and  Jerica  nodded,  her  headful  of  yellow  curls
bouncing.

“What’s happening, Mommy?” she wailed.
Kat pressed her lips against Jerica’s brow. “I don’t know, pup.”
Leia sat up, dazed. Blood streaked down  her  cheek  from  a  wound  below  her
eye.
Alex helped Leia get  to  her  feet.  “Kat,  take  Jerica  and  Leia and  go  round  up
Franklin and Doc. I’m going to go up to the bridge and find Eric. Meet me at the
escape shuttle.”
“The shuttle?” Leia cried. “Are we going to crash?”
“Just go with Kat!” Alex snapped at her.
“Be careful!” Kat shouted after him. She meant to say, I love you.
He disappeared down the corridor, away from them.
She  remembered  that  there  were  things  exploding,  wires,  cables  and  conduits
along the  ceilings of  the  passageway.  There  was  some  kind  of  power  surge,  an
overload  or  something.  It  had  turned  the  hallways  of  the  ship  into  a  murky,
smoke-filled hell.
“Shit!” Leia shrieked.
Sparks  landed  on  them,  burning  their  faces  and  hands.  Kat  tried  to  protect
Jerica, tried to put her own body between the flames and her daughter. Jerica wasn’t
crying, but she was making frightened, mewling sounds. She shoved her small face
against Kat’s throat, gasping for breath, frightened and panicked.
Leia smacked fervently at her  arms  and  belly. “ShitshitshitshitSHIT,  Kat,  holy
shit!”
Eric was suddenly in front of them, yelling. He grabbed Leia by the arm, jerked
her around smartly and  started  beating  her  in the  back  of  the  head.  Her  hair was
burning,  on  fire,  but  the  smell  was  indiscernible  from  the  hot,  rich  stink  of  the
electrical fire and melting circuitry.
The entire cargo ship heaved, and a long, fat  section  of  piping  came  crashing
down out of the ceiling. Leia screamed, her voice ripping above the din of the alarm
claxon. Eric put his arms around her, pushing her  head  down,  shielding her  body
from the shower of sparks. “Kat!” he cried. He held his hand out to her. “Kat, come
on!”
“You know who he is, don’t you?” Leia had asked her once. 
“What do you mean? No. Who?” 
“Oh, Kat, that’s Eric Nagel. You know, the Sovereign pilot. He was in all the
news…such a shame, what happened to his leg.” 
“Mommy!”  Jerica  cried,  and  she  cringed,  struggling.  The  hole  in  the  ceiling
where the pipe fell was on fire. “Mommy!”

“Come on!” Eric flapped a desperate hand at her. “Here! Help her, come on!”
Someone grabbed Jerica away from her, pulling with strong arms—Franklin.
“No!” she screamed. “Jerica!”
“It’s burning!” Franklin caught her by her wrist, his hand clamping down, hurting
her. “Go! Now! I’ve got Jerica!”
“No!” Kat tried to pull away from him. “Where’s Alex?”
Eric closed his hand against her sleeve and jerked  her  toward  him. Frank  was
right behind  them,  inching around  the  collapsed  pipe.  He  held  Jerica  in his  arms,
trying to shield her. Sparks shot out of the ceiling, peppering them with white hot
embers. Jerica wailed in terror.
“Jerica!” Kat cried, struggling against Eric. She watched the sparks pelt her, but
didn’t feel them. She heard Frank yelp in pain.
“Watch it,” Eric said in her ear. He pushed her head down with his hand.
They got around the piping and the ship lurched again. Kat staggered and fell to
her knees.
“Go!” Frank hollered at Eric. He passed Jerica to him. “I’ll help  Kathryn,  go,
go!”
“Come on!” Leia pleaded shrilly.
Frank got his arm around Kat, hurrying her to her feet.
“Goddammit!” she screamed, angry, fighting. “Where’s Alex?”
They reached the shuttle and Kat was thrown  into  a  chair.  Her  head  smacked
against the back of the seat.
“Mommy!” Jerica yelled, and she ran away from Eric. She jumped into Kat’s lap
and crushed against her in a fierce embrace. “Mommy, I’m scared!”
“It’s okay, Jerica,” Kat whispered, leaning over and kissing her hair. “Sit  over
here, next to me. Come on, pup, just like in the drill.”
Jerica clambered into the adjacent seat. Kat lowered the safety harness over her
daughter’s small shoulders. “Watch your arms…here, okay,” she said, securing the
straps.
“Are we going to crash?” Jerica asked.
Kat struggled to smile. “No, pup.” She exchanged a quick, anxious glance with
Eric from across the shuttle. “It…it’s going to be fine.”
Frank helped Kat, fastening the safety harness over her. She saw Eric strapping
Leia into the seat directly across from her. Leia whimpered  quietly, her  eyes  huge
and round and glassy with fright.
Frank fell into the seat next to Jerica and began struggling into his own harness,
his movements quick, jerking, frantic.

Something was wrong. Kat knew it. Alex was taking too long on the bridge, and
there was still no sign of Doc. “Where are Alex and Doc?” she yelled to Eric. “They
should have been here by now!”
“I  don’t  know.”  Eric  checked  Jerica’s  harness,  pulling  the  straps  taut.  He
cupped her face in his hands. “Having fun yet?”
She shook her head and he struggled to smile as he pushed golden curls back
out of her eyes. “Me either, kiddo.”
“We have to go and look for them,” Kat said, drawing his gaze. “Get this thing
off of me. We’re not leaving yet.”
Franklin blinked at her. “Are you crazy? We have to get out of here.” He turned
to Eric, his eyes wide and alarmed. “Launch the shuttle, Eric!”
“Like hell!” Kat snapped, balling her hands into fists. “I’m second officer—it’s
my goddamn call! Eric,  unhook  this  thing and  let me  out  of  here.”  She  began  to
struggle, pushing her shoulders against the bars, trying to get the harness off. “Eric, I
said let me out of here! I’ve got to find Alex and Doc!”
“Eric, we have to—” Franklin began.
“I’m in charge here, Franklin—not you!” Kat shouted. She glared at Eric. “We’
re waiting—we’re going to go look for them.”
“This  thing is  going  to  go  and  you  know  it!” Frank  screamed  and  his  voice
cracked along a ragged, panicked edge. “Something must have happened to them.
They’d be here by now if they could! They’re not coming!”
“We’re waiting!” Kat screamed back at him, thrashing now against the restraints
of the safety harness.
Eric  stared  at  her,  his  eyes  stricken  and  uncertain.  Kat  could  hear  the  ship
groaning around them. Smoke rolled into  the  little shuttle,  bitter  smelling, acrid.  It
curled around Eric’s legs and he shied away, coughing, stumbling.
There was a cracking sound from somewhere deep in the ship’s bowels, and the
recoil pummeled the little shuttle. Kat’s head snapped sideways, the side of her face
smacking against the hard, unyielding pipes of the safety harness.
Eric fell, catching himself clumsily on the seat next  to  Leia, his  knees  banging
hard against the floor. His face twisted in pain.
“Eric!” Jerica began to mewl again, quietly.
“We have to go!” Leia screamed. She struggled against her restraints, terrified,
drumming her boots against the floor. “Please, please!”
“Close the goddamn door!” Franklin shouted.
Eric looked at Kat desperately.
Because I’m senior officer here, Kat thought. Because he’s waiting for me. It’s

my call.
She saw the glow of the fire, orange and yellow against the smooth oiled steel of
the corridor walls. She heard the flames licking their way eagerly toward the shuttle
doorway, heard the ceiling caving in, spilling down, feeding the blaze.
“Kat, Eric, please, for God’s sake!” Franklin cried.
She looked at Jerica, whose cheeks were flushed with fear. Her eyes were wide
and shining and alert, like a small deer pinned by a car’s headlights.
Alex, oh, Christ, Kat thought, her eyes flooding with tears. I can’t kill us all. I
can’t kill my daughter! Do it, Eric.
She must have spoken aloud. Eric staggered over and sealed the hatch closed.
He moved to the front of the little craft and fell into the pilot’s seat. She watched as
he pulled his life-support mask over his mouth and nose.
He looked back over his shoulder and met her eyes.
Such a shame what happened to his leg… 
“Do it.” This time she knew she spoke; she heard the flat, dead  sound  of  her
voice, and somehow there was a strength in it, a courage, an authority, a conviction
she did not feel.
There was bright, brilliant, white light. She could hear people screaming; Leia’s
frightened,  panicked  peals,  Jerica’s  high-pitched,  bird-like  cries,  Franklin’s
bellowing, her own terrified shrieking.
There was no air. She hitched in a breath to scream, but there was no air to take
in.
And then there was blackness.
And the pain and burning in her eyes.
 
***
 
Once upon a time, five years ago, in the dawn of terra-farming borrowed moons,
they  had  been  in  Illinois,  at  the  loading  platform.  Somewhere  high  above  them,
slowly circling in the upper atmosphere, was the Daedalus, their cargo  craft,  hers
and Alex’s command.
Kat remembered Leia on a heavy payload lift. Leia worked the enormous, bulky
metal  arms  with  a  deftness  and  ease  that  Kat  found  remarkable  given  the  other
woman’s small, slight stature.
She looked across the tarmac and saw a young man walking with some of the
ground crew techs. She also recognized the gentle, arrogant swagger of one of the
men in the group, and a soft smile found the corners of her mouth.

Alex. 
The men seemed to be engaged in heavy, deep conversation. Shop talk of some
sort. It occurred to her that the young man with Alex was incredibly handsome; the
kind of guy you caught a glimpse of somewhere, like in a movie, and fell for head
over heels.
She had never seen him before.
“Who is that, Leia?” She raised her voice over the whine of the lift’s engine.
Leia  stalled  the  motor  out,  and  the  lift  grumbled  to  a  halt,  its  arms  poised
purposefully out in the air in front of it.
“Who?” Leia asked, wiping sweat off her forehead with the side of her slender
wrist. Her auburn hair was caught back in a rakish ponytail, but strands had worked
their way free and blew across her cheeks in the breeze.
“That guy over there, walking with Alex and the techs. See?”
“Oh, Kat.” Leia smiled. “That’s Eric Nagel. You know, the Sovereign pilot. He
was in all of the news.”
Alex raised his hand to Kat in a  wave.  She  saw  his  handsome  grin below  his
dark, mirrored sunglasses. The other man, Eric Nagel, followed his gaze.
“Such a shame,” Leia said, and then the payload lift was rumbling back to life
underneath her. “What happened to his leg.”
 
***
 
Kat stirred lightly aboard  the  shuttle  as  something  cold  and  wet  hit her  in the
face. Plop!
What  is  that?  she  wondered,  her  pain-dazed  mind  slipping  back  toward
unconsciousness. Rain? It…can’t be raining…not in space…
Plop! 
  
***
 
She  dreamed  of  that  day  in Illinois again, of  Alex catching  up  to  her  on  the
tarmac. It was an Indian summer, and unseasonably warm and humid. Autumn had
not had time yet to rob his skin of its summer bronze tone, or his dark blond hair of
its sun-gold highlights.
He had two teenaged daughters and a son in college, though one wouldn’t know
it just to look at him. His son was the spitting image of Alex, while the girls favored
their mother—dark eyes, dark hair and the sort of exotic, olive complexions Kat had

always longed to have.
His wife’s name was Cassandra. Cassie for short. Kat had met her more times
than she could count at company picnics, holiday parties, New Year’s get-togethers.
She had a hell of a recipe for broccoli salad and once, at a pot-luck supper, she’d
copied it for Kat.
“You can use all Miracle Whip,” Cassie had told her. “But it’s better if you do it
half and half with mayonnaise.”
She’d had no idea that less than an hour earlier, at that very same gathering, Kat
and  Alex had  ducked  into  a  bathroom  together  for  a  quick  but  fiery  lovemaking
session.
“You look beautiful.” Alex had to speak to Kat on the tarmac in a  low  voice,
with only a hint of a smile playing on the corners of his lips and a simmering, lusty
glow in his eyes. She watched his gaze crawl down her body, lingering like a caress
along her breasts.
Kat blushed and lowered her head. “Stop it. Who is that, Alex?”
Alex glanced  over  his  shoulder  and  his  brow  furrowed.  “That,”  he  said,  in a
somewhat  irritable  voice,  “is  the  one-time  Lieutenant  Eric  Nagel,  Sovereign  pilot
extraordinaire. You’ve got to have read about this guy, Kat. He had some kind of
wreck. Lost his leg, the left one. Its all biomechanical, clear up to his hip. You can’t
even tell. I mean, I’m walking beside him and I’ll be damned if I could see a limp.”
“What’s he doing here?”
Alex shook his head. “That’s our new pilot. Dylan officially left our crew as of
yesterday morning.”
“What? Why?” Kat said, dismayed. She had liked Dylan Wayman; he had been a
member  of  their crew  for  as  long  as  she  could  remember.  She  had  trusted  him.
Wayman had been almost like a father to everyone on board.
Alex shrugged.  “Well,  you  know,  he  was  getting up  in years,  and  all  of  that
extended hyperstasis was starting to wear and—”
“Oh,  bullshit,  Alex.”  Kat  frowned.  “In  other  words,  Nagel’s  injury  got  him
discharged, so the suits in their million-dollar high rises decided to bump Dylan and
give this guy his job to make for good public relations.”
Because she could not  have  known  what  would  happen  five years  later, on  a
routine mission to X-1226, a stupid, desolate moon and future terra-farming colony,
Kat arbitrarily decided she didn’t much like this Eric Nagel.
 
***
  

Plop! 
Whatever  was  hitting  her  began  to  fall  faster—PLOP!—and  soon  she  was
soaked. It  trailed down  her  nose,  down  her  throat.  Kat  tried  to  sit  up,  coughing,
choking,  sputtering.  The  safety  harness  caught  firmly  across  her  shoulders  and
snapped her backwards into the seat.
She spat. Bloody phlegm smacked against her pant leg. She squinted. Her eye
still vaguely burned.
I’ll be damned, she thought, dazed. It is raining.
The shuttle had landed on the terra-farming moon—or crashed was more like it.
A slight downpour pattered in through an enormous  hole  that  had  been  wrenched
into the ceiling of the craft. It had washed most of the blood away from her eyes,
and she was able to see again.
Kathryn shivered. She tried to free herself from the harness mechanisms, but her
hands were shaking badly.
What in the hell happened? Where am I? 
Jerica…! 
She looked around, her eyes wide with bright panic, and found the little girl in the
seat next to her. Her face was turned down, her chin rested against her chest. Her
hands were curled in small fists in her hair. She seemed very peaceful, like she was
taking a nap.
Kat began to fight frantically with the seat harness. It flew up off her shoulders
unexpectedly, and she slipped out of the seat and onto her ass.
She crawled over to Jerica. “Jerica?” she gasped, trying to get the harness off the
girl. “Jerica? Hey, pup, hey, it’s me…”
Jerica  moaned.  Her  long  eyelashes  fluttered,  her  eyes  opened  sleepily.
“Mommy?” she whispered, bewildered.
Kat pushed the harness off Jerica’s shoulders and pulled her close. “Oh, God,”
Kat said, on the verge of tears. “Oh…”
A soft grey bruise was forming at the right corner of Jerica’s mouth and a single,
dark drop of blood dried at her lip.
“Are you okay?” Kat smoothed her daughter’s hair back, clutching at the child’s
shirt. “Jerica, are you hurt anywhere?”
Jerica blinked at her, staring blankly, silently. She was in shock.
“Sit down, Jerica, just sit here a minute,” Kat said, easing Jerica down in her seat
again. “It’s okay now, pup.”
Franklin was next to her. He was limp in his seat, but Kat could see his  chest
rising and falling steadily. He was alive.

She  looked  toward  the  pilot’s  chair.  Eric  was  slumped  to  one  side,  and  she
couldn’t  see  his  face.  His  hand  dangled  limply  over  the  armrest,  and  she
remembered that he had been hitting Leia, beating her in the head because her hair
had been on fire.
Leia,  Kat  thought,  remembering  the  screams  that  had  seeped  into  her
unconscious mind after they’d crashed.
Something had punched through the pod where Leia had been sitting. A large,
leafy tree limb draped across the crimped metal. Leaves and branches were scattered
across the floor.
Leia had been knocked clean  out  of  her  safety  harness  and  lay in a  sprawled
heap at the back of the module. Her back was arched at a crazy angle, and her head
was  turned  all of  the  way  around  on  its  axis,  so  it  looked  eerily  like  she  was  a
sideshow contortionist.
Come See the Amazing Rubber Band Girl! a voice screeched  in Kat’s  mind,
resounding in shrill, strained cheer. Only a Nickel!
“Oh, God.” Kat gulped, feeling bile rise in her throat.
Leia’s eyes were open. There was blood smeared around her mouth and nose,
drying, crusting. The left side of her face had a strange, sunken look where her skull
had splintered.
Kat whirled clumsily, throwing up until there  was  nothing left to  come  up  but
thin, foamy fluid, and her stomach  was  wrenched  into  tight, agonizing knots.  She
glanced over her shoulder and realized to her horror that Jerica was looking at Leia’s
body. The little girl’s face was blank and shell-shocked, her eyes vacuous.
“Don’t  look,  Jerica.”  Kat  scrambled  for  her,  turning  her  face  away.  “Don’t
look.”
She crawled over to Eric on her hands and knees. “Eric?” she whispered, taking
his hand. She reached up and touched his face. The instrument panel had collapsed
in places. Part of it was crimped down around his legs, trapping them at mid-thigh.
“Eric,” she said again, her voice ragged. She pulled the face mask over his head.
She  felt  the  immediate  push  of  his  breath  against  her  face.  He  drew  in  a  deep,
gasping mouthful of air. His brows knitted slightly in pain.
“It’s okay. I’ll get you out.” Kat grabbed the fallen console. She gave the twisted
metal an experimental shove, but it was impossibly heavy.
She pushed her damp  hair back  from  her  face  and  struggled  to  her  feet.  She
limped over to Frank. “Franklin?” Kat shook his shoulder tentatively. “Frank?”
Having Frank join their crew had  been  easier  to  take  than  when Eric  had  first
come along. The only constant in the Daedalus’ medical officer position was that no

one seemed to keep the job for more than one flight mission. They had just picked
up  Frank—Franklin  Mackenzie  Brown,  M.D.—four  days  earlier,  when  they’d
docked at the stellar platform.
Some welcome-aboard this has been, huh? Kat thought as she shook him again.
“Frank? Can you hear me?”
Franklin groaned. His head rolled from side to side for a moment, and then his
eyelids fluttered open. He stared dazedly at her.
“Are you okay?” Kathryn asked.
“Wuuhh…what…?”  Franklin  touched  the  back  of  his  head  and  grimaced,
sucking in a quick hiss. Blood dotted his fingertips when he pulled them away.
She began to help him as he fumbled with his safety harness. The straps were
wet and clumsy to handle.  She  loosened  them and  pushed  the  frame  up  over  his
shoulders. “What happened?” His voice was stronger now, less cracked and hoarse,
but she could tell from his eyes he was hurting and dazed. “Where are we?”
“We crashed. I don’t…I don’t know exactly what happened, but we’re on the
moon. Leia…she…oh, Christ…”
Frank  looked  over  and  saw  Leia.  “Jesus!”  He  turned  to  Kat,  wide-eyed  and
alarmed. “Jerica—?”
“She’s okay… I think…I think she’s just in shock.”
“And Eric…?”
“He’s alive, but he’s over here. His legs…it fell on him. I think he’s hurt. I can’t
get it off him.”
“Get what off him?” Frank said. She stood and helped him stumble to his feet
alongside her. She noticed blood matted thickly in his hair at the base of his skull.
He blinked stupidly, owlishly at the hole in the ceiling, and at the trees filling the
view. “So this is X-1226,” he observed.
He reached across Eric’s hips and released his safety straps. He cupped the side
of Eric’s face with deliberate care, his thumb resting against the side of his throat.
“His pulse is strong,” he said. “But he’s got to be in pain. We have to get him
out of here and to the compound.” He  gripped  the  console  with both  hands.  His
knees  were  flexed,  his  feet  planted.  “I’m going  to  try  and  lift this  thing  up.  If  it
moves, you pull him out. Don’t quit until he’s clear, okay? I’ll hold it as long as I
can.”
She nodded.
“You ready?”
“Yeah,” she said. “Go on.”
He began to tug. His face flushed with the exertion, and the tendons on his neck

stood out like taut straps of rubber under his skin.
After a  long,  futile moment,  Frank  let go  and  staggered  back  a  step.  He  was
breathing hard and his hands were shaking. “Goddammit! It’s slippery from the rain
and it’s too heavy. I can’t get it.”
Kat looked around the ruined shuttle, searching for anything they could use for
tools. She caught sight of a pipe poking out of the tear in the ceiling. She reached up
and wiggled it experimentally. There was a good amount of give, and so she caught
it in both hands and put some weight behind it as she yanked. The pipe popped free
with a  lack  of  resistance  that  caught  her  by  surprise.  She  danced  back  a  step  to
avoid getting clobbered over the head as it fell to the floor with a loud metallic clank.
“Maybe this…?” she offered it to Frank.
He smiled at her. “Give me a lever and I can move the world, huh?”
He eased the end of the pipe under the lip of the console and snuggled it in good
and secure. He rubbed his hands together, grabbed hold  of  the  opposite  end  and
glanced up at Kat.
“You want me to help?” she asked.
“No, no, I got this,” he said. “You pull him loose.”
He began to push down on the pipe. The console creaked as it shifted.
“Keep going.” Kat slipped her arms around Eric. “That’s it, you’ve almost got
it, Frank, keep going.”
“Shit,” he seethed, pushing with all of his might, his forearms shaking from the
strain. “It’s too much!”
The panel rose centimeters more, enough to just clear Eric’s thighs.
“No, no, I got him, that’s it!” Kat cried, pulling Eric free. He was heavy, and she
sprawled him out on the floor. She kept one hand under his head, supporting and
protecting. “Eric, can you hear me?”
Eric moaned lightly. He opened his eyes. He blinked, confused and bewildered
up at Kat. “Hey…” he murmured.
“Hey,  yourself,”  she  said.  She  smiled  at  him,  brushing  his  hair  back  off  his
brow. She leaned over him, using her back and shoulders to shield him from the rain.
He groaned. “How long was I out?”
She shook her head. “I don’t know. I just came to a little while ago.”
He cracked a smile, a wry lift to the corner of his mouth. “You woke up first.
Guess that means you won our bet.”
She couldn’t help herself but to laugh. It was either that or burst into hysterical
sobs. Or go crazy, she thought. She kissed Eric’s forehead, blinking against tears. “I
’ll collect from you later.”

“Can you walk?” Frank asked Eric. “I’m not sure how far it is, but the colony
compound has to be around here somewhere.”
“I can make it,” Eric said with a nod.
Kat gathered Jerica up in her arms. It was like lifting a  very  heavy doll.  Jerica
didn’t make a sound, didn’t even seem to blink.
“Want me to get her?” Eric reached for her, but Kat shook her head.
“No, no, it’s okay. I’ve got her.”
“What should we do with…?” Frank cut his eyes toward the back of the shuttle,
toward Leia. Eric followed his gaze and uttered a sharp, startled gasp.
“We’ll have  to  come  back  later,”  Kathryn  said.  She  caught  Eric’s  hand  and
forced him in tow without turning her head. She didn’t want to look at the corpse
again. “Let’s just go.”
Chapter Two
“Ow!” Kat yelped miserably.
“Sorry,” Frank said, smiling sheepishly at her. “I know it stings a little.”
“A little, hell.” She winced as he began to dab at the laceration on her head again
with  some  kind  of  sweet-smelling  antiseptic  salve.  “What  is  that?  Hydrochloric
acid?”
They had made the infirmary the first stop in their perfunctory grand tour of the
compound. Jerica had curled up on one of the cots and immediately dozed off. She
slept with one hand buried in her mess of dirty yellow hair, and the other up, almost
over her face. Frank had cleaned the little scrape on her lip, and covered her with a
blanket. He assured Kat her torpor was nothing more than shock from the crash.
“I know this hurts, but it’s really not too bad,” he remarked. “Not very deep at
all. Scalp wounds will scare the shit out of you, but there’s usually more blood than
damage. You’ll probably have a scar, though.”
“That’s all right,” Kat said as he handed her a white cotton gauze pad. “It will
match the others.”
“Hold that up there a sec. Good.” Frank pressed a strip of medical tape across
the gauze. “Thanks. You’re all done now.” He handed her a small foil packet from a
nearby cabinet. “Ibuprofen,” he responded to her questioning glance. “Take two and

call me in the morning.”
Kat groaned and he laughed.  “You’ve been  banged  up  pretty  good,  Kat,  and
those will help. You’re going to be sore.”
“Too  late.  I  already  am.”  Kat  smiled,  hopping  down  from  the  cold  metal
examination table. She walked over to another, where Eric had situated himself.
He’d shucked out of his flight suit and was sitting in his underwear. Despite her
soreness and their circumstances, Kat took in a quick but admiring look at his long
torso, the well-defined muscles cleaving his chest and abdomen. The dim,  sudden
heat this observation stoked in her snapped her mind immediately, cruelly to Alex,
and the awful realizations she’d been trying her damnedest not to think about.
I left Alex to die. 
“Any luck?” she asked Eric.
His legs  were  stretched  out  in front  of  him, and  all  sorts  of  little  tools  were
spread around him. He looked up at her. “No. All of these tools are too big. There’s
nothing here small enough for the cybermechanics.”
“Do you think it’s damaged?”
“I don’t know. I hope not. I mean, it seems to be working okay.” He wiggled his
toes experimentally. “How about you and Jerica?”
She nodded. I’m fine, she thought. Just peachy. Never better. The man I love,
the man I’ve been sleeping with for the past five years is now blown to microscopic
bits in outer space, floating around Jupiter’s asteroid belt. The man whose hands
were touching me  not  twelve  hours  ago,  who  was  undressing  me,  kissing  me—
whose goddamn erection I felt pushing against me through his pants and wanted
to feel  inside  of  me—is dead  now,  gone.  I  didn’t  even  get  to  tell  him  goodbye.
Much less that I loved him.
“I’m fine. We’re fine. Everything is fine.” She pushed her hair out of her face. It
felt grimy to her. She winced, and went to rub her  hand  on  her  flight suit.  It  was
covered with blood and muck.  “God,  I  hope  there’s  a  change  of  clothes  around
here somewhere.”
“I’ll find you one,” Eric told her, his voice oddly gentle.
He can tell my brain is scrambled right now. He knew about me and Alex. 
But she didn’t want to think about Alex anymore.
She began to unfasten the front of her flight suit, and remembered what it had felt
like to have Alex’s fingers there, working the clasps free. I remember how he tasted.
 The  flavor  of  his  mouth,  his  toothpaste.  We  were  just  about  to  make  love,
goddamn it. 
“Kat…” Eric began.

“It’s all dirty,” she said, not looking at him. She managed a sharp, barking laugh.
“It’s disgusting.”
She couldn’t get the fastens undone fast enough. Suddenly all she wanted to do
was get that damn thing off her, away from her skin. She could feel it pressed against
her; wet, cold, sticky fabric.
“Get  it  off  me.”  She  jerked  ferociously  at  it,  ripping  the  front  wide  open,
staggering back, twisting and struggling. Her  hip  knocked  against  a  tray  of  Eric’s
tools and it crashed to the floor.
She  managed  to  pull her  arm  free  of  the  sleeve.  “Get  it  off  me!”  she  cried,
desperately.
Eric was off the table and holding her, pinning her arms down at her sides. Jerica
was awake, sitting up on her cot, watching them with wide eyes.
“Eric, help, get it off me!” Kat cried, and then she burst into tears.
“Kat,  shhh…”  Eric  stroked  her  hair.  He  turned  his  face  down  toward  hers,
holding her gently. “It’s okay.”
“No, it’s not! It’s not okay! I left Alex to die. I tried to do the right thing, and
now he’s dead!” She brought her hands up to her face, ashamed of her tears, unable
to stop them. “I loved him, Eric! I never got to…to say it…I just…”
“I know, Kat,” Eric whispered. His hand pressed against the back of her head;
warm, comforting pressure.
Frank gave her a sedative. She hadn’t even felt it as he slid the long silver needle
into her  the  soft  curve  of  her  elbow.  She  supposed  she’d  needed  it.  It  was  the
proverbial slap in the face to get her out of her hysterical fit.
Chapter Three
On her tombstone: For a brief moment, an angel rested here.
And sometimes Frank would be sifting through the day’s pile of assorted bills
and junk mail, stacking department store circulars in a neat pile here and anything not
immediately destined for the garbage there, and it would hit him out of nowhere, like
a splash of glacial water.
I don’t remember how she sounded. 
There  would  be  times  when he  would  almost  hear  her,  when his  wife Lauren

would laugh despite herself on the phone with her sister. He would think on it, think
hard, and try to cement the melody of his daughter Elaina’s voice in his mind.
I can’t forget you, I can’t. 
He  remembered  Elaina  playing  with  her  Raggedy  Ann  and  Andy  dolls  one
afternoon. She was sitting in a warm, fat, yellow beam of sunshine that cut a diagonal
across her playroom floor.
He, Lauren and Elaina had lived in a beautiful split-level Cape Cod that was what
his grandfather  would’ve  called  “spitting  distance”  from  where  the  cold  Atlantic
Ocean pressed itself against the edge of New England.
He and Elaina would go digging for clams. They would wake before dawn and
tiptoe through the house, careful not to disturb Lauren.
He remembered how he would pack their lunches, and how she would raise up
on her tiptoes so she could see over the edge of the counters and make sure he didn
’t get too much mustard on her hard-salami sandwich.
“More?” he would ask her, poised with a butter knife. He would hold the slice of
Roman  Meal  out  for  her  inspection,  and  she  would  either  nod  her  approval  or
wrinkle her tiny, delicate nose.
“Too much, Daddy,” she’d say in a hush, her blue eyes dark like polished steel
in the dim light from the bulb over the range. “Take some of it off, yucko.”
They would dig for clams all morning long, furrowing with their feet through the
wet, cold sand at the tide’s lip until their toes would be numb. They would collect
the clams in a big plastic pail, sometimes until it was filled to the brim with mussels.
Then they would hike out to the overlook, sit  on  the  rocks  while waves  smacked
around them, and eat  sandwiches,  Frito’s  corn  chips  and  share  a  thermos  full of
raspberry lemonade.
“Do you believe in monsters, Daddy?” Elaina had asked him once upon a time,
out on the damp rocks.
He had  leaned  over  and  tugged  the  hood  of  her  red  cotton  sweatshirt  more
securely around her ears. Autumn was encroaching, and the breeze blowing in off of
the pewter grey ocean was chilly.
He remembered like it was yesterday; the small, rhythmic movements of her lips
as she chewed her bite of sandwich, and the way the tip of her small pink  tongue
darted out to catch a smidgen of bread on her lip.
He had packed yogurt that day, too. Strawberry-banana, her favorite.  She  had
taken a mouthful of some, and licked the spoon clean.
And he remembered her that day in her playroom as well, with the rag dolls,
and how she had taken off all of their little clothes, and how she was pushing their

small, stuffed bodies against each other with savage fervency, and the words that
were coming out of her mouth. 
“Sea monsters?” Frank had asked, smiling at her. He had not been able to coax
her into doing much more than wading out into the ocean. She shared her mother’s
irrational fear of water.
“Just monster-monsters,” Elaina had said, looking up at him. A loose strand of
her dark hair had blown across her cheek, and he had pushed it away, trying to tuck
it back under her hood.
“Remember, this is our secret  stuff,  it’s a  secret  thing,  remember,”  she  was
whispering, her voice hoarse and nearly panting. “Stop crying, be quiet, it doesn’t
hurt you, it doesn’t hurt…” 
“Nope,” he’d told her, and he flicked a corner of bread crust up into the air with
his forefinger and  thumb.  A  particularly  deft  seagull  had  caught  it  and  swooped
away. Elaina had giggled, delighted.
“This  is  our  secret  stuff,  remember,  a  secret  thing.  It  doesn’t  hurt,  STOP
CRYING.” 
“Besides, even if there were monsters—which there aren’t,” he’d said, dropping
her a conspiring wink. “They couldn’t get to you.”
“How come?” She had licked her yogurt spoon again.
“El, what are you playing at?” 
“Nothing—nothing, Daddy.” 
“I  wouldn’t  let them,”  Frank  had  said,  and  he’d  put  his  arm  around  her  and
pulled her close and loved her more than his own soul.
“I love you, Daddy.”
The feel of her cold, wind-chafed lips pressing against his cheek, and the smell
of her, like Johnson’s  Baby  Shampoo  and  detergent  and  something  beautiful and
vaguely clean that was distinctively Elaina.
“Who plays with you like that, El?” 
“Nobody, Daddy. Like how? I dunno, I just…I…nobody, Daddy.” 
“I love you, too, El.”
 
***
 
It had been a man who lived up the road from them, the closest neighbor in five
miles.
When they had bought the split-level Cape Cod, Frank and  Lauren had  found
that charming, one of the selling points of the place.

His name had been Campbell Greene and in the summertime, he’d brought them
grocery  bags  full  of  freshly  grown  corn,  sweet  peas,  beans  and  bright  yellow
summer squash from his half-acre wide vegetable garden.
He had been a charming and delightful bachelor. Sometimes he and Frank would
sit out on the wraparound porch of the Cape Cod and swap stories while sipping
Budweiser out of brown glass bottles.
Lauren had talked about fixing him up with one of her friends from the city. “Or
maybe one of the nurses at the hospital, like that one, Jenny. You said you post-op a
lot with her, and she’s single and pretty…”
 
***
 
Frank had blown Campbell’s brains out all across the bed where the man had
raped his beautiful six-year-old daughter.
He had made Campbell deep-throat  the  barrel  of  the  gun,  almost  to  the  point
where he gagged. “You son of a bitch,” Frank had said, and he had been shaking,
thinking about Elaina shoving the Raggedy Andy doll against the Ann doll.
“Vvvtthnnoo,”  Campbell  had  pleaded  around  the  black  metal  stock  of  the
48-caliber handgun Frank had picked out at a pawn shop.  He’d  driven  more  than
five hours to New York City to buy the pistol. Pawn shop owners in New York didn
’t ask questions when someone was murdered, but in small towns, they buzzed like
late-season cicadas. Frank had watched enough true-crime television shows to know
that. And he hadn’t wanted anyone to ever trace the weapon back to him.
“Eeeez, vvtthhnnnooo…” Campbell had pissed his pants. Of course,  that  was
before Frank had kicked him furiously in the balls and smashed them into a meaty,
useless pulp.
“Stop crying,” Frank had told him, and then he  had  blown  Campbell’s  brains
out across a navy blue bedspread.
“It doesn’t hurt,” Frank had whispered. He’d left Campbell’s house, driven to
the city again and dumped the gun in the Hudson River. Double shifts, that’s what he
’d told Lauren. He’d had to pull double shifts at the hospital in East Windsor and
that’s where he  had  been.  She’d  never  questioned  him on  it,  and  neither had  the
police. Frank had returned from New York, locked himself in the bathroom, turned
on the sink faucets and sat on the toilet, sobbing for Elaina under the cover of the
water’s rush.
In the end, Elaina had died anyway.
He hadn’t been able to protect her from another monster, this one almost more

dark and foul and insidious than the molesting neighbor.
Leukemia. The goddamn leukemia.
There  had  been  no  time  after  the  diagnosis.  And  throughout  that  brief  time,
Lauren had watched him bitterly, her dark eyes quick and bright. He knew what she
was thinking. He shared the same sentiments.
I’m the doctor. Why didn’t I see it all sooner? 
Lauren had left him shortly  after  the  funeral. The  cancer  had  taken  everything
from him.
Frank  sat  alone  in  the  dark  quarters  he  had  adopted  as  his  room  in  the
compound on X-1226, trying to remember his daughter’s voice. It was somewhere
in his brain, trapped like forbidden music, but it would eventually come. It  always
did.
From  somewhere  down  the  hallway  outside,  he  heard  Eric’s  voice,  soft  and
distant, followed by Jerica Emmente’s, louder, shrill with something  that  delighted
her.
He could hear her laughter, and for a moment her voice reverberated in his skull,
and he smiled, remembering Elaina.
Chapter Four
Kat  had  a  weird  dream  about  Chris  Emmente,  her  first  and  only  and
not-sorely-missed ex-husband.
She dreamed about being back on board the Daedalus, and they were headed
for the escape shuttle because the ship was burning, and piping and conduits were
crashing down out of the ceiling.
For Kat, it was like being at the movies. She didn’t feel panic or fear. She felt
distant,  disconnected,  like  she  was  sitting  in  the  back  row  of  an  empty  theater,
watching a show. In the dream, Frank was behind her, holding Jerica. Kat could hear
her daughter crying, frightened. She watched the pipe come crashing down in front
of them, and heard Jerica shriek in terror.  She  saw  Eric  in front  of  them,  holding
Leia, trying to shield her body with his own from the showering  sparks.  Leia was
screaming.
Kat watched with a strange, detached fascination as Leia clutched desperately at

Eric’s flight suit, her fingers splayed wide.
“Kat!”  Eric  cried,  holding  his  hand  out  toward  her,  reaching  around  the
collapsed portion of the ceiling. “Kat, give me your hand!”
“Go  on,  what  are  you  waiting for?”  someone  said  behind  her,  and  when she
turned around, she saw it wasn’t Frank and Jerica behind her at all.
It was Chris.
He stood there, sparks spilling around him but not seeming to  touch  him. His
arms  were  crossed  at  his  chest  in  that  old  familiar  way.  He  was  wearing  the
red-and-blue plaid shirt he’d had on the day she had finally left him for good.
His face was different, though. It was much younger and thinner than the day she
’d left him. He looked like the young man she had fallen in love with; a man who had
once treated her kindly, and whose hugs were so fierce and warm she remembered
hoping he would never let her go.
My God, she thought. Were you ever really this beautiful, Chris? 
“Take his hand.” Chris nodded toward Eric. He unfolded his arms and began to
squeeze  his  hands  into  fists.  She  listened  to  the  terrible,  familiar  sound  of  his
knuckles as they went snap! crackle! and pop!
And she knew what that sound meant. Oh, yeah. Real damn well.
“Go on.” Chris’ face seemed to change right before her eyes. His skin moved
like warm taffy, pulling down toward his chin, draping in plump tucks of fat at each
corner of his mouth, and in a roll just under the edge of his jaw line.
Kat shied away, bringing her hands up to her face instinctively. There  was  the
face she remembered. The man who never seemed to smile. The man whose  face
could twist and contort and become evil.
“Take his fucking hand.  Maybe  he’ll suck  on  your  tits,  huh?  Would  you  like
that?”
Kat cringed. “Chris, don’t…please, no…”
“I know. Maybe he’ll fuck you, Kat, and you’d like that, wouldn’t you? A nice,
pretty young fella like him, huh?”
She saw his fist come up, and she remembered the Easter Sunday when she had
first started showing with Jerica. She’d lost two teeth to those hard, uncaring, cruel
hands that day.
And his face. She’d thought he looked like the devil.
“No,” she pleaded, shrinking back, hunching her shoulders in toward her chest,
feeling small and young again, wanting to disappear. “Oh, no, Chris…no, please…”
In the dream, his fist swung around in a sharp, precise arc, hooking expertly for
the  side  of  her  face.  She  supposed  it  had  connected,  but  she  didn’t  remember

feeling it.
 
***
 
When she came to, she was in a small, dimly lit room,  in a  soft,  comfortable
bed, with cool, crisp, clean-smelling sheets draped about her shoulders.
She looked around, momentarily bewildered and disoriented. She half-expected
to find herself back in Illinois, in her old house, with Chris there, his terrible hands
poised.
The dream was still fresh enough in her mind to bother her, because she’d been
immobilized with terror, frightened and helpless. It had been a long time since she’d
felt that way. She’d worked very hard not to be that woman anymore, the victim, the
one  who  had  endured  Chris’s  beatings  and  abuse  for  so  long.  And  yet,  in  that
moment, in the dream, it had all been stripped from her.  She’d  been  that  woman
again, the one she still hated. The one she’d vowed she’d never again be.
Eric dozed next to her in a chair, with his head tilted back, resting against the wall
behind him. His eyes were closed.
You’d like that, wouldn’t you, Kat? A nice, pretty young fella like him? 
She studied the angle of Eric’s jaw line, the slope of his nose, and the arch of his
cheek outlined in the dim light. She thought—and not for the  first  time in the  five
years or so that they’d been  working together—what an  extraordinarily handsome
man he was. At twenty-seven, he was nearly eight full years her junior.
I was  learning  to  drive  a  car  when  you  were  in  grade  school,  she  thought
fondly and somewhat forlornly, smiling as she watched Eric sleep. Jerica snoozed in
his lap, her hand draped daintily against his chest,  her  lovely little features  serene.
She looked like she’d been made out of porcelain.
Kat peeked beneath the covers and realized she was in her bra and panties. They
weren’t nearly as soiled as her flight suit had been, but they still looked pretty bad.
The idea that Eric must have undressed her, that his hands had caressed her body,
drawing back the damp, dirty jumpsuit left her feeling warm inside, and  somewhat
embarrassed.
God, what he must think, she thought, with an unhappy glance at her soft belly,
breasts and hips, all rounded and full, presenting more folds at the moment than she
would have preferred.
Kat leaned over and gently poked Eric’s thigh. “Hey, sleepy heads.”
He gave a start and woke up, blinking sleepily at her. “Kat, hey.”
“Mommy!” Jerica cried.  She  hopped  off  of  Eric’s  lap  and  bounced  onto  the

bed.
“Hey, pup,” Kat said, as Jerica straddled her hips.
“Are you going to be okay now?” Jerica bounced on Kat’s belly.
“I think so.” Kat caught her  daughter’s  shoulders  with a  grimace,  holding her
still. “At least, if you stop jumping on my stomach, I will.”
“How are you feeling?” Eric asked.
“Kind of loopy.” She smiled goofily. “Must be from that stuff Frank gave me.
Where’s he at?”
“Checking out the commissary.” Eric reached out and gave her nose a  playful
pinch. “While you were sleeping, some of us were hard at work. We’ve activated the
emergency beacon in the command center. Not much else  there  seems  online yet,
except the basic primary functions, like maintaining the perimeter field.”
“Yeah, Doc was supposed  to  do  all…” Kat  began.  Her  voice  trailed off;  her
smile faltered. Xian Tren, or “Doc” as he was affectionately dubbed, had been their
engineering  specialist.  While  the  basic  electronic  and  computer  functions  of  the
colony compound had been set up earlier, by her friend Trina’s crew, it had been
Doc’s responsibility to see everything else up and running. But now Doc is  gone,
she  remembered,  and  the  horrible,  leaden  weight  of  her  culpability  came  settling
down on her once more.
“Hey,  there’s  a  shower  in  there,”  Eric  said  brightly.  She  could  tell  from  his
expression that he worried about her, that he’d sensed her distress. He indicated a
small, narrow door she’d mistaken at first glance for a closet. “And plenty of  hot
water, too.”
“That sounds too good to be true.” Kat stretched her legs out and wiggled her
feet.
Eric stood. She noticed that he seemed to favor his right leg over his cyborg left
one. She also noticed the nearly imperceptible way his brows furrowed, as if it hurt
him.
“You okay?”
“I’m fine. Come on, Jerica. Let’s go give Frank a hand.”
Jerica leaned down, gave Kat  a  loud,  smacking  kiss  and  then  climbed  off  the
bed.
“That little console by the door is a com system, so give a shout if you  need
something,” Eric said to Kat. “When you’re done in the shower, come down. Just to
the left and around the corner. We’ll all have canned meat and rehydrated milk.”
Jerica wrinkled her nose at Kat and poked her tongue out.
“Can’t wait.” Kat reached out, took his hand and squeezed his fingers. “Thanks,

Eric.”
“No problem, Kat.” Eric looked down at Jerica. “You want a piggyback ride?”
“I’m too big for piggyback rides,” Jerica said, rolling her eyes.
“I didn’t want to give you one anyway.” Eric dropped a wink at Kat.
“Yes, you did, too.”
Kat watched  Eric  walk  out  of  the  room,  the  dark  metal  door  sliding  closed
behind him with a hydraulic hiss. She hadn’t been able to detect a limp. I must be
imagining things, she thought, crawling out of bed. That’s all.
  
***
 
The shower felt good, impossibly good.
Kat pressed her forehead against the smooth wall of the shower stall and let the
steaming water pound against the back of her neck and shoulders.
It had never felt so good, so important to be clean. Kat had scrubbed every inch
of  her  body  as  hard  as  she  could,  scouring  until her  skin  was  violently red.  She
cupped her breasts in her hands, feeling their warm softness, their reassuring weight.
She closed her eyes and remembered.
It’s always you on my mind, Kat, and one day we can be like this, together, I
mean, for good, for always. 
Alex’s  voice,  echoing  in  her  mind.  Alex’s  hands  caressing  her  breasts,  his
fingers gentle and kneading, squeezing her nipples, exciting her.
It’s not always going to be like this, Kat. I’m going to leave Cassie. But I can’t
right now, not any time soon. These things take time, and there’s a lot to figure out
in the meantime. But you know this is what I want. You’re what I want. 
“Oh, Alex,” she whispered. “Alex, I’m sorry.”
She stayed in the shower for what seemed like hours, until she was certain her
body had shriveled up into a raisin. Eric had left some towels out for her and she
wrapped one around her body.  She  walked back  into  the  bedroom,  leaving small
puddles in her wake.
She leaned over the sink and looked at her face in the mirror. She’d been careful
to keep the gauze pad over the wound dry, but it had gotten rather soggy none the
less. She carefully pulled it off. Her eyes smarted as the tape peeled back from her
skin.
She studied the rough, jagged line that furrowed down from her hair line to just
above her cheekbone. Frank had used fifteen stitches to close it. It still stung, and
the skin around it was irritated and sore. She squinted experimentally, and it felt tight

and stiff.
Her entire body ached. Her neck  and  shoulders  hurt  the  most,  but  Frank  had
said  there  was  no  back  injury or  whiplash.  The  safety  harness  of  the  shuttle  had
protected her from any serious injuries.
In the light from above the sink, she could make out the  lines in her  face  that
betrayed  her  age,  although  she  still  felt  she  was  a  fair  cry  from  being  “old”.
However, she didn’t like the creases around her eyes. “Laugh lines,” her mother had
always called  them.  Kat  didn’t  think they  were  too  funny,  especially  since  she’d
watched the same sort of lines cut deeper and deeper trenches across her mother’s
face throughout the years.
Sometimes she would look at Jerica, admiring the pretty, cornflower-blue eyes,
the beautiful, glossy golden ringlets, and the delicate, refined features and wonder if
her mother had ever looked at her that way, cherishing the small, innocent features
that were so similar to her own, so untouched by time.
“Jerica’s going to be a little heartbreaker,” Alex had told her once upon a time.
Alex. 
She  pushed  all  of  her  wet  hair  back  from  her  face  and  twisted  it  into  a
rudimentary knot on top of her head.
There were two grey jumpsuits folded neatly on her bed. Kat picked one up and
smiled. “Thanks, Eric.”
As she wriggled into the jumpsuit, she pretended not to notice the way her hips
were not as slim as  they  once  had  been.  Jerica  had  found  Kat’s  wedding  picture
once, maybe a year ago. She had studied it for a long time, her face  pinched  and
serious.
“Is this you?” she’d asked, pointing to the slim, pretty twenty-four-year-old girl
in the photo.
Jerica had glanced at the picture, and at Kat, and at the picture again.
“What happened, Mommy? You were a lot skinnier here.”
Thanks, pup. Again, she tried not to  consider  Eric  undressing  her,  seeing  her
little more than naked. She’d seen him in a nearly identical state in the compound’s
infirmary, and had admired the view. I doubt he could say the same. God, what he
must think. 
Kat pressed her hands against her hips, smoothing the fabric back, watching the
way it pulled across her belly and her upper thighs.
The girl in the wedding picture seemed like someone from another time in more
ways  than  just  the  physical;  a  person  she’d  once  known,  long-lost  and  nearly
forgotten. That had been the girl Chris had beaten, the one too stupid and naïve to

escape him.
I don’t know her anymore. Kat shook her head, ridding herself of any residual
dread left over from her dream, and trying to forget she’d never be able to wriggle
into a  pair  of  size  seven  slacks  again. She’s  gone  forever,  out  of  my  life.  Good
fucking riddance.
  
***
 
She could hear Jerica’s high voice coming from up ahead as she tried to find the
kitchen. She poked her head into a doorway, and saw Eric and her daughter nosing
through some sort of supply room.
“…is this what it was like before?” Jerica asked him. They both had their backs
to the door and didn’t see Kat. “The first time you crashed?”
“No,” he replied.
She sat on the floor and tried to pry open the lid of a metal box. “What was it
like, then?”
“I don’t really remember. I’d lost power in my ship, and all I know is it was very
dark and very cold.”
“Did it hurt?” Jerica looked up at him. “What happened to your leg.”
“I don’t remember it hurting then,” he said. “I was in shock.  You  know  what
that means?”
Jerica  sighed,  rolling  her  eyes,  awarding  him  one  of  her  patent-pending  “I’
m-not-stupid-you-know” looks. Eric laughed. “Right. What was I thinking?”
Kat smiled softly, shying back in the doorway so they wouldn’t notice her. Eric
seldom  talked  about  the  accident  that  had  cost  him  his  leg.  She  found  herself
touched that he would confide so freely and earnestly with her daughter.
“It hurt later, though,” Jerica said. It was a statement, not a  question  and  Eric
nodded.
“Yeah.”
“Bad?” Her voice grew small, uncharacteristically timid.
“Pretty bad, yeah.” He knelt next to Jerica and took the box gently out of  her
hands. “I  got  this.”  He  glanced  toward  the  doorway  and  saw  Kat.  He  blinked in
momentary start and then smiled. “Well, hi.”
Jerica looked over her shoulder and grinned. “Hey, Mommy!”
“What’s going on?” Kat asked.
“We’re  looking  for
 tools,”
 Jerica  replied.  “Eric
 needs
 small-point
cybermechanical tools to work on his leg.”

“I  thought  you  said  it was  okay.”  Kat  frowned  at  him, thinking of  how  he’d
looked pained as he’d risen to his feet in her room.
“It is okay,” Eric told her and as he stood now, he did so with a straight face,
not even a hint of a limp or wince. “I mean, I think one of the lift hinges in the knee
might be a little crunched, but that’s no big thing.”
She could have pressed him on it, but didn’t. He wouldn’t lie to me, she told
herself. If there was something wrong, he’d say so. Maybe not to Frank or Jerica,
but he would to me. And even if he was lying, Kat didn’t think she wanted to know.
I’ve had to deal with too much already today. I can’t take anything else. Not now.
Not after Alex.
She forced a smile, dismissing any lingering concerns. “You guys help Frank in
the commissary?”
“I wanted to help Eric instead.” Jerica bristled.
Kat smiled knowingly. Jerica was polite to Frank, but he was still new to her, a
stranger,  and  she  always  seemed  to  regard  him  with  a  child’s  dark  mistrust  of
unfamiliar adults. Plus, she had always been particularly fond of Eric. Kat  secretly
suspected that Jerica had developed a crush on him.
She would watch how Jerica carried herself around Eric, her spine straight, her
gestures  graceful and  purposeful,  like  she  was  a  small  woman  instead  of  a  little
nine-year-old girl. She was often amazed to  hear  this  playful, coquettish  woman’s
laugh coming from the kid when she would talk to Eric.
“Are you hungry, pup?” Kat asked her.
“I’m not a pup,” Jerica said in that odd, womanly voice, snooping through the
tool box. “Please don’t call me that.”
“I’m kind of hungry.” Eric tousled her hair to draw her attention. “What do you
say we see what Frank has found for supper? This can all wait.”
“All right.” Jerica got to her feet and took Kat’s hand. “Come on, Mommy. The
commissary is this way. I’ll show you.”
She was just a little girl again. But Kat  had  a  feeling she  would  see  more  and
more of the busy little woman inside of Jerica in the next few years.
 
***
 
“We  need  to  check  the  compound’s  electric  HUM-V.” Kat  sat  on  the  floor,
resting her spine against the side of a couch, her arms crossed over her knees.
“Already  done,”  Frank  said.  “It’s  been  charging  since  the  Icarus  crew  left,
apparently. I tried starting it up and it turned right over. All the fluid levels looked

good.”
Kat was surprised that he would have thought to do this, much less know how.
He’s a doctor, for God’s sake, she thought, scolding herself. He’s not a moron. Of
course he figured it out.
“I think we should take it tomorrow and try to find the Daedalus’ black box,”
she said. “Maybe then we can try to figure out what happened.”
There was a long moment of silence.
“Look, I know this is hard to talk about, but I think we need  to.”  Kat  looked
between Eric and Frank, her expression solemn. They had all been avoiding the topic
of  conversation  since  they’d  reached  the  compound,  but  she  knew  they  had  to
address it. Since no one else seemed inclined to broach the subject, and she was the
senior officer in charge,  she  figured  it was  her  responsibility.  “Do  you  remember
anything about what happened? Did you hear something like an explosion?”
Frank shook his head. “Not that I can recall. But I had a CD in. I was working in
the med lab and I like to listen to Vivaldi when I’m doing sample analysis.”
“I didn’t hear anything either,” Eric said. “Just all at once, STELA went nuts, the
alarm claxons screeching, the monitors saying there were fires all over the ship, and
hull breaches on the cargo hold and three subdecks below it.”
Hull breaches. That sure as hell sounded like the result of an explosion to Kat.
But from the cargo hold? What did we have back there that was explosive?
Leia had been the crew’s payload specialist, charged with keeping track of the
Daedalus’ cargo. Kat had only perfunctorily surveyed the ship’s inventory sheets.
She didn’t remember seeing anything volatile or  explosive  listed.  And  Leia  would
have  told  us  if  there  had  been.  She  would  have  made  everyone  aware  of  the
danger.
Eric  ran  his  fingers  through  his  hair.  “I  tried  to  reestablish  orbit,  initiate  a
posigrade  burn  and  pull  us  out  further,  but  the  navigational  systems  wouldn’t
respond. The electrical systems were all shorting out, sparking. I keep  replaying it
over and over again in my head, but I don’t remember anything being wrong before
that—none of the readings, nothing.”
“Did Alex ever make it to the bridge?” Kat’s voice was small. Here was what she
had  really  been  dodging,  not  the  discussion  of  the  explosion,  but  of  Alex.  Just
saying his name sent a spear  of  pain  through  her  heart.  She  began  to  pick  at  her
cuticles, pushing against them with her thumbnail until she saw a thin line of blood
swell along the edge. “He…that’s where he was going when he…”
“I never saw him.” Eric shook his head. “He must have come in behind me.”
“Behind you?” Frank frowned. “That doesn’t make sense. If he was going that

way, you should have run into him.”
Eric met his gaze, a slight crimp forming between his brows. “I didn’t see him.”
“How could you have  missed  him?” Frank  said.  “That  corridor  was  the  only
way to and from the bridge. I—”
“What the hell are you saying, Frank?” Eric snapped. “I didn’t see him, okay?
Leave it alone!”
“Both of you shut up.” Kat frowned. “We got enough to deal with without the
two of you jumping each other’s shit. So just cool it already.”
“Goddamn it, I’m not jumping his shit,” Frank said, his voice sharp and angry.
“All I’m saying is—”
“Enough,  Frank!”  Kat  locked  gazes  with him, and  for  a  moment,  the  furious
intensity in his eyes frightened her. It took her back to another place, another time—a
lifetime ago. It was the way Chris would look before he hit her.
“Enough,” she said again, as much to herself as Frank. I’m different now, damn
it. I’m in charge here.
Frank  turned  away and  shrugged,  the  rage  in his  face  softening  into  subdued
submission so abruptly, Kat wondered if she had imagined it.
It’s the dream, she told herself. That dream about Chris. It’s still on my mind,
still messing with me.
She  cut  her  gaze  first  to  Eric,  then  to  her  daughter.  “And  you  watch  your
mouth.”
Eric looked abashed by her rebuke, his shoulder hunching. “Sorry.”
Jerica sat  next  to  Eric  on  the  couch,  her  legs  tucked  under  her  Indian-style,
watching them with a great deal of interest.
“I think it’s about time to go on to bed,” Kat said to her. “I want to get an early
start tomorrow, if we can, and you’ll need to go with us.”
“Okay, Mommy.” Jerica slid off the couch.
“Do you need something to help you sleep?” Frank asked. He looked sheepish,
and she realized he was trying to make amends.
She didn’t want to sleep again, or face any more disturbing dreams, but the idea
of  remaining  awake,  of  spending  the  night  through  in  the  creepy,  unfamiliar
compound with only her thoughts, her memories of Alex and her bitter  heartbreak
for company didn’t appeal to her, either. “Yes, please, Frank.”
“How about you, Eric?” Frank turned to the younger man. “A little something to
—?”
“No,”  Eric  said,  quickly,  almost  sharply.  “No,  thanks,  Frank.  I  don’t  like
needles. I’ve had enough sticking into me in my life. I’ll sleep okay.”

 
***
 
“I didn’t mean anything by that,” Frank said, walking down the hall. “I’m sorry,
Kat. I didn’t mean to get you upset.”
“It’s okay,” she replied. “I kind of fired off both barrels at you, and I shouldn’t
have.”
“Well, I  sort  of  fired  first,  so  I  had  it coming.”  He  offered  his  hand  to  her,
bridging the distance between them. “Truce?”
Kat smiled, slipping her palm against his and accepting his shake. “Truce.”
In the infirmary, Kat watched, transfixed, as he administered  the  sedative.  The
needle slid effortlessly into a small, fat, bluish-grey knot of blood vessels at the inner
delta of her elbow. It burned when Frank pulled it out and he pressed a cotton ball
against the small polka dot of blood that was forming.
“There.” He winked at her. “One nightcap, shaken not stirred. A peaceful night’s
sleep, guaranteed.”
She smiled. “Thanks. You ready for bed, pup?”
Jerica waited across the room, snooping through cabinets and drawers. She was
frightened by  needles.  “Yuh-hunh.”  She  glanced  at  Kat  and  nodded.  “Can  I  stay
with you?” Jerica twisted a lock of hair around her finger. “Just for tonight, I mean.
Not for always.”
“Sure, pup.” Kat looked at Frank. “Are you going to be okay?”
“Yeah,” he said. “As long as I don’t stop to think about anything.”
“Tell me about it.” She  hugged  him. She’d  been  so  busy  worrying about  her
own grief and pain, she’d failed to notice how exhausted he looked, how haggard
and strained, haunted in his own right.
“Thanks, Frank.” She wished she could offer more to comfort him. But hell, I
don’t even have that for myself.
He smiled and it touched his eyes. “I’ll see you in the morning, Kat.”
Chapter Five
Frank lay on his back, naked in bed, staring up into the darkness at the ceiling

and thinking about what it had been like to slice open the gook’s throat.
Xian  “Doc”  Tren  had  put  up  a  pretty  good  fight,  but  Frank  supposed  that
should’ve been expected.
All those goddamn gooks know that karate shit. 
Frank knew that karate shit, too. He had learned it, among other things, shortly
after he  had  stood  on  frost-crusted  ground  and  watched  as  his  daughter’s  small,
glossy white casket had lowered into its black pit in the earth.
Leukemia. The goddamn leukemia.
There had been no more early morning clam digs for him and Elaina. They were
replaced  by  early  morning  pills.  It  was  always  his  responsibility,  because  Elaina
wouldn’t  take  the  medicine  from  Lauren.  Every  morning  at  four  o’clock  sharp,
Frank would kiss Elaina’s forehead lightly, rousing her from her fitful sleep.
“Mornin’, punkin.”
“Oohh, Daddy, please, no, it makes me sick, I don’t want it…”
“Please, punkin. Take it for Daddy. It’s going to make you all better real soon.”
“Do you promise?”
“Cross my heart.”
“And hope to die,” Frank whispered hoarsely up at the ceiling.
On her tombstone: For a moment, an angel rested here.
He made sure  all of  her  favorite  stuffed  toys  were  in the  casket  with her.  He
remembered a world history class from his undergraduate years in college, where he
had  studied  how  Egyptian pharaohs  were  buried  with all of  their favorite  worldly
possessions,  including  servants  and  pets.  Frank  had  doubted  that  trying  to  slip
Kit-Kat, El’s fat grey tabby cat into the coffin would go over particularly smooth,
and so he’d settled on her powder blue Puffalump hippopotamus, the  Paddington
Bear she’d had since she was three days old, and her Crystal Princess Barbie doll.
After the funeral and wake, when he and Lauren were left alone in the split-level
Cape Cod on the  beach  with three  honey-baked  hams  and  God  alone  knew how
many consolatory casseroles, he had sat in his bathroom on  the  toilet, wishing he
hadn’t thrown his  pistol  into  the  Hudson  River.  He  would  have  wrapped  his  lips
around the barrel and pulled the trigger.
Three weeks later, he had met “Colonel” David McDonald at a cocktail party in
East  Windsor.  It  had  been  some  kind  of  fundraiser  for  one  of  Lauren’s  stuffy
politician friends.  An  unsuccessful  candidate  in two  presidential elections  himself,
McDonald  was  in  attendance,  offering  his  personal  backing  and  that  of  his
independent militant party, Legion.
And, of course, his financial backing. David McDonald was one of the richest

men  in  the  world,  a  self-made  billionaire  who  had  grown  disgruntled  with  the
mechanisms of American politics and wanted to see the country reshaped into what
he called a “true democracy”.
Frank had spent more than four hours that night discussing this concept with the
good Colonel. Within a month, he was a card-carrying member of the New England
Militia branch  of  Legion.  He’d  been  so  desperate  for  an  escape  from  his  grief,
longing for something that felt like family to him. Christ knew that he hadn’t enjoyed
that with Lauren in ages, long before Elaina’s illness.
He had abandoned  his  job,  his  house,  even  his  wife, and  moved  to  Legion’s
compound in rural New Hampshire. Where, of course, he’d met Reba Crowe.
Reba had taught Frank his karate shit. And his computer shit. And his explosives
and weapons shit.
He guessed that if anyone in the world besides his daughter could have been his
soul mate and friend, it was Reba Crowe. And man, could she  fuck.  Christ  knew
that he hadn’t enjoyed that with Lauren in ages, either.
Frank had been too noisy coming into the tech lab aboard the Daedalus. Reba
would have been pissed at him, told him he had to be more careful.
Doc had heard  him, glanced  over  his  shoulder  and  seen  the  butterfly  knife in
Frank’s hand. “Franklin…?” he’d asked, puzzled.
Frank had gone after Doc first because he knew too much. If he’d survived, he
would  have  been  able  to  get  all  of  the  electrical  and  computer  systems  up  and
running at the lunar compound—which Frank didn’t need—and he wouldn’t have let
anyone else access the systems in the meantime—which Frank did need.
That,  and  Doc  knew  the  karate  shit,  which  made  him  dangerous.  He  was  a
first-degree  black-belt  in  hapkido,  as  a  matter  of  fact.  Too  bad  Frank  was
third-degree.
Doc  had  reached  forward  and  hit  the  bridge  alarm,  and  Frank  had  sprang
forward in swift, sudden action. He’d brought the knife around and down, severing
Doc’s index finger neatly.
Doc  shrieked  and  danced  back  clumsily, clutching his  hand  to  his  chest  and
watching in nearly comedic horror as blood spurted from the stump of his knuckle.
Frank had brushed Doc’s finger aside and shut off the alarm.
“Whu…what are you doing, Franklin?” Doc had wheezed at him, backing away,
trying to get to the door. “Eric’s on the bridge… He will have seen the alarm. He’ll
be here…any minute.”
“Good,” Frank had replied. “It’ll be a pleasure to slice his fucking throat open,
too.”

He’d delivered a quick, hard roundhouse kick to the side of Doc’s  face.  Doc
had swung his arm up, blocking the  blow,  sending  blood  from  his  severed  finger
spraying  across  Frank’s  cheek.  Frank  had  danced  back,  ducking  around  the
countering punch Doc launched at him, and the fracas had been on.
Doc had been one tough little gook. Even with his wounded hand, he’d landed
some solid blows, his fists swinging, his feet kicking out as he struggled to defend
himself. Frank had been breathing hard; it had felt like his heart had been going to
jackhammer its way right through his solar plexus. He was exhilarated, flying on  a
rush of adrenaline. Again and  again he  swung  the  knife, ripping  into  Doc’s  flesh,
carving him open, sending blood splattering around the lab.
Doc had rushed unexpectedly at Frank. He’d slammed Frank backwards into a
table, nearly knocking both the wind and the kidneys out of him. Frank had felt Doc’
s bloody hand clawing for his wrist, the knife, and he’d brought his fist up, punching
Doc’s nose. He’d heard the moist, distinctive crunch as the bone had broken. Doc
staggered away, bringing his good hand up to his face, yowling in pain.
Frank  had  caught  him  easily,  forcing  the  other  man  into  a  tight,  choking
headlock. Doc had struggled ferociously against him, even as Frank forced the open
blade of the butterfly knife under his chin and jerked it swiftly, deftly, opening  his
carotid artery.
Doc’s blood had splashed across Frank’s forearm in powerful, pulsating spurts.
It had been incredibly hot against his skin. Frank had shoved Doc and watched him
man  flounder  away.  He’d  heard  Doc’s  breath  wheezing  through  his  punctured
windpipe.
Doc’s knees had folded clumsily, and he’d pitched face-down on the floor. A
large pool of deep crimson had spread rapidly around his head.
Frank had wiped the knife blade clean on the front of his blood-stained shirt. He’
d folded the knife closed with a quick toss of his wrist. He’d tucked it in his pants
pocket and unbuttoned his shirt.
He’d  waited patiently for  Eric  Nagel,  Everybody’s-Fucking-All-American,  but
after about ten minutes he realized the pilot wasn’t going to answer the alarm. He’d
been both disappointed and relieved at this; disappointed because he’d be lying if he
said he hadn’t wanted to carve open the arrogant pretty boy since the  moment  of
their introduction,  and  relieved because  at  that  time,  he’d  needed  Eric  to  fly  the
escape shuttle. Alex Horne was a bigger problem in the overall scheme of things than
Eric,  and  thus,  he  was  number  two  on  Frank’s  list  of  things  to  do  before  the
Daedalus blew up. But if he killed Alex and Eric, that would have left Frank alone
with Kat, Leia and Jerica. Neither woman could fly the shuttle. He knew how to, but

they didn’t  realize this—and  it  would  have  raised  a  world  of  suspicions  had  he
revealed it to them.
When Frank had finished killing Doc, he’d pulled his  shirt  off  and  dropped  it
unceremoniously across the gook’s body. He’d glanced at his watch. He had only
seven minutes left before the first round of detonations, but  it had  been  plenty  of
time to throw on a fresh shirt from his quarters.
He’d locked the tech lab behind him and headed for his room. His gait had been
light and quick.
He’d run into Leia as he’d left his room after changing. She had been stomping
toward the rec room, her pretty red ringlets streaming along behind her, her bright
hazel eyes flashing.
“Hey, Leia,” Frank had said, and he was still pretty rueful that he’d never had the
chance to fuck her. She’d survived the crash, even though her safety  harness  had
broken loose of its moorings during the impact, and she’d been hurtled across the
shuttle. Her body had been battered and broken, but she’d been alive, hiccupping
for breath, squirming feebly on the floor. “Everything okay?”
“Just beautiful,” she’d replied, not even slowing her pace down for a moment.
“Be even better if Eric Nagel would drop off the fucking face of the earth.”
Frank had come to before anyone else aboard the shuttle and found Leia on the
floor, sprawled and bleeding. He’d limped over to her and looked down for a long
moment,  watching  with  detached,  aloof  interest  as  she’d  struggled  to  breathe,
gulping at him, opening and closing her mouth like a fish caught out of water.
“You and Eric have a lovers’ spat, huh?” he’d asked her aboard the Daedalus,
amused.
He’d broken her neck aboard the escape shuttle, genuflecting beside her broken
body and cupping  her  face  between  his  hands.  She’d  blinked up  at  him, uttering
quiet, whimpering, pleading sounds and he’d smiled at her.
“Hush  now.”  He’d  wrenched  her  head,  twisting  her  neck  until  the  bones
anchoring her skull to her spine snapped and  her  soft,  snuffling mewls had  faded
abruptly to silence. “Hush.”
Aboard the Daedalus, when he’d teased her good-naturedly about Eric, she’d
shot him a blazing look, her nostrils flaring out and her eyes sharp and mean, and
then she’d disappeared into the rec room without offering him another word. Her tits
had been bouncing provocatively under her blouse, and he’d watched the way the
fabric of her khaki slacks hugged the gently undulating curves of her ass.
She’d given him a hard-on with that baleful look.
Just thinking about her now, in his bunk at the complex on X-1226, turned him

on.  He  reached  down,  his  hand  sliding  between  his  legs,  and  folded  his  fingers
around his hardening shaft. He began to stroke himself, remembering Leia’s tits and
ass, the soft, crunching sound as her neck had broken.
He imagined that he might have been able to fuck  her  eventually, if he’d  been
able to stay with the Daedalus crew for awhile. But at that time, Leia was obviously
head over perky little ass for Eric.
Just  like  Kat,  although  Frank  figured  Kathryn  Emmente  was  too  full  of
self-righteous  indignation  and  petty  personal  insecurities  to  ever  admit  that  she
wanted Nagel.
Uptight  bitch,  he thought.  His  hand  moved  faster,  his  rhythm  growing  more
fervent. Her cunt’s probably so  tight,  she’d  turn  your  dick  to  diamonds  fucking
her.
He smiled, considering this, imagining burying his cock between Kat’s prudish
thighs and finding out for himself if the ice queen indeed ran cold to the core. He
closed  his  eyes  as  he  came,  the  hot,  wet  rush  of  his  release  spattering  suddenly
against his belly.
Chapter Six
“Mommy?” Jerica whispered.
The  room  was  dark,  and  they  were  snuggled  under  the  covers,  side  by  side.
Jerica had wriggled up close to Kat’s back, her face near her mother’s shoulder.
“Yeah, pup?” Kat felt warm and sleepy from  the  sedative.  She’d  almost  been
asleep.
“I’m sorry Alex is dead. I know you loved him a lot.”
“Yes,” Kat said quietly. “Yes, I did.”
Jerica’s  small  fingers  crept  along  her  side,  tickling.  Kat  reached  down  and
squeezed them affectionately.
“It wasn’t your fault.”
“Thanks,  pup,”  Kat  murmured.  You’re  wrong  but  thanks  anyway  for  the
sentiment.
The drug lulled her to sleep, with Jerica snuggled up beside her. She’d hoped the
drugs would keep her from dreaming, but the damn things came around anyway.

She dreamed they were back on the shuttle, at the crash site in the forest. She
could  hear  the  rain  dripping  delicately  down  through  the  leaves  and  branches
overhead. She could hear the soft, lulling creaks and groans of the battered shuttle.
She could hear her own rasping, whistling breathing.
In the dream, Leia wasn’t dead yet. Her body was still torqued crazily, horribly
broken, but she was somehow still alive. Kat could hear her small, whimpering sobs.
“Please…” the dream Leia pleaded. “Please…!”
 
***
 
Kat jerked awake, twisting so sharply that the muscles in her right calf cramped
into a knot.
“Shit!”  she  hissed,  pulling her  leg up  to  her  chest  and  trying  to  massage  the
muscles loose.
The cramp subsided and she relaxed. She rolled over onto her belly and took her
watch off the nightstand. She brought it up to her face, but couldn’t make out the
time. The crystal had cracked during the crash, and rain water had gotten inside the
face. Now there was a thick film of moisture bubbles obscuring the glass.
She put it down and sighed.
“Mommy…?”  Jerica  whispered  from  beside  her.  She  was  half-asleep,
bewildered and scared.
“It’s okay, pup.” Kat rolled over and stroked Jerica’s satiny curls until the little
girl slept again.
Kat closed her eyes and imagined Leia, laying sprawled and twisted at the back
end of the shuttle, the rain running into her open  eyes,  filling and  overflowing like
tears.  Just  a  dream,  she  thought,  even  though  Leia’s  voice  replayed  in her  mind
again,  a  hitching,  hiccupping  plea  that  dissolved,  ripping  upward  into  a  terrified
scream.
She opened her eyes and stared up at the ceiling. Just a dream, she told herself.
Leia wasn’t alive  after  the  shuttle  hit.  She  couldn’t  have  been.  Who  would  she
have been pleading with? Who would have made her scream?
  
***
 
Kat dreamed again, this time about Alex.
In the  dream,  they  weren’t  doing  anything exciting or  extravagant.  They  were
sitting together on the sofa in his quarters aboard the Daedalus.

He was  holding her  hand.  His  palm was  warm  against  her  knuckles,  and  his
fingers were wrapped around hers, comfortable, familiar.
She could smell his cologne faintly. He never bought expensive cologne. It was
just some anonymous kind he’d buy for himself, a fragrance that she associated with
no one else but him.
He looked so handsome.
They were watching TV, hand in hand. One of Alex’s favorites: Jimmy Stewart,
It’s A Wonderful Life.
Kat looked at Alex instead of the movie. She watched the way the warm lights
from the TV screen lit across his face and shined in his soft grey eyes.
People often thought he was Jerica’s father. His hair was a darker shade of gold,
and his eyes were not quite as blue, but there was still a remarkable resemblance.
In the dream, Alex glanced at her. He cocked one eyebrow, smiling at her. She
watched the dimple in his left cheek crimp.
“What?” he said, his fingers tightening slightly against hers.
“Nothing,” she said, savoring the deep, resonant tenor of his voice.  “I  just…I
had this really awful nightmare where the Daedalus crashed and you were dead.”
Alex laughed. “That was sweet of you.”
She leaned over and rested the side of her face against  his  arm.  She  felt the  hard
curve of his biceps through the material. “It was the worst dream I’ve ever had.”
Alex slipped his arm around her, hugging her. “Do I look dead to you?”
 
***
 
“No,” Kat said, and when she spoke the word aloud, she woke herself up.
The room was still dark. Kat blinked up at the ceiling.
A dream. It was just another goddamn dream. 
She began to weep silently, with almost no tears.
Chapter Seven
Jerica was  already awake and  gone  by  the  time  Kat  woke  the  next  morning.
Sunlight was streaming in through a small window cut into the cinder block wall. It

was warm and gloriously bright.
Kat stretched her arms and legs out until her feet hung over the end of the bed.
She rubbed the sleep out of her eyes and sat up.
She  found  Jerica  in  the  kitchen.  She  was,  much  to  Kat’s  surprise,  fixing
breakfast with Frank.
“Good morning,” Frank said to her.
“Good morning.” Kat tucked her unruly hair back behind her ears. “Any word
yet from the platform?”
Frank shook his head, his bright expression faltering slightly.
They had issued their distress signal, but as of bedtime the night before,  there
had  been  no  response  from  the  stellar  platform.  Though  this  seemed  odd  and
worrisome to all of them, none had yet been willing to admit that something might be
wrong.
“There must be something off with the receiver here,” he  said.  “They  have  to
have heard us by now. I’ll check it this morning. Maybe it’s not set up right.” He
nodded, as if to convince himself that this was  the  most  likely scenario,  and  then
quickly  changed  the  subject,  lest  he  persuade  himself  otherwise.  “How’d  you
sleep?”
“Fine.”  Coffee  was  brewing,  and  it smelled  positively  wonderful.  Kat  looked
around stupidly for a mug.
“Second cabinet on your left.” Frank pointed helpfully. “No, the other left.”
Kat laughed,  and  found  a  cup.  “I  am  desperate  for  caffeine.  I  feel like I  just
crawled out of cryostasis or something.” She took a sip of coffee and burned her
lip. “Is Eric up yet?”
“He’s been up for awhile…if he got any sleep at all,” Frank said. “I think there’s
something wrong, maybe with his leg. Something he’s not telling us.”
“He  can’t  do  anything  about  it  if  there  is,”  Jerica  said.  “There  aren’t  any
small-point cybermechanical tools here. He can’t even get inside it.”
Kat  tried  to  imagine  Eric  somehow  unscrewing  part  of  his  seemingly
normal-looking leg, and removing it like you might a hat or pair of gloves. She tried
to  imagine  what  it  would  look  like  inside:  complex  circuitry  and  stainless  steel
mechanisms  moving  in  graceful  tandem  with  long  muscles  and  synthesized
ligaments, tendons  and  joint hinges.  She  thought  about  all  of  that  mixed  in  with
blood and greasy mechanical lubricants and it made her feel a little green.
Eric walked in. His motions were slow and stiff, and he looked tired, older than
his rightful years. There were heavy shadows under his eyes.
“Eric!” Jerica hopped down from the cabinet and ran toward him.

“You got breakfast done yet?” He placed his hand on top of her head, tousling
her hair.
“Almost,” she replied, shrugging out from under him and then slipping her hand
through his.
“How are you feeling?” Kat asked.
“I hurt in places I didn’t even know I had.” He laughed. “Have we heard back
from the platform?”
“Not  yet.”  Kat  shook  her  head.  “Frank’s  going  to  check  the  receiver  this
morning to make sure it’s running okay. Did you get much sleep?”
“Enough.”  Eric  reached  down  and  gently  squeezed  the  tip  of  Jerica’s  nose
between his forefinger and thumb, making her  squeal  with laughter as  she  ducked
away from him. “Frank, you got any more of that aspirin in the infirmary?”
“Yeah,” Frank said. “If you’re real sore, there’s some narcotics. They’ll work a
lot more—”
“Thanks,  but  I  don’t  need  anything  like  that,”  Eric  interrupted.  “Just  some
aspirin, please.”
“I can show you where it is.” Jerica’s hair was  resting  over  her  shoulder  in a
golden  sheaf,  and  she  flipped  it  back  with  a  quick  toss  of  her  head.  It  was  a
frightfully coy gesture; Kat could imagine a sixteen-year-old Jerica  doing  the  same
thing, batting her long eyelashes flirtatiously, and  having anything she  ever  wanted
handed to her.
Eric was a good sport and let Jerica drag him out of the commissary and down
the hall. Kat  heard  a  soft,  unfamiliar hissing  sound  when  Eric  walked  away.  She
realized it was the sound of the hydraulic lifts in his knee and heel. She didn’t recall
ever having heard it before.
“Did I just say something wrong?” Frank asked, his brow arched slightly.
“No.”  Kat  considered  leaving  it  at  this,  but  Frank  continued  looking  at  her,
obviously  expecting  something  more.  “It’s  just…well, you  couldn’t  have  known.
Eric used to…use morphine. After his accident. He was in so much pain, and there
wasn’t a lot…”
“Jesus, here goes my foot in my mouth,” Frank said.
“He’s been clean for awhile now. It’s been so hard for  him…I can’t  imagine.
First his leg, and then he loses his career with the Corps, and then the drugs…”
“Even with the cyborg leg, they wouldn’t let him pilot Sovereigns again,” Frank
remarked. “I remember reading about it when it happened. Maneuvers  training out
around Saturn. Wasn’t there something wrong with his navigational system?”
“Something.” Kat shrugged. “I don’t think I’ve ever  heard  him talk too  much

about it.”
Except to Jerica. 
“Do you think he should stay behind today? Keep tabs on Jerica?”
Kat shook her head. “No, Eric says he’s okay. He wouldn’t lie to me. And we’ll
need his help. Jerica’s, too. She’ll have to stay in the HUM-V and use the com links
and scanners to tell us how to get to the box.”
“She can do that?” Frank looked surprised. It was a common enough reaction.
Jerica tested on the genius level as  far  as  I.Q.  While most  kids  her  age  struggled
through  simple  multiplication  and  division  tables,  Jerica  solved  quantum  physics
equations for fun.
Kat smiled. “Sure. She can do all sorts of stuff. She’s a smart kid. Gets it from
her mom.”
 
***
 
“Do you think this place will ever be like Earth?” Jerica asked as they bounced
along in the HUM-V. “Full of people and cities and stuff?”
“Eventually,” Eric said. “You’ll probably be around to see it.”
As a future terra-farming colony, X-1226 had an artificial atmosphere designed to
make its surface optimal for harboring life. The little moon, once a desolate chunk of
rock hovering between the outermost edge of an asteroid belt in Jupiter’s  massive
gravitational field, was  now  a  sub-tropical  paradise,  replete  with weather patterns,
precipitation and lush, dense vegetation. This was the result of more than ten years
of deliberate, concentrated cultivation. Like a cake baking in a temperamental oven,
X-1226 had been monitored day in and day out, by numerous computers both at the
nearby stellar platform and on earth, and scientists had insured that the right amount
of elements and gases were maintained. There was more science to it than Kat had
ever understood. Playing God is what Alex had always called it.
The HUM-V grazed a tree and jostled over a fallen log.  The  equipment  in the
back hatch slid precariously.
“What have you got up on screen, Jerica?” Kat asked.
“We’ve come a little more than ten miles,” Jerica said.  “We  won’t  be  able  to
keep going much further. It gets really rough up ahead.”
Eric shifted the HUM-V into a lower gear, and it growled as it clambered over
more fallen trees and large, rocky knolls.
“The box should be just up ahead.” Jerica frowned. “There’s something there.
Something big, but not part of the terrain.”

“It’s got to be part of the ship,” Kat said. “Something that  didn’t  burn  in the
atmosphere.”
“Stop, Eric!” Jerica leaned forward excitedly. “Stop here.”
The little HUM-V rumbled to a halt. Kat swung her door open and hopped out.
The grass was tall, almost to her knees. She could hear insects buzzing and chirping,
transplanted from Earth. “Where, Jerica?”
“Over there, past the trees.”
Eric and Frank climbed out of the vehicle, too.
“Wait for me!” Jerica opened her door and swung her legs around.
“No, pup, you stay there.” Kat looked back at her daughter.
“But, Mommy—”
“Jerica, I said stay in the HUM-V.”
Jerica huffed and puffed, but stayed put.
Kat, Eric and Frank made their way through the grass. It whispered against their
pant legs and folded under their boots. They carefully worked through the trees and
thick foliage until they reached a spot that had been gouged through the woods.
The trees lay knocked aside,  snapped  in two  like toothpicks.  Some  had  been
burned. The earth was churned up as if cleaved by an enormous plow. There was a
pungent, scorched stink in the air.
A towering metal cone laying on its side in the trench. It had been seared black.
It was as wide as at least four HUM-Vs and nearly as tall as the outer wall of  the
colony compound.
A cable sprouted from the top. It draped across the ground before coming to a
burned stump a few feet away from them.
“What is it, Mom?” Jerica whispered in Kat’s headset.
“It’s part of the tether,” Kat replied quietly. “The gravitational tether.”
“The black box is inside it,” Eric  said.  “We’ll need  the  equipment  out  of  the
truck to get to it.”
Kat walked toward the cone. She stared at it, transfixed.
How many times did I see this swing slowly past the window in my quarters?
Watching it after Alex and I made love…we always just took it for granted… 
She  remembered  her  first  space  mission.  Nothing  had  prepared  her  for  the
strange, alien gravity of the oscillating tether. She had been sick  from  the  moment
she’d come out of cryostasis. She had eventually gotten used to  it,  and  anymore,
Kat would find herself feeling nauseous on  Earth,  where the  gravitational pull was
stronger, more insistent.
“You okay, Kat?” Eric’s voice, low and kind in her earphone.

“Yeah, I’m fine. I was just thinking…”
“Well, you know better than that,” he told her, and she laughed.
“Just hurry up and get the equipment we need,” she said. “I want to get this over
with. The sooner the better.”
 
***
 
They used industrial cutting lasers to strip the thick metal sheets from the hide of
the tether  cone.  Smoke  came  rolling out  in  dense  black  clouds,  forcing  them  all
back, choking and sputtering. Frank sprayed the inside down with a fire extinguisher.
The smoke cleared.
“You think it’s safe to send the probe in?” he asked Kat.
“Hope so,” she said. “It’s the only one the compound had. Let’s get this metal
out of the way.”
She  noticed  Eric  leaning heavily against  a  tree  after  dragging a  large  piece  of
metal back.  He  had  his  left leg folded  slightly, resting  most  of  his  weight  on  his
opposite hip.
“Eric, are you okay?” The metal she was pulling was still warm, and she put it
down. She rubbed her hands against her pant legs.
He looked over. “Yeah. I just…I’m still sore from the crash.”
“I’m going  to  deploy  the  probe.”  Frank  set  the  small  device  in  front  of  the
opening they’d cut. “It’s already set to hone in on the black box’s locator signal?”
“Yeah,” Kat said. “Let it go. It should be okay. Shouldn’t take more than five,
ten minutes.”
The probe scooted forward on its little wheels.  It  disappeared  inside  the  dark
opening.
The  sun  glared  down  on  them.  It  was  a  hot  afternoon,  like  summertime.  Kat
noticed, much to her disgust, that her armpits and back felt slippery and damp with
sweat. She rubbed her forehead with the back of her wrist.
Eric had  sat  down  in the  cool  shade  beneath  a  tree  and  Kat  joined  him.  She
smiled at  him, but  his  eyes  were  closed,  so  she  settled  for  tilting her  head  back,
feeling her sweat-dampened hair push against the back of her neck.
“Mommy, it’s hot,” Jerica whined quietly into the headset.
“I know, pup,” Kat said. “It should only be a few minutes.”
“Can I come where you are?”
“No, stay in the HUM-V.”
“Eric, will you come  sit  with me?” Jerica  pleaded.  “I  don’t  like it here  all by

myself. I’m scared.”
“Jerica, stop being silly,” Kat growled, feeling steamy, tired and irritable.
“I’m not, Mom…”
“Jerica—” Kat began, snapping now.
“It’s  okay,  Kat,”  Eric  said.  “Yeah,  Jerica.  Hang on  a  sec.  I’ll be  right  there,
okay?”
“Okay,” Jerica mumbled in a pouty, baby voice.
“She’s fine, Eric.”
“I know.” He rose to his feet.
Kat heard it again this time, distinctly, that quiet, ominous hydraulic whisper from
the hinges in his  leg. She  opened  her  eyes  in time to  see  Eric  supporting  himself
heavily against the tree trunk, his brows knitted in unmistakable pain.
“Eric,” she said, concerned. She touched his left leg and felt the smooth curve
of muscle just above his knee. It felt so real.
“It’s okay.” He  misunderstood  the  note  of  worry  in her  voice  and  shook  his
head. “This is scary for her. I don’t mind.”
He walked back through the grass, limping.
Kat looked  over  at  Frank.  He  was  standing  under  another  tree,  leaning  back
against it. He watched Eric walk away, and she wondered if he noticed the limp as
well.
Chapter Eight
Eric went straight to his room after they’d returned from retrieving the Daedalus
’ black box. Jerica had wanted him to play with her, to send the little probe roving
through the air ducts. She had looked puzzled and hurt when he’d told her no.
He saw the guarded way Kat watched him as he went.
She wasn’t a stupid woman, and he figured by now  she  knew something  was
wrong. She looked concerned, and he thought she would follow  him, corner  him,
force him to tell her the truth.
And  she  could.  He  would  do  anything  Kat  asked  him  to,  anything  for  her.
Anything.
But she hadn’t asked.

And he hadn’t volunteered to tell.
He stretched out on his bed and touched his leg, running his fingers  along  his
outer thigh. It was hurting. Not too badly with no weight on it,  but  he  knew if he
started walking around again, it would probably become unbearable.
He closed his eyes and fell asleep. He hadn’t meant to, but all it had taken were a
few brief moments of darkness and quiet for his mind to fade. When he came to, he
had no idea how much time had passed. He didn’t know anything at all except he
was hot, his body ablaze and aching with fever.
Eric struggled to his feet and limped over to the sink. His stomach was queasy,
doing lazy little somersaults, and his mind felt dazed. He splashed cold water on his
face, and then ran his hands through  his  hair, pushing  it back.  The  nausea  struck
again, worse than ever. Eric stumbled into the bathroom and knelt in the dark in front
of the toilet. He could feel the hard tiles pressing, unyielding, against his knees.
He  vomited.  His  stomach  wrenched  tightly,  heaving.  He  spat  violently,  and
fumbled  for  the  button  to  flush  the  toilet. He  was  trembling, shaking.  He  heaved
again, but there was nothing to come up, and his stomach closed into an agonizing
knot. He cried out miserably.
He flushed the toilet and slumped back against the wall.
What’s happening to me? What’s wrong with my leg? 
But he knew. The only thing that could be wrong, that could make him feel so
rotten, hurt so bad.
He was being poisoned.
Slowly,  but  certainly.  The  impact  from  the  shuttle  console  falling  onto  the
cyborganic  limb had  somehow  damaged  the  conduits  inside  that  kept  lubrication
flowing to the lift hinges and pistons and metal works. He didn’t think he could fix it
by himself, even if he could find the tools to get in to see if his hunch was correct.
He needed Doc.
And Doc was dead.
The  lubricants  were  leaking  throughout  the  leg,  getting  into  his  bloodstream,
making him sick. He imagined that eventually enough would leak out to kill him.
Kat knew something was up, but he was afraid to tell her, of what she would say,
what  it  would  do  to  her.  She’d  gone  through  so  much  already.  And  she  was
counting on him now.
He closed his eyes and tried to imagine what it would feel like to have Kat there
in  the  dark  bathroom  with  him,  placing  her  impossibly  cool  hands  on  his  face,
holding him, comforting.
“Eric?”

Eric blinked, opened his eyes. He had  imagined hearing Doc’s  soft  voice,  his
tone gentle.
And now he imagined seeing Doc, somehow alive and standing in the bathroom
doorway, a silhouette against the backdrop of light from his chamber.
“Xian,” Eric whispered, holding out his hand, his fingers trembling as he reached
for his friend. “Doc…help me…”
“It’s your leg, isn’t it?” Doc walked toward him. He knelt beside Eric, draping
his hands against Eric’s cyborganic leg. Imagined or  not,  Doc  felt real enough  to
Eric. He looked real, too. He wore a Yankees baseball hat turned around backwards
on his head, just like he had by fond habit. His parents were Vietnamese, but Xian
had been born in New York—and was damn proud of it.
“Yes.” Eric nodded. “Yes, please, Xian, it…it hurts…”
“We’ll fix it.” Doc smiled at him kindly.
“Please…” Eric said to him.
“Shhh…” Doc whispered, soothingly, putting his finger over Eric’s lips. “Don’t
be scared, Eric.”
Doc held a syringe. Eric could see the warm light from the bedroom wink off the
needle. He cowered, but Doc caught his shoulder.
“It’s okay.” Doc leaned forward. Eric could see his face now, and the canvas
brim of the cap. Doc was smiling at him. “This will make you feel better.”
“No.” Eric tried to pull away.
Doc unbuttoned the cuff of Eric’s sleeve and began to push the material back
toward his elbow.
“No,” Eric said again. “Xian, don’t—”
Doc reached over and gripped Eric’s left knee, his fingers pinching down hard.
The pain was immeasurable. Eric cried out. He tried to shove Doc’s hand away from
his leg. His head rolled back, hitting the wall.
His brain swam from the pain. It felt like a wave broke gently across his mind
and began to pull him back in its undertow. Semiconscious, he slumped sideways.
Doc seized him by his hair and held the needle up in front of his face. The sliver of
metal seemed to blaze with reflected light.
“Do you want it?” Doc’s fist twisted, pulling harder, forcing Eric’s head back.
“Do you? Is this what you want?”
“No!” Eric knew what was in the hypodermic, and he knew that he did want it.
He wanted it desperately. His leg was on fire.
The needle slipped out of his  line of  sight  and  suddenly  Doc’s  hand  crushed
against his biomechanical leg again. Eric screamed in pain.

“You know you want it,” Doc told him. “Say it. Say it, Eric. It will make the pain
go away.”
Eric stared at the syringe full of morphine. It was lustrous, beautiful.
“Do you want it?” Doc whispered in his ear, his breath hot against the side of
Eric’s throat. “Tell me, Eric. Say it.”
“Yes.” Eric nodded. “Yes, yes, I want it…”
He watched as Doc jerked something from his pocket, a strip of rubber tubing.
He tied this  around  Eric’s  arm,  and  Eric  watched,  semi-lucid,  as  Doc  tapped  his
fingertips against the inside of Eric’s elbow. It’s like he knows what he’s doing, Eric
thought, dazed. How do you know about this, Xian?
Doc slid the needle into his arm. It burned when he pulled it back. Eric felt the
morphine rush through his body and slam into his brain. He moaned. His eyes rolled
back and fluttered closed. He could feel Doc letting him go, easing him sideways,
laying him against the floor.
The morphine was warm and kind and good.
“That’s it.” Doc chuckled quietly. “Take it, boy. Take your medicine.”
You’re not  Doc,  Eric tried  to  say,  but  it had  been  so  long  since  he’d  had  a
morphine  rush  and  it  felt  so  good.  His  body  had  been  starved  for  the  needle,
emaciated without the drug.
 
***
 
When he finally came back around, he was lying in his bed again.
Again? Eric thought. Or still?
He groaned and rolled onto his side. His leg ached vaguely, like a pulled muscle,
but he wasn’t in debilitating misery, like he had been when they’d gotten back to the
compound. He straightened his leg out carefully, expecting pain, but again there was
nothing serious.
He was incredibly thirsty. His mouth was dry and tasted foul, like he’d eaten a
shit sundae or something before going out for the count. He sat up, swinging his legs
around until his boots hit the floor. His head swam momentarily.
He ran his hand through his hair and rubbed the back of his neck. He was still
pretty sore from the crash landing in the shuttle, but felt pretty good other than that.
He remembered he had felt wretched after they’d retrieved the Daedalus’ black box.
Must have been the heat, he thought. Didn’t Jerica say it was close to ninety
degrees out there?
He glanced over at the bathroom door. It was open, a black hole looking out at

him.  The  dream  about  Doc  was  still  very  much  fresh  in  his  mind.  It  was  a
dream…wasn’t it?
Eric glanced  down  at  his  arms,  but  both  of  the  sleeves  of  his  jumpsuit  were
cuffed neatly at his wrists.
He dreamed about shooting up a lot. He didn’t seem able to stop himself in his
dreams. He had hated being a morphine junkie, but he had liked how it made  him
feel. It had helped him forget about the thing he had become because of his leg. Half
a man. I am half a man.
He walked over to the sink and looked in the mirror. Once upon a time, he had
been the best pilot in the Stellar Corps. He’d flown Sovereign fighter craft. It  had
been the greatest thrill he’d ever known.
Morphine wasn’t as good a high, but it had served its purpose.
He turned on the cold water and cupped his hands  under  the  stream,  slurping
greedily. It only seemed to make him more thirsty, so he abandoned his room for the
kitchen. Here, he filled the largest cup he could find with water and stood over the
sink, gulping it down. It dribbled down his chin and he wiped at it with the back of
his hand.
“Thirsty?”
Startled, he looked over his shoulder just as Kat walked in, still looking at him in
that cautious, concerned way.
“Yeah.” He laughed. “I was parched.”
“Are you feeling better?”
“I feel fine,” he said. “Had to take a good, long nap. I think the heat got to me.”
She smiled at him. Even when she looked exhausted, like she did now, he found
her lovely.
She  came  over  and  stood  close  to  him.  “You’d  tell  me,  wouldn’t  you?  If
something was wrong, I mean.”
“Yes,” he lied. He touched her hair, ran his fingers along the curve of her cheek.
She was beautiful, but her face was cast in a shadow of sorrow that broke his heart.
I can’t, Kat. You’ve already been through too much.
She  turned  her  face  toward  his  palm,  the  corners  of  her  mouth  lifting  into  a
fragile, nearly imperceptible smile. “I don’t think I can do this.”
“Do what?”
“Trying to act like…I don’t know,” she said. “I keep pushing it away.  I  keep
thinking this is all some terrible dream, and any moment now, I’ll wake up.”
She  leaned  forward,  resting  her  cheek  against  his  chest.  He  slipped  his  arm
around her narrow waist. He liked feeling her body close to his, feeling her dim heat

and the firm pressure of her breasts against his sternum.
“I keep dreaming about Alex,” Kat murmured.
“I know.” He could smell the faint, clean scent of her hair. “I wish I could take it
back for you, Kat.”
“I don’t even miss him yet,” she said softly. “I don’t think I really know he’s
dead. I’m afraid to see the tracks from the Daedalus. I think it will hit me then, that
this is real. He’s really gone, and I…”
Her voice broke off. She had her head down, and he couldn’t see her face, but
he felt her shoulders tremble against him and knew she was crying.
“Kat,” he said, holding her close. He touched her soft, blonde hair.
“I can’t do this.” It was the first time in a long time he’d seen her near anything
resembling a breaking point, when she let her cool, controlling façade crumble. This
sudden and uncharacteristic frailty, the child-like fear and anguish in her voice pained
him. “I can’t…!”
“Yes, you can.” She looked up at him, her eyes red-rimmed and tear-filled. He
watched as one fat tear rolled slowly down her  cheek.  He  wiped  it away with his
thumb. “We all can.”
She  leaned  forward,  rising on  the  tips  of  her  toes.  She  kissed  him,  her  full,
closed  lips  pressed  against  his  briefly, like a  dream,  and  her  hand  came  up  and
caressed the side of his face.
And  then  she  was  gone,  pulling  away  from  him,  leaving  him  startled  and
dumbfounded.
She wiped her eyes daintily with her fingers, the way a woman will when she is
trying to save her mascara from smearing. “I don’t know what I would’ve done if
something’d happened to you, too, Eric.” She sniffled and laughed, a quick, shrill
sound. “You’re always taking care of me, aren’t you?”
“Well, you’re always running around  doing  stupid  shit,”  he  said,  making  her
laugh. He wanted to tell her that he didn’t mind doing  whatever he  could  for  her.
More than a member of the crew, and more than just a friend, over the years, Kat
had made Eric feel like he mattered again somehow, like he was part of her family.
After he’d lost his leg…after the media circus surrounding him had died down,
he’d  been  left with nothing.  The  people  he’d  called  friends  before  the  crash  had
seemed different to him, distant somehow, and even his family had handled him with
kid gloves. Everything had changed and he had felt so alone, a part of nothing. The
morphine had been an  escape  from  that  isolation.  He  probably  never  would  have
stayed clean for as long as he had if it hadn’t been for Kat and Jerica, their faith in
him. Their love, he thought. You’ve taken care of me more than you’ll ever know,

Kat. And that’s why I can’t tell you about my leg.
“Hey, Kat.” Frank’s voice, sounding hollow and alien, came over the compound
’s intercom system, startling them. “I think Jerica’s got this drive hooked up to the
main computer here. We should be able to access the Daedalus’ records now.”
“I’m coming, Frank.” Kat looked at Eric. “Why don’t you tag along, too? Jerica
’ll want to show off how she fixed the computers.”
“She and Frank are friends, now?” he asked, mildly surprised.  Jerica  had  told
him once aboard the Daedalus that she hadn’t liked Frank.
“He tries too hard to make people like him,” she’d said, her beautiful little face
dour and almost stern.
“I guess so.” Kat shrugged. “It was only a matter of  time, I  guess,  no  matter
what. They’ve been talking shop, like she and Doc used to. Something about string
theories.”
“String theories?”
“I have no idea, either,” Kat assured him. “I didn’t realize Frank was so smart.”
Eric watched her lips, trying to remember exactly what it had felt like when she’d
kissed him.
“You see something green?” Kat smirked, slapping playfully at him. “Come on.
What else have you got going on? A hot date?”
He started to follow her and suddenly he felt dizzy and disoriented. He stumbled,
bringing his hand up to his forehead, groaning.
“Eric, what’s wrong?” Kathryn asked. She looked frightened.
“Just got a little dizzy for a second.” The vertigo had passed, but he still felt a
light-headed. Like after a morphine trip, he thought, remembering his strange dream.
“It’s  this  proximity to  you,”  he  told  Kat,  winking.  He  managed  a  smile,  not
wanting to worry her any further. “You just have that effect on me.”
“Jesus, you’re full of shit.” Kat smiled, buying his act. “Come on.”
Chapter Nine
On their way to the control room, Eric made a detour by the infirmary. “I’ll be
right there,” he said to Kat. “I just need to get some more aspirin.”
He opened the small metal cabinet where Jerica had found aspirin earlier for him

and  abruptly  drew  his  hand  away as  if the  door  had  bitten  him. The  aspirin  was
gone, and the cabinet had been rearranged. The shelves were now lined with rows of
little glass vials. Eric didn’t have to read the labels to know what was in each.
Morphine.
Jesus there must be over a hundred bottles here, he thought.
Over a hundred hits. 
He took a step away from the cabinet, but stared, transfixed, at the small vials.
He could feel his body craving it, a strange, insistent pang. His mouth felt dry again.
His hand  inadvertently traveled  to  his  right elbow.  He  was  a  southpaw;  he’d
always shot up on his right side. The flesh at the delta of his elbow joint felt sensitive
and sore to the touch.
If I took just a couple, no one would ever notice, a part of his mind whispered.
No one would know and if—when—the pain in my leg gets too bad, I can just hit
a little…just enough to make the pain stop…
“No.” He slammed the cabinet door shut and shoved the heels of his hands over
his eyes. “No, goddammit, no.”
He had worked  so  hard  to  get  clean.  He  had  been  weaned  off  morphine;  his
doctors had administered slowly diminishing doses to him for nearly eight months,
and in many ways, he still believed that was even worse than had he just gone cold
turkey. His body hadn’t been fooled, not for one minute. He had gone to a private
rehabilitation  clinic  and  sat  through  countless  feel-good,  bullshit  group  therapy
sessions. Nothing helped. The shit the doctors gave him had only teased him, and
made him crave the drug even more.
And  you  know  the  pain  is  going  to  get  bad,  that  little  voice  in  his  mind
whispered. You know what’s happening to you…those greases and oils are going
to rot your leg from the inside out. You know it’s going to be hell.
Eric ran his hands through his hair. He looked at the cabinet, uncertain. The pain
from his leg would only get worse, he was sure about that. Eventually it would get as
agonizing as it had been when he’d  first  woken  up  from  his  almost  twelve-month
coma. He remembered clearly, as if it had just happened yesterday.
There had been  no  one  in the  room  with him. The  first  thing he  remembered
seeing was  all of  the  tubes  draping  down  around  him; intravenous  feeding tubes,
catheter  tubes,  dialysis  tubes,  tubes  for  the  mask  that  breathed  cool,  distilled,
oxygenated air directly against his mouth and nose.
He couldn’t remember anything. He didn’t know what had happened to him. The
sight of all of those tubes, and the whistling, clicking, clattering, wheezing sounds of
all of his life-support equipment had terrified him, panicked him.

He’d begun to struggle. An IV running into his  hand  ripped  free,  hurting, and
some kind of thick, clear liquid began splashing around. It spurted onto his face, and
Eric hadn’t been able to move his arms to wipe it off.
And then he felt the indescribable, unbelievably excruciating pain in his left leg. It
felt like someone had driven a metal stake from his heel clear up to his hip—which,
he supposed, they had.
Eric had screamed.
People  rushed  in,  doctors  and  nurses,  all  in  starched  white  and  baby  blue
costumes. They held his body still, forcing his wrists and ankles into tight restraining
straps. They stuck him with needles and poked at him, prodded. They shouted and
yelled at him.
“Eric, can you hear me?” 
“Eric, can you feel this?” 
“Eric, does this hurt?” 
And then they touched him, moved his leg, and it hurt. He screamed and nearly
blacked out from the pain.
There had been one doctor, a man with glasses and large, compassionate eyes
who leaned over and comforted him.
Get  away,  Mike,  can’t  you  see  he’s  frightened?  Get  away  from  him  all  of
you…Eric…? Eric,  I’m  Mitch  Taylor.  I’m  a  doctor,  Eric.  You  don’t  need  to  be
frightened. It’s okay. You’re safe now… 
His hands had been warm and kind against Eric’s face, soothing.
“…my leg…hurts…” Eric had groaned, not realizing that these would be the first
words he’d spoken in almost  a  year,  and  that  they  would  be  smeared  across  the
front of every newspaper, magazine and web engine in the country by the time the
sun rose that morning.
I know, I know it hurts, Eric, I’m sorry. I want to help you. You don’t need to
be afraid. Do you know what’s happened to you? 
From the background, behind Dr. Taylor: For Christ’s sake, I don’t care if it’s
three in the morning, go call his goddamn family…!
Eric touched  his  leg  absently,  staring  at  the  metal  cabinet  in  the  compound,
remembering  Dr.  Taylor.  He  had  been  a  decent  man,  a  good  doctor.  He  had
honestly thought he was doing the right thing when he had given Eric his cyborg leg.
And, considering the alternatives, maybe he had. But the pain had been very, very
bad.
Eric, you crashed  your  fighter…do  you  remember?  That  was  almost  a  year
ago…you’ve been in a coma, asleep, for a year… 

He had heard Dr. Taylor trying to explain what had happened to him, but it hadn
’t sunk in, and wouldn’t for a long time. He would have no clear, precise concept of
what had happened to him for another three months.
All he  had  been  aware of  was  the  searing  agony  in his  leg. He  had  struggled
against the wrist restraints, pulling with all of his strength, fighting to free his hands.
All he could think to do was claw his leg off, to make the pain go away.
And that is what it’s going to be like again, only this time there’ll be no good
doctor to help you…this time you have to help yourself. 
Eric opened the cabinet and stared at the morphine.
He’d always been told that the brain forgot pain. It would remember where there
had been pain, but not the actual, physical  sensation  of  it pain.  Eric  remembered.
Eric had not forgotten what it had felt like when he woke up in the hospital.
He took three of the vials out and held them in his hand. He nudged the cabinet
door shut and closed his fingers around the morphine.
“What are you doing?”
Eric turned, startled, jerking his hand behind his hip. “Jerica, you scared me.”
The little girl looked at him, curious, unable to figure out what he was up to. She
didn’t know about his addiction to morphine. He tucked the vials into the hip pocket
of his flight suit. “Did you and Frank switch stuff around in here? I can’t find the
aspirin.”
Jerica nodded. “Earlier today. So stuff we use the most is easier to find.” She
went over to a drawer and pulled it open. “The aspirin’s in here, now.”
Jerica handed him a packet, and he smiled. “Thanks, kiddo.”
“Are you better now?” she asked, and her voice was small, worried. She almost
sounded like her mother. Her pinched, concerned expression was nearly identical to
Kat’s. “You looked so bad when we got back this morning. And you slept for so
long. I wanted to come see if you were okay, but Frank said not to bother you while
you were sleeping.”
Eric knelt in front of her, and she put her arms around his neck. Her golden curls
brushed against his nose and lips, and smelled clean, vaguely floral. “You don’t ever
bother me.”
“I was worried about you.” Her breath fluttered against his ear and he realized
she  was  on  the  verge  of  tears.  “I  was  scared  you  were  hurt…that  your  leg  was
hurting you. I don’t want to lose you, too, like…like Alex…and…and Doc…”
“You’re not,” he said, and she hugged him fiercely, tightening her grip on him. “I
’m here.”
She pulled away enough to look at him. There were tears smeared on her cheeks

and Eric wiped them away, like he’d wiped away her mother’s earlier. “You about
ready for bed?”
She nodded at him, her blue eyes enormous and glistening with tears. “Will you
tuck me in?”
“Sure.” He gathered her into his arms and stood. He felt the knee hinges in his
left leg protest. Pain lanced up through his thigh, but he tried  not  to  wince.  Jerica
wrapped her legs around his waist and snuggled her face against his shoulder.
He carried her down the corridor. She wasn’t very heavy, maybe fifty pounds,
and  Eric  normally hefted  her  around  easily. But  tonight,  the  pain  in his  leg  came
rushing back immediately, unwelcome. He struggled to control a limp, not wanting to
frighten or upset Jerica.
“Here we go,” he said quietly, reaching Kat’s room. He set her down in the bed
and she curled up on her side, resting her knees against him. Her hair had fallen into
her face in disheveled curls, and he smoothed them back with his hand.
“Eric, are you scared?” she asked him in a  small voice.  She  had  her  little fist
poised by her mouth, as if she thought about sucking her thumb.
“Scared of what?” It was dark in the room, the only illumination coming in from
the open front door. He could see the light flash across her eyes as she looked up at
him.
“Being here. What’s going to happen to us.”
“Nothing’s going to happen to us.  By  now,  the  platform’s  heard  our  distress
signal,  and  someone  is  probably  already  on  their  way  down  to  get  us.  There’s
nothing to be scared of.”
“Then  why  don’t  they  answer?”  Jerica  asked.  “Why  haven’t  they  called  us
back?”
“I  don’t  know,”  he  replied.  “But  they’re  coming—I  know  that.  There’s  no
reason why they wouldn’t. They’ll be here soon. The Icarus probably hadn’t even
docked  all the  way  when our  distress  signal  came  in,  and  knowing  your  mom’s
friend,  Trina,  they’re probably  half  a  day  away  and  coming  in  at  light  speed  to
rescue us.”
She rolled onto her back and blinked up at him. “I hope so. I don’t like it here.”
“Me, either.” He reached down, touching her cheek. Her warm, delicate fingers
curled around his. “But we’ll get to go home soon, I promise.”
He leaned over and kissed the tip of her nose. She giggled.
“Good night, Jerica.” He rose to his feet. It hurt to put weight down on his leg,
but he forced himself to do it.
“G’night,” she said, but she didn’t close her eyes.

“You want me to leave the bathroom light on?”
She nodded.
He walked over and hit the bathroom switch. He swung the door almost all of
the way closed, so that a sliver of orange light cut across the room. “How’s this?”
“Little more.” Jerica held up her forefinger and thumb about an inch apart.
“Here?” he asked, nudging the door with his foot.
“Good. Thank you.”
He  leaned  against  the  wall  once  he  was  safe  out  in  the  deserted  corridor.
Reaching down, he gripped his leg, splaying his fingers across the fabric of his pants
and listened as the little vials of morphine clicked together quietly in his pocket.
He limped over  to  one  of  the  compound’s  intercom  boxes.  “Hey,  Kat.”  He
pressed the “send” button.
After a moment, Kat’s voice came, sounding like she spoke through a tin can.
“Yes, Eric? Are you on your way down?”
“Uh, no.” He tried to rest most of his weight on his right hip. “I just put Jerica to
bed. I think I’m going to head that way myself. I’m still pretty beat.”
There was a long, quiet pause.
“Kat, I’m sorry. If you need me, I can—”
“That’s okay,” she interrupted. “Frank doesn’t know if he can get this working
tonight or not after all. I’ll probably head off to  bed  myself here  shortly.  You  go
on.”
He felt like shit. “You pissed?”
“No,” she said, sounding amused. “Should I be?”
Eric smiled. “See you in the morning. Tell Frank I said good night.”
 
***
 
Eric stopped by the infirmary again and snooped around until he found an empty
hypodermic  syringe.  Don’t  think  about  what  you’re  doing,  he  told  himself,
pocketing both the needle and the morphine, taking them to his quarters.
Don’t think about it, he told himself again, pulling his jumpsuit off and sitting on
the edge  of  his  bed  in his  T-shirt  and  jockeys.  He  stretched  his  left  leg  out  and
studied  it.  Swelling and  discoloration  had  begun  around  the  knee.  His  ankle  was
swelling too, but he didn’t need to look to know that. He could tell by how tight his
boot lacings felt.
Slipping his  belt  out  of  the  waist  of  his  jumpsuit,  Eric  looped  it  through  the
buckle. He pulled the coil over his forearm and cinched it tight. He watched a small

blue knot  of  veins  rise.  He  put  the  end  of  the  belt  strap  in his  mouth,  holding it
secure with his teeth.
Don’t think about it. But it was  funny  how  it all came  back  to  him, how  the
junkie in him surfaced once more so easily. The junkie remembered how to poke the
needle through the foil cap on the morphine just so, then to invert the vial and pull
back the stopper on the syringe. He watched it fill slowly with the drug. Don’t think
about  what  you’re doing,  he thought,  and  it  was  easier  that  way,  disassociating
himself, pretending he was only an observer.
When he’d drawn a full dose, he pulled the needle back and shook it quickly,
back and forth. The junkie in him, still alive and damnably well, admired the play of
light in the liquid.
Don’t think about what you’re doing. 
He closed his eyes.
I have to do this. I have to. It’s the only way… 
He pushed the needle into his arm, pressing the plunger in. At the same time, he
loosened the strap of the belt about his arm, letting it fall from his mouth.
The morphine hit him and he dropped the needle as his fingers went numb. His
head rolled back and he stared up at the ceiling. He gasped loudly, felt the horizon
side-slip. He crumpled onto his side on the bed, and lay there, trembling, riding the
trip.
He could feel the morphine coursing through his body, roaring in his ears like the
ocean trapped in a conch. It fell over him like a heavy blanket, fresh out of the dryer
and infused with thick, comforting heat.
Eric closed his eyes and moaned quietly. The morphine felt so good, so really
fucking good. He could feel it eating away at  the  pain  in his  leg, chasing  it back,
washing it away in a numbing flood.
The room felt like a Tilt-a-Whirl, swirling and heaving around him. He  tried  to
raise his arm, to bring his hand up to his face, but he couldn’t seem to manage.
It was almost as good as flying.
The morphine swept over him, pulling urgently with its demanding fingertips, and
he fainted.

Chapter Ten
Images flashed before Kat’s eyes, fragments like the pieces of a shattered bottle;
glass shards that glittered and glistened, that sliced and cut and hurt.
An image appeared of Kat and Alex, walking down one of the hallways aboard
the Daedalus.
She gasped, surprised, shocked. Her face grew hot and flushed as on the screen,
Alex playfully pinched her ass. The Kat on the monitor whirled around, slapping at
him, laughing. “Quit it!”
“Kat?” Frank asked gently.
They had been sitting side by side for several hours with neither of them saying
much at all. Frank had been able to access the Daedalus’ drive after all, and they
had been watching the ship’s video logs and security recordings.
Kat felt a tear roll slowly down  her  cheek.  She  wiped  it away fervently. “I’m
okay, I’m okay.” She didn’t know to whom she was offering this—Frank or herself.
“It’s just that…I mean, Alex and I…we were…”
“I know,” he interjected kindly. “I kind of figured that out on my own.”
Embarrassed and abashed, she started to giggle. “Well, so much for discretion.”
“Hey, we all have needs.” He smiled at her and gave her hand a soft squeeze. “I’
ll forward past this.”
“No, no, I want to see, I want…” Kat said. I need to see this. I need to know
what happened. It’s the only way I’m ever going to be able to move forward. “At
least we know we’re on the right track, then. That happened on the day of the crash.
That morning…I remember…”
She watched as the image of Alex put his arms around her and tickled. On the
screen, she squealed and twisted, trying to get free.
She could remember this, all of it. It didn’t seem possible that Alex wasn’t there
anymore; he wasn’t going to snuggle up with her anymore, or tickle her playfully like
he was on the screen.
“Stop it!” she heard herself say.
Forever ago…another world ago. 
Frank searched ahead through the images. Kat saw herself at the bridge, setting

the ship’s new coordinates, talking with Trina aboard the Icarus via the  com  link.
She  watched  as,  on-screen,  Eric  came  in;  she  watched  them  both  smiling  and
exchanging their playful, flirting banter, blissfully unaware of the impending disaster
that was now less than an hour from occurring.
“Here,” Kat said, as her on-screen image left the bridge  and  the  doors  closed
behind her.  The  monitor  showed  only  Eric,  sitting alone  in the  bridge.  The  lights
were dimmed, and he had his feet propped up on one of the consoles. “Play it from
here, Frank. This must be about when it happened. Eric had bridge duty.”
They watched Eric for a few minutes, and then he looked up as the bridge doors
slid open and Leia walked in. “Hi.”
“Hey.” Eric swung his legs down from the console and rose to his feet. “What’s
up?”
“Not  a  whole lot.”  Leia stood  near  him, leaning back  and  resting  against  the
corner of the console. “Having fun yet?”
“Oh, yeah.” Eric uttered a nervous-sounding laugh.
Leia reached out and touched his hair. He flinched away from her. “You shouldn
’t be up here. I’ve got stuff I need to be doing…”
“Oh,  really?”  Leia  stepped  close  to  him  again  and  leaned  forward.  “That’s
funny. So do I.”
“Don’t…” he murmured, trying to duck away from her as she brushed his hair
aside to  kiss  his  neck.  Undeterred,  Leia stepped  even  closer  against  him and  her
hand slowly, deliberately slid down Eric’s chest and dropped between his legs.
“Here’s what I need to be doing.”
Kat watched in startled disbelief. It wasn’t that she couldn’t believe that Leia and
Eric might have had a fling aboard the Daedalus, even though the idea of this left the
pit of her stomach feeling twisted. Eric was handsome; Leia was pretty. Neither of
them was blind, and both were single. It made sense.
Why didn’t he ever say anything to me about it? That’s what bothered her the
most, or so she told herself. Eric knew about her and Alex. He’d always known, for
as long as he and Kat had been friends. That he might have been sexually involved
with Leia, but not trusted Kat enough to confide in her about it hurt her feelings.
“Leia, stop,” Eric said on screen, as she began to move her hand rhythmically
against him.
“That’s  not  what  you  told  me  last  night.”  She  smiled  as  Eric  gasped  at  her
touch.  Her  lips  found  his  throat  again,  the  pace  of  her  hand  growing  quick  and
insistent. “Or the night before in the cargo hold…the morning before that in the rec
room…my quarters…your quarters…the tech lab…”

He groaned, draping his hands against her shoulders. “Leia, stop,” he whispered
again, breathlessly. “Leia…please…”
“Now that’s what you said.” Leia’s smile widened as she lowered herself to her
knees in front of him, moving to unfasten the fly of his pants and let her mouth take
the place of her hand. “That’s what you—”
Eric pushed her away, staggering back from her. “I said stop.”
She blinked at him in startled confusion. “What’s wrong with you?”
“I can’t do this anymore,” he said, struggling to reclaim his breath. He stumbled
back further, widening the distance between  them.  “It’s  over,  all right? I  can’t…I
don’t want to anymore.”
The confusion in her face deepened, and then shifted toward humiliated outrage.
“What do you mean, you don’t want to anymore? For two weeks now, you haven’t
been able to get enough. Now, all of a sudden, it’s over? We’ve got five years out
here. Where else do you think you’re going to get any?”
He shook his head and said nothing, turning away from her, running his fingers
through his hair. “Just go away, Leia.”
She uttered a sharp, angry laugh. “What, are you going gay on me? You think
Xian or Franklin is going to go down on you for some variety? Or what? You going
to make a play for Kat? You’re not that stupid, I know.”
He turned to her, his brows narrowed. “Get out of here, Leia.”
Her eyes flew wide and she laughed again. “Oh, my God,” she said. “You are
that fucking stupid, aren’t you? I should’ve known.  I’ve seen  the  way  you  watch
her, all moon-eyed and goof-ass. Good luck, Eric. Kat’s wrapped so tight around
Alex’s cock, she wouldn’t do you if—”
Eric hauled  off  and  smacked  her  across  the  face.  Hard.  Kat  could  hear  the
reverberating slap clearly.
On screen, Leia touched the side of her jaw.
“Get out of here, Leia,” Eric seethed. “Get the fuck off my bridge.”
Leia gasped softly, the sound choked as if with tears. “You asshole.” She spun
around on her heel and stomped off.
Frank stopped the image and began to rewind it.
“What’re you…?” Kat began.
“Watch,” Frank said quietly. “Here. See?”
He let the disc play.
“What, are you going gay on me?” Leia was saying again.
“What am I looking for, Frank?” Kat asked.
“Here.” Frank rewound the image again, frame by frame. “Right here.”

He pointed, and she watched a small red light flash on the console of the bridge.
“See that?”
Kat nodded, suddenly realizing. She felt the color rise in her cheeks in two hot,
angry patches.
“What was that?” Frank glanced at her. “Was it…do you think…?”
“I know it was.” She stormed for the door.
“Kat, what are you—?”
“I’ll be right back, Frank,” she said, and she was gone.
Chapter Eleven
She opened Eric’s door and flicked the light switch. Brilliant white fluorescents
filled the room with bright light. Eric was sleeping and didn’t stir.
“Wake up,” she said, her voice trembling angrily. “Goddammit, get up!”
She grabbed a bar of soap off the rim of his sink and hurled it at him. It hit him
in the shoulder, and he woke up, startled, bewildered.
“What the hell…?” he said, sitting up, blinking stupidly. He pushed his hair out
of his face. “Kat, what’re you—?”
“Shut up,” she snapped at him. “What is it you told me? ‘I keep replaying it over
and over again in my head, Kat, and I just can’t seem to remember anything going on
in the bridge.’ That sound familiar, Eric? Nothing, sure, except for Leia going down
on you.”
His eyes widened, any last vestiges of sleepy disorientation wiped away. “What?
Kat, I…I don’t…”
“You shut up!” Kat yelled at him. “You shut your mouth, goddammit! Was Leia
good, Eric? You never told me about it before, so why not start now? Was she? I
sure hope so. I hope she was a damn good fuck.”
He  flinched,  looking  hurt  and  confused.  “Kat,  please,  what  are  you  talking
about?”
“Frank and I saw the tape just now. When you and Leia were fighting the night
of the crash, fighting about you fucking her. There was an alarm light from the tech
lab. Some kind of alarm Doc must have pulled and you didn’t see it.”
Eric blinked at her, his eyes enormous, stunned. He looked like he’d just gotten

punched in the stomach. “What?”
Kat nodded. “Yeah, Eric. Doc pulled the tech lab alarm. And because you weren
’t paying attention, you missed it. You son of a bitch.”
“Kat…”
“Fuck you, Eric. They’re dead. Alex and Doc are dead, and it’s your fault. It’s
all your fault because you weren’t paying attention. Yeah, I hope Leia was a damn
good fuck.”
She was shaking, so pissed off she couldn’t think straight. She walked out of the
room, her hands closed in tight, trembling fists. She wanted to hit him so badly. She
had never wanted to punch anyone more in her life.
I  want  to  punch  him,  hit  him,  hurt  him,  scar  his  goddamn  face  with  my
fingernails, make him fucking sorry. 
The door slid closed behind her, and she stood, shaking.
Is this what it feels like to be like Chris? 
She stared numbly down at her hands, forcing her fingers to loosen. She could
hear the harsh, labored sound of her breathing.
Oh, my God. 
She  wondered  if Eric  had  thought  she’d  looked  like the  devil, just  like she’d
always thought Chris had when he’d go into one of his rages.
“Oh, Jesus,” she whispered. She couldn’t breathe. What have I done? My God,
all of these years, I’ve tried to put my past behind me, and here it is, tonight in my
face—only I’m not the girl  I  used  to  be.  Oh,  Christ,  I’m  something  worse—this
time, I’m the monster.
Kat had worked very diligently to erase any evidence of her marriage from her
job. She had told Alex some  things,  but  had  kept  most  all of  it,  all of  her  bitter,
painful  memories  private.  She  hadn’t  wanted  anyone  to  know  about  all  of  the
humiliation and pain she had endured for so long. She’d always kept her mouth shut,
and spoke only vaguely of Chris when questioned.
The memories of his rages had always seemed too fresh.
Eric had found out by accident, really. And somehow, after that, she’d been able
to confide in him every once in awhile small pieces and fragments; the memories of
another woman in another lifetime. The one I used to be.
The day Eric learned her grim secret had started out to be such a good day. She
had gotten a letter back from a literary agent, the last one she’d  sent  her  carefully
plotted synopsis and sample chapters to, and  the  last  one  to  write her  back.  The
other  letters  hadn’t  even  politely rejected  her,  and  so  Kat  was  ecstatic  when  one
finally came in, asking to see her manuscript.

She’d  practically  sprinted  across  the  loading  dock  tarmac,  oblivious  to  the
blazing heat that bounced off the blacktop. She was hoping Alex would be working;
their shuttle  module  was  parked  at  the  far  end,  and  from  what  she  could  tell,  it
looked as though someone was running a routine maintenance check on it.
The letter was folded neatly in her hip pocket. She’d meant to show it to him,
feeling some strange, incessant need to prove it to him. She knew it was a hold-over
from Chris, who had never believed her, never trusted her, and had always scoffed
and ridiculed her writing.
“Hello? Anybody home?” she called, reaching the shuttle. She leaned against the
open hatchway, panting slightly from the heat and from her dash. “Alex?”
There was no answer. Kat frowned and studied the spread of tools and module
components around the shuttle.
Everything  looked  a  hell  of  a  lot  neater  than  whenever  Alex  would  run  the
perfunctory check of the shuttle. It had always really been the pilot’s responsibility
to run  the  operations  checks  prior  to  docking  with the  Daedalus,  but  Dylan had
never seemed to end up doing it for some reason.
Kat figured  the  neat  little  arrangement  of  tools  was  probably  just  some  new
method to Alex’s maintenance madness. She walked toward the nose of the shuttle,
stepping carefully around the equipment. “Alex?” she called again.
“Hello, Kat,” someone said from her left, and she jerked around, startled.
“Chris,” she said, surprised and momentarily taken aback.
He was standing about twenty yards away from her, on the other side of a high
chain-link security fence. Kat felt suddenly happy and exhilarated to see him there,
and  at  the  same  time,  wary,  apprehensive  and  even  afraid.  She  found  her  eyes
inexorably drawn to his hands, even though he wasn’t being aggressive in the least. It
had simply become habit to her.
She was so surprised to see him she didn’t even think about the restraining order
that was supposed to keep him at least twice as far away from her as he was now.
She saw he was holding a bouquet of flowers, daisies and black-eyed Susans;
her favorites. The flowers were wrapped in wrinkled green tissue paper.
“What are you doing here, Chris?” She found herself walking toward the fence,
toward him.
He was smiling at her. “I  came  to  see  you.  I  mean,  I  just…”  He  lowered  his
head, and she could see the color rising in his face. “Jesus, I miss you, Kat.”
She  stopped  on  the  other  side  of  the  fence.  He  reached  up  and  slipped  his
fingers through the links.
“You look so great,” he said. “So pretty. You weren’t at home so I figured you

might be out here…”
“You look good, too.” She smiled and tittered wildly, nervously. Jesus Christ I
feel like I’m sixteen again. It’s amazing how quick it all comes back…how much I
miss him and still love him…
She  touched  his  fingers  through  the  chain,  rubbing  briefly,  gently,  and  then
pulling away.
“You going to let me in?” He waggled the bouquet, all smiles. “I brought these
for you.”
She blinked stupidly. “Sure. Here.”
They walked abreast of one another down toward the gate. She didn’t feel afraid
of him at all now, just kind of warm and shy and silly and happy to see him.
She opened the gate and let him in.
“It’s  so  good  to  see  you,  Kat.”  Chris  hugged  her  fiercely, lifting  her  off  the
ground.  It  might have  been  her  imagination, but  she  could  have  sworn  his  voice
choked with tears. “I miss you.”
“I…I miss you, too, Chris,” she said, but when he went to kiss her she turned
her face away.
“Hey.” He sounded hurt. “Hey, come on.”
He tried to kiss her again, and she pulled away, shaking her  head.  “Chris,  no.
Don’t do that.”
She knew it was going to start, and suddenly she was sorry she’d opened the
gate. She had actually been happy to see him when he’d been on the other side of
the  fence,  unable  to  touch  her.  Now,  she  felt  uncomfortable  and  anxious.  She
remembered that Alex was somewhere in the shuttle, and probably  spying  on  her,
which made her even more abashed.
“Jesus Christ, Kat, all I wanted to do was kiss you,” Chris exclaimed. “I can still
kiss you, can’t I? I mean, you’re my wife.”
“No.”  Kat  took  a  small, involuntary step  away from  him. “No,  I’m not  your
wife, and no, you can’t kiss me anymore. Chris, please, can’t we just visit like two—
”
“What? Like friends?” he interrupted. “Friends? Fuck no, we can’t just visit like
friends. We’re more than friends.”
“No, we’re not.” There it was, that whiny, cry-baby edge to her voice that only
seemed  to  creep  around  when  she  was  with  Chris.  It  made  her  feel  weak  and
ashamed and frightened and she hated it. “Not anymore.”
“I just wanted to see you, to talk to you.” The color rose in Chris’ cheeks again,
but this time it wasn’t from embarrassment.

“This  was…”  Kat  dabbed  at  the  sweat  on  her  upper  lip  nervously  with  her
fingertips. “This was a mistake. I’m sorry, Chris. You’d better go. The restraining
order—”
“Don’t start that again,” he snapped, his tone low and menacing. He jabbed his
finger at her and she flinched. “Why do you need a restraining order with me? I’ve
told you I’m sorry. I’ve told you things are different now—I’m different now. I’m
not going to hit you anymore. How many times can I fucking say it? What do you
want from me?”
“I  just…I  want  you  to  go.”  Kat’s  throat  constricted  to  a  pinhole,  her  voice
forced through this narrow opening. “Please, Chris.”
“I just wanted to see you for a few minutes, to talk and try and work things out,”
Chris said. “You owe me that much. You’re the one who let me  in here,  so  fuck
your restraining order.”
“There’s nothing to work out. Please, Chris, don’t be like this. Please just go,
please? Just go.”
“God, you are such a bitch!” His voice grew loud, nearly a shout. “I come here,
I don’t do shit to you, and you act like this. Fuck you, Kat.”
He threw  the  flowers  at  her  and  they  smacked  against  the  tarmac,  scattering
delicate, slender white and yellow petals.
Kat jumped at the motion, and felt her face burning, her eyes welling with tears.
Had she actually been so excited and glad to see him? Why in the hell did she always
seem to forget about all of the bad things?
“Go away,” she said, quietly, her voice trembling. “I don’t…I don’t want to see
you around here anymore. Go away before I…I call security.”
“Go ahead.” Chris sneered at her, angrily. “Call them.”
He’d reached out for her then, to grab her, and  she’d  known  his  hand  would
clamp  down  and  hurt  her,  and  then  he’d  probably  hit  her,  and  she’d  cried  out,
frightened.
“Is there a problem here?”
Kat spun around, and Chris backed immediately away from  her,  like a  cowed
dog.
Eric Nagel leaned out of a small opened hatchway just behind the  nose  of  the
shuttle. He swung his legs around and hopped down to the  tarmac.  “Hi,  Kat,”  he
said,  walking  toward  them,  his  gait  easy  and  leisurely.  He  was  wearing  old,
grease-spotted jeans and a white crew-neck tee-shirt. He was smiling amicably, but
Kat couldn’t see his eyes behind his sunglasses. She wouldn’t realize it until much
later, but it was the first time the pilot had ever referred to her as “Kat” and not as

“Kathryn”. “Everything okay?”
Kat glanced apprehensively at Chris, and then down at the ground. She  didn’t
seem to be able to speak.
“Everything’s fine,” Chris told him. She could tell, even without looking at either,
that the two men were sizing up each other. “No problem at all. Just talking to my
wife.”
“Oh.” Eric raised an eyebrow. “Well, I think Kat’s about through talking to you.
I believe she asked you to leave.”
“Do you believe that?” Chris’ hands coiled into neat, stacked fists.
“Yes,” Eric said. “I do.”
There was a long pause. Kat stared down at her feet and watched the breeze tug
and  push  daisy  petals  towards  her  toes.  She  didn’t  know  what  would  happen  if
Chris wanted to fight. He was pissed enough to, and even though Eric was  leaner
and quicker and probably a better fighter, Chris outweighed the younger man by a
good thirty pounds.
“Thanks, Kat,” Chris said. “Have a very nice fucking day.”
She heard him stomp off, heard the chain-link gate slam shut in his wake. Eric
followed Chris and locked the gate behind him.
Kat sighed and brought her hands up to her mouth. Her fingers were shaking.
“Are you all right?” Eric took off his sunglasses and tucked them into the back
pocket of his jeans.
She nodded wordlessly. She felt embarrassed and ashamed that Eric had  seen
how Chris would treat her. She  was  careful  to  maintain a  cool  façade  among  her
coworkers, to always present herself as calm, collected and  in control.  Now  he’d
seen her secret, what she was really like.
“Are you sure?” Eric was standing directly in front of her, but she couldn’t meet
his eyes. She was on the verge of tears. “He didn’t hurt you, did he?”
She  shook  her  head.  “No,  I…I’m fine. Really.” She  struggled  to  pull  herself
together,  to  force  some  strength  into  her  warbling  voice.  “What…what  are  you
doing here?”
The  question  seemed  to  surprise  him.  “I’m  running  the  routine  maintenance
check on the shuttle. That’s part of my job description, remember?”
“I…I thought Alex would be…” Kat began. She stooped and tried to rescue the
poor dilapidated flowers Chris had brought her. She gathered them into her arms and
realized they were a pretty fair analogy for her ex-marriage. She  clapped  her  hand
over her face and burst into tears.
“Hey.”  Eric  sounded  awkward  and  embarrassed.  “Oh,  hey,  Kathryn,  c’mon,

don’t…”
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I’m sorry.” He put his arm around her shoulders, holding
her at a stiff and uncomfortable distance as he  led  her  into  the  cool  shade  of  the
open shuttle hatch. They both sat down on the edge of the doorway.
She tried to wipe her tears away, humiliated. “I’m sorry. I just…I’m sorry…”
He draped his hand against hers,  a  simple but  powerful  gesture  that  drew  her
voice to silence. “Stop saying that. It’s not your fault.”
It was like he had known, as if somehow simply from that brief encounter, he’d
realized the entire dynamic of her miserable relationship with Chris.
She looked up and met his gaze for the first time since he’d approached her on
the tarmac. “Please don’t tell anyone about this. Especially Alex. I don’t…I don’t
want anyone to know how he…Chris, I mean…”
Eric nodded once. Again, it was like he understood, without her saying another
word in explanation, he knew. “I won’t.”
She could see his bare arms, strange, small, dark marks dotted across the inner
curve of his right elbow. They looked almost like bruises, and she remembered that
not too long ago she and Alex had held a serious discussion about Eric’s on-again,
off-again relationship with free-based narcotics.
Needle marks. Those are his needle marks. 
But whatever prejudices she had held for him about replacing Dylan or because
of his indiscretions with morphine  seemed  to  dissolve  immediately, and  from  that
moment on Kat and Eric were friends, bound by that hot, humid August afternoon
when they had each shared a dark and brooding secret.
She supposed that part of her had fallen in love with Eric that day, too, but  it
was never something she felt like talking about, and sure as hell was nothing she’d
ever let Eric know.
Some secrets were meant to be private.
Chapter Twelve
“Kat, it’s been a long day and you’re upset.” Frank offered her a mug of coffee.
“Why don’t we call it a night?”
“No.” Kat shook her head. “No, we’re close. I want to keep looking.”

He didn’t look convinced, but shrugged in concession. “Okay. What next?”
“What’s this?” They were back at the Daedalus’ main menu, and she pointed to
one of the folders.
“Let’s  see,  looks  like personnel  records,  mail transcripts…here’s  Eric’s  daily
flight log, Leia’s daily payload log…”
“Wait.” Kat pointed. “Click on that.”
She’d caught sight of a small transmission icon, an earthbound communication
sent on the day they’d awakened from cryostasis. She recognized the numerical user
identification listed with the transmission.  Alex had  made  a  call to  Earth  from  the
bridge.
Frank opened the log file, and Kat found herself watching a grainy video image
of Cassandra Horne’s face—Alex’s wife, Cassie.
“…we’re all right anyway.” Alex’s voice filled the room, recorded as part of the
transmission log. Kat was seeing what he had seen as he’d talked to his wife. “Just a
few minor course corrections, but Jesus, it could have been worse.”
“I don’t want you doing this anymore, Alex,” Cassie said. “I mean it. It’s always
one thing or another, and now the navigation computer is resetting itself? What if you
hadn’t come out of cryostasis?” Her voice grew shrill, choked with tears. “It’s bad
enough you won’t be back until after Crissy graduates from college—bad enough to
know  you’re up  there  for  five years  alone  with her—but  to  think  that  something
might happen…? You might not come back at all?”
Her. Kat felt a sudden chill at that word, at Cassie’s cold, bitter inflection.
“Cassie, you’re overreacting,” Alex told her in a gentle, condescending voice. “I
told you. We’re on course again and  everything’s  fine. You  don’t  have  to  worry
about that, or about Kat, either.”
Kat’s face drained to ashen. What?
“I’ve seen how she looks at you.” Cassie frowned. “For years now, I’ve seen
her.”
“So she looks at me,” Alex said.  “Let  her.  I  don’t  look  back.  She’s  a  single
mom and you know how they can be—every man’s their knight in shining armor.
You smile at them crooked and they think you want to marry them.”
It felt like the blade of a knife jabbed into Kat’s heart. Her breath caught against
the back of her throat.
“Kathryn Emmente is like a guy with tits to me,” Alex told his wife, making her
laugh. “She’s  nothing,  just  someone  I  work  with, no  different  than  Eric  Nagel,  I
swear to Christ. In fact, I would probably rather fuck Eric, if I had to choose. At
least he’s pretty.”

“Stop it.” Cassie giggled, just as Kat’s shattered heart pleaded the same thing.
Stop it. 
“It’s not always going to be like this, Cassie. I’m going to leave this job, leave
the Shinkansan Company. But I can’t right now, not any  time soon.  These  things
take time, and there’s a lot to figure out in the meantime. But you know you’re what
I want.”
Kat listened to the familiar words—repeated nearly verbatim to her—in stunned
horror. Oh, God…!
“Kat…” Frank’s voice seemed to come from miles away.
She stood, swaying dizzily. Suddenly the room felt very muggy and stifling. She
took a staggering, clumsy step for the door.
“Kat!” Frank said, alarmed now. He stood.
“I’m okay,” she told him dazedly. “I…I just think I’m gonna be sick…”
She stumbled out the door. She didn’t know where to go.
She wandered down the hall, struggling to contain her tears. She found herself
back in Eric’s room. He was asleep again, and the room was dark. She hesitated in
the doorway, like a small child frightened in the night, and then went and crawled into
bed with him. She curled up against his back, wanting some  kind  of  comfort  and
security from his warmth.
He stirred and  rolled  over.  The  light in his  bathroom  was  on,  and  in the  dim
yellow glow, she saw his eyes open, sleepily.
“Kat…” he murmured. He brought his hand up and rubbed his eyes. “What is
it?”
“Oh…!” Kat’s tears spilled. “Oh…oh, God, Eric…!”
“Hey…” He touched her  face,  and  she  had  no  defense  against  such  a  tender
gesture. She broke down into hysterical sobs.
Frightened and awake now, Eric propped himself up on his elbow so he could
look down at her. “Kat, what is it? Tell me what’s wrong.”
She managed to hiccup out the story in between tearful gulps for breath. When
she’d choked out as much as she could bear, she covered her face with her hands,
ashamed. “Oh, Eric, I’m so sorry I said those awful things to you,” she whispered.
“I didn’t…I didn’t mean them…”
“It’s all right.” He leaned over and hugged her. He canted his face and pressed
his lips against her tear-stained cheek. “Please, Kat. Please don’t cry. It’s all right.”
“He said I was nothing.” Kat’s eyes flooded with new  tears,  and  she  gasped,
anguished. “He…he said I was nothing, Eric!”
“He was wrong,” Eric said. He kissed her cheek again, his lips lighting against

her skin,  then  the  corner  of  her  mouth.  He  cradled  her  face  between  his  hands,
leaning down so that his nose brushed hers. “He was an ass, Kat.”
She  and  Eric  were  good  friends,  but  it  had  never  stopped  her  from  always
admiring him from a distance. Many a time had she caught herself staring, transfixed,
admiring the lines and aesthetics of his body.
“Oh, my God,” Leia had said to  him.  “You  are  that  fucking  stupid,  aren’t
you?  I  should’ve known.  I’ve seen  the  way  you  watch  her,  all  moon-eyed  and
goof-ass.” 
Had he really watched her like that, as she’d watched him, as well?
All of this time, and I never realized. I’ve been in love with you, Eric. 
“I’m so stupid,” Kat whispered.
“No, you’re not,” Eric said, and he kissed her mouth.
His lips were soft and warm and welcome against hers. Kat tilted her  head  up
and  kissed  him back,  opening  her  mouth,  bringing her  hands  up  to  his  face.  His
tongue glanced off hers, and as she pulled him closer, a low groan, a longing sound
escaped his throat.
The kiss grew deeper still; he lay her back against the bed and pressed himself
on top of her. She tangled her fingers in his dark hair, holding him near. They kissed
with  the  sort  of  desperate  passion  that  comes  from  having  avoided  something
inevitable for far too long. When at last they parted for breath, he hovered above her,
both of them gasping suddenly, windless.
“Kat…” He touched her face, brushed her hair back from her eyes. She could
feel his arousal, hard and hot, straining against the fabric of his flight suit, pressing
against her thigh. She trembled, turning her cheek into the basin of his palm, kissing
his hand.
He breathed her name again, his voice anxious and uncertain, but she let him say
no more. She caught his face between her hands and kissed him again, shifting her
weight, parting her thighs to enfold his hips, to let the hardening length of him press
firmly against her. He moaned softly, a wordless plea, as her hand moved between
them, fumbling with the zipper-front of his flight suit.
He made love to her. She was afraid it would hurt him, hurt his leg, and so she
eased him back against the bed and straddled him. He arched his back, drawing his
hips up to greet her as she lowered herself against him. When they began to move in
tandem, as she drew him deeply into her, he reached up to cradle her breasts against
his hands and gasped out her name over and over.
She moved with him, watching the play of light and shadow across his face as he
closed his eyes, undulating beneath her. She could see when climax came upon him;

from  the  muscles  between  his  neck  and  shoulders  to  the  stacked  plane  of  his
abdomen, he tensed, hooking his fingers into the soft curves of her hips.
For the first time in her life, Kat found release at the same time as her lover; it
was something she’d been cheated out of by Chris and Alex, neither of whom had
ever seemed to consider her pleasure before their own. Kat threw her head back and
cried out softly as Eric grasped her hips firmly, delivering himself into her with final,
powerful thrusts.
When it was over, she leaned over him, her hair tumbling past her shoulders. She
struggled to reclaim her breath; her arms felt tremulous and weak, and she shivered.
She closed her eyes, weary and winded, but opened them as he touched her face,
ran his fingers through her hair.
How long had she wanted that? From the day Eric had come to her aid on the
tarmac? She looked down at Eric as he smiled up at her, his features glistening with
sweat, his hair tousled and swept about his face. Somehow, even now, the answers
to those questions terrified her.
“I have to go,” she whispered.
He shook  his  head  as  he  ran  his  fingertips  lightly, sweetly against  her  mouth.
“What? No.”
She smiled, tried to make light as she shrugged away from him. She slipped her
leg from over his hips and hated the sudden coldness that filled the space his warmth
had only just occupied.
“Kat…” He reached out to stay her. She made it out of the bed, both feet on the
floor,  but  he  caught  her  hand  before  she  could  step  away  and  reach  for  her
discarded clothes.
“Jerica will be waiting for me, Eric,” she said quietly, slipping her fingers away
from his. “I have to go.”
He didn’t say anything. He rolled onto his side and watched her step back into
her panties, shrug her way back into her bra. She slipped her flight suit back on, and
pulled her hair loose from beneath the collar.
“I…I’ll see you in the morning,” she whispered, because something needed to
be  said.  She  had  never  felt at  a  loss  for  words  around  Eric,  and  was  somewhat
dismayed to discover that now, she had no idea what to offer him. She leaned down
and kissed him, a quick and hurried peck on the mouth that left him blinking up at
her as she drew away, his large, dark eyes round and wounded.
“I’ll see you in the morning,” she said again, and then she left him.

Chapter Thirteen
Eric sat alone in the commissary very early the next morning. The sun had not
even crept up over the horizon yet. He hadn’t slept much the night before, not after
Kat had left, and he didn’t expect anyone else in the compound to be awake. When
he heard  soft  footsteps  in the  corridor,  he  looked  up  from  the  cup  of  coffee  he
nursed, hoping it was Kat.
Frank walked in, as haggard as Eric felt and seeming equally surprised  to  find
someone else roused. “Hey.”
“Hey.” Eric  nodded  once  in greeting. There  was  a  palpable  tension  in the  air
between them, left over  from  the  previous  night’s  disagreement.  Eric  knew Frank
could sense it, too, and that he had to do something to dissolve it. Because I need
Frank’s help. “What are you doing up?”
Frank got a coffee mug down from the cabinet. “I haven’t  been  able  to  sleep
worth a damn.
“Me, either,” Eric said. “I keep having nightmares about the crash.”
Frank nodded. He sipped his black, steaming coffee carefully. “Is Kat all right?”
“I don’t know.” Eric glanced down into his coffee mug. “She was pretty upset.”
“Yeah, I could tell,” Frank said.
Eric studied the doctor for a long moment. He didn’t want to confide in Frank,
but didn’t see any way around it. Last night had changed Eric, had forced him to
realize that he couldn’t keep quiet any longer. He needed help. He didn’t want to die.
 I don’t want to lose Kat. I can’t. Not now. Not after last night.
“Look, Frank, can I trust you to keep a secret?”
Frank raised an eyebrow. “What do you mean?”
Eric wouldn’t  look  at  him. He  touched  the  pant  leg  of  his  flight  suit,  toying
anxiously  with  the  fabric.  He  didn’t  want  to  say  anything,  but  knew  he  had  no
choice. “Promise you won’t mention it to Kat.”
“No, you know I won’t, of course,” Frank said. “What is it? What’s wrong?”
“I think the wreck really fucked up my leg. I think something in it is broken.”
“Eric, Jesus Christ.” Frank stood, going over to him. “What’s wrong?  Maybe
there’s something I can do. For Christ’s sake, why didn’t you tell me?”

“I don’t think there’s anything you can do. There aren’t any tools small enough
here.  I  think it’s  leaking lubricant  solutions.  It’s  making  me  sick,  making  my  leg
hurt…” He looked down into the murky blackness of his coffee. “This morning, I
saw blood in my piss.”
“Let me take a look at it.” Frank motioned with his hand. “Come with me to the
infirmary.”
“Frank, there’s nothing you can—”
“You don’t know that, damn it,” Frank said. “Now come on.”
 
***
 
“Something’s  leaking  in  there,  all  right.”  Eric  had  stripped  down  to  his
underwear and sat on an examination table, while Frank leaned over his injured leg.
“You’ve got some pretty extensive edema  developing  around  your  ankle and  into
your calf, and here around your knee, too.” He glanced grimly at Eric. “And if you’
re pissing blood, that means it’s already affecting your kidneys. I’m going to draw
up  some  blood  work,  check  your  liver  enzyme  levels,  too.  That’s  my  biggest
concern right now. Stopping this before you go into liver or renal failure.”
“Stop it how?” Eric asked.
Frank pressed his hands gently along Eric’s knee and lower leg. “I don’t know.
But I’m going to try. This is real skin, right? Cloned tissue custom-developed for the
prosthetic?”
Eric nodded.
“It’s fed through a capillary system that ties into your bloodstream,” Frank said.
“The upper layers of underlying tissue, too, the muscles. That’s how the lubricants
from  everything  underneath,  all  of  the  mechanized  parts,  are  getting  into  your
system.”
He glanced up at Eric. “They did a beautiful job of this.” He patted Eric’s leg.
“Damn near a work of art. I may not have the right mechanical tools to get down in
there, but I have scalpels. I can cut it open, try to figure out what’s wrong once I’m
inside.”
He turned to a nearby cabinet and squatted, rifling through the contents. “I think
I saw some surgical drains around here  yesterday.  Maybe  I  can  rig up  something
with those so we can keep whatever’s leaking out of your bloodstream.”
Eric felt a glimmer of hope. “You think that will work?”
“At least until help gets here,” Frank replied. “I’m hoping, anyway.”
Eric  forked  his  fingers  through  his  hair.  “I’ve  been  so  fucking  scared,”  he

admitted shakily. “I thought I was going to die.”
“In my line of work, that’s only a last resort.” Frank glanced at him and winked.
“I think I can  set  everything up  for  surgery  by  lunch  time. I’ll find  some  way  to
distract  Kat,  don’t  worry.  I’m  going  to  give  you  something  for  the  pain,  in  the
meanwhile.”
“No.” Eric sat up.
“We’ve got plenty here,” Frank said. “And there’s no need for you to suffer.”
“I can’t.” Eric  was  ashamed  to  tell Frank  about  his  addiction;  humiliated that
Frank  would  discover  he’d  already  been  pilfering  the  compound’s  supplies.  “I
just…after  the  crash,  when I  lost  my  leg…”  He  looked  down  at  his  lap.  “I  got
hooked on morphine. It took me years to get clean. It hasn’t been that long ago, and
I…”
Franklin opened the cabinet where the morphine was stored. If he noticed  any
missing, he didn’t say anything. “You  know  what  the  difference  between  a  junkie
and a patient is, Eric?” He took a vial out. “A patient needs the drug. A junkie just
wants it.”
“Frank, I can’t,” Eric said, staring at the bottle of morphine.
Frank  smiled  at  him.  He  opened  a  drawer  and  pulled  out  a  fresh  syringe.
“Suffering is for martyrs and third-world countries. And while at the moment,  this
compound  seems  pretty  damn  close  to  that…”  He  winked  at  Eric  again.  “…it’s
not.”
Frank set the morphine and the needle down. Eric jumped like he’d just placed a
live rattlesnake next to him, and the doctor smiled.
“I’m your friend, Eric. You can trust me. I won’t say anything to  Kat.  This’ll
stay between us. You’re hurting. This can help you. I can help you—if you let me.
That’s my job.”
“All right.” Eric hung his head. He tried to tell himself that Frank was right; he
wasn’t going to use morphine because he wanted to. He needed to. For Kat.
Frank used a blood pressure cuff to cut off the circulation in Eric’s arm. “How
does that feel?” he asked, as he drew the needle out.
The  effects  were  again  almost  instantaneous.  Eric  closed  his  eyes.  “It  feels
great,” he said, and he laughed. “Jesus Christ.”
“Lay back, relax.” Frank helped Eric lie down. “Ride with it. It’s okay.”
“Thanks,  Frank,”  Eric  murmured,  his  voice  slurred,  his  eyelids  drooping  to
half-mast.
“Like I said,” Frank replied with a smile. “That’s my job.”

Chapter Fourteen
“Frank,” Jerica whispered, tugging patiently on his sleeve.
Frank  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  at  her  from  an  examination  table  in  the
compound infirmary. He didn’t look sleepy or surprised at all. He looked at her like
he’d been expecting her.
“Good morning, Jerica,” he said, and he unfolded his legs across the table. He
stretched them and yawned simultaneously, like a cat in a warm sunbeam.
“I have to show you something.” She took a couple of steps back from him.
“What is it?” He swung his legs around  and  sat  up.  He  didn’t  move  with the
sluggish, dazed  motions  of  someone  who  had  been  snoozing.  He  moved  with  a
graceful, effortless ease, like a panther that had patiently waited for its prey to creep
close enough to pounce at.
Frank puzzled Jerica. He was always friendly to her. Yesterday, he had deferred
to her in connecting the black box from the Daedalus to the compound’s system.
He talked to her like she was a grown-up person, kind  of  like Eric  would,  except
Frank always seemed to have this sly look on his face when he was with her. It was
almost like he was waiting for her to slip up, to do something that would prove she
wasn’t as smart as everyone said she was.
She walked around him. She didn’t like the way he was watching her, studying
her.
“Eric.”  She  shook  the  pilot’s  shoulder.  Like Frank,  he  seemed  to  have  fallen
asleep in the infirmary, but unlike Frank, she’d been unable to rouse him.
Eric groaned. He looked very bad. His face was pale and damp, shining with a
light sweat. He wouldn’t wake up.
“Eric,” Jerica said again, more  urgently. She  turned  to  Frank.  “What’s  wrong
with him?”
Frank  smiled at  her,  a  sneaky  little I’m-one-up-on-you  smile. “He’s  just  sick,
Jerica. There’s something wrong with his leg, and it’s made him sick. I gave him a
shot to help him sleep, to help ease his pain.”
“He’s hurt?” Jerica reached instinctively for Eric’s hand.
“Not too bad,” Frank told her. He hopped down from the table. “He just thinks

it’s worse than it is. It’s in his head.” He tapped his forehead. “You know what I
mean?”
Jerica shook her head warily, suspiciously. She shied closer to Eric.
“I mean, his leg doesn’t hurt him as much as  his  mind does.  His  mind wants
morphine, so it tricks him into thinking he needs it, that he can’t go without it.”
“I  heard  Mom  and  Alex  talking  once,”  Jerica  said  quietly,  ashamed  and
embarrassed that she’d overheard. “Alex said Eric was addicted to morphine.”
Frank nodded. “He’ll be okay, though, Jerica. As long as we’re here, as long as
I keep  an  eye  on  him. He  can  clean  up  again  once  the  rescue  gets  here.  In  the
meantime, I think you know as well as I do that he’s suffering. Something is really
wrong with his cyborg leg.”
Jerica was silent for a long moment. She leaned over the examination table and
brushed Eric’s hair back from his brow. “He doesn’t want it. It’s not his fault. He
didn’t ask for that leg.”
“I know.” Frank stood next to her, and touched her blonde hair. “Eric’s lucky,
though. You know why?”
She shook her head, watching Eric sleep, listening to the rough, labored sound
of his breathing.
“He wasn’t an expendable commodity,” Frank said. “Otherwise, he’d probably
be dead. Let him sleep, Jerica. He’s exhausted. What did you have to show me?”
She studied him for a minute. He smiled at her, friendly enough. She didn’t really
trust him completely. Certainly not like she trusted Eric.
“Come on.” She led Frank out into the corridor. “I was playing with the probe,
making it go through the service ducts and stuff. And I found it.”
“Found what?”
She walked ahead of him, running her fingers down the wall as she walked along.
Her skin made a soft whispery sound as it went. “You’ll see.”
They walked along in silence for a moment. Frank didn’t press her to  tell him
more. Jerica found that odd. Most adults, even Eric or her mother, probably would
have needled at her to tell. Frank seemed just the opposite, content to let her  lead
him to her discovery, to share it with him in her own time and fashion. She wasn’t
sure if she was pleased by this or not.
“What  did  you  mean  when  you  said  Eric  wasn’t  expendable?”  she  asked,
glancing back at Frank.
“I mean, Eric was a military pilot,” Frank said. “He was a very good, very well
paid military pilot. He was an investment of a lot of time and a lot of money. He did
a good job and he did what he was told to do.”

“So?” Jerica watched the floor, her small shadow in front of her. She could see
Frank’s shadow to her left.
“So, the government controls the Stellar Corps. They were Eric’s boss. It was
their time and their money that made Eric a good pilot. They weren’t about to let a
little something like a crash, or a mangled leg ruin their prized investment.”
“Eric  is  not  an  investment.”  Jerica  looked  at  him,  frowning  slightly.  “He’s  a
person.”
“Perhaps,” Frank remarked musingly, and he smiled at her. There was something
about the way the cold fluorescent light overhead flickered across his eyes, the way
it  seemed  to  caper  across  his  grey,  nearly  silver  irises;  something  that  bothered
Jerica.  She  looked  away quickly,  her  long  hair  whipping  across  her  face  in  soft
tendrils.
“I mean…” Frank’s shadow elongated, growing closer to hers. “Do you think if
you or I, or your mother, maybe, had lost a leg when we crashed here that anyone
would have paid for us to have a replacement like Eric’s?”
She frowned again and turned around to walk a  couple  steps  backwards.  She
narrowed her eyes at him. “I don’t know.”
“Yes, you do. You know as well as I do Shinkansan wouldn’t pay for that kind
of operation. Eric was a soldier. A very good soldier. And the government took care
of him because of that. You know what taxes are?”
Jerica glowered at him again and he laughed. “Right, silly me. We all pay them,
people like your mom, Eric and me. That’s where the government gets its money. All
of  it—including  what  was  spent  to  fix  Eric’s  leg.  And  because  he  was  a  good
soldier, the government spent our tax money to help him. But they wouldn’t do the
same for your mom or me, even though it’s just as much our money as Eric’s. Do
you think that’s fair?”
Jerica didn’t know what to say. It didn’t seem fair to her, to hear Frank tell of it.
“But Eric needed his leg fixed,” she said. “He would have died.”
“Yes.” Frank nodded and now his shadow had drawn alongside of hers until the
two ran together like warm maple syrup, pooling into one dark puddle. “He would
have.”
They  reached  the  top  of  a  flight  of  metal  industrial  steps  that  led  into  the
sub-basement of the compound. Jerica looked between her feet, down the stairwell,
holding the railing in case she lost her balance. “Here.” She pointed.
Frank  stood  opposite  her  and  followed  her  gaze.  He  made  a  harsh,  harking
sound  in  his  throat,  like  he  was  going  to  cough  up  a  loogie,  and  winked.  She
frowned, but she really thought it was pretty funny.

“Shh!” she told him. “Cut it out. Listen!”
They both listened. She could hear it, plain as day, and hoped he could, too.
“Sounds like water running,” Frank said.
She nodded, and then started down the staircase, eying her footing carefully.
The sub-cellar floor near  the  foot  of  the  stairs  had  been  dry  when Jerica  had
gone to find Eric and Frank. There was now at least an inch of standing water there,
shimmering, quivering. The  golden  lights on  the  ceiling bounced  crazily off  of  its
moving surface and danced across the walls.
Jerica and Frank stopped on the bottom steps.
“What the…?” Frank said.
The sound of rushing water was louder now, a dim roar.
“Jerica,  where is  this  coming  from?”  Frank  stepped  into  the  pool.  The  water
splashed up over his boot toes.
“This way.” Jerica led him through the water, over to a huge, hulking, rumbling
piece of machinery. Pipes and conduits twisted and wound in and out of it. It was an
enormous black metal octopus. Water gushed out of its belly in torrents.
“Holy shit!”  Frank  yelled over  the  din  of  the  water.  He  stood  in front  of  the
machine, both  hands  on  his  head.  The  water  by  the  machine  was  several  inches
deep, cresting almost above his ankles. It splashed him, drenching the front of his
pants.
“Well,  this  is  just  great!”  He  waded  over  to  Jerica  and  started  to  laugh
hysterically. “Jesus Christ! Do you know what that is? It’s our water supply! This is
the compound’s water purification and storage system. And it’s spilling all of  our
water all over the basement floor!”
Jerica stared at the machine in aghast.
“That pipe in the front,  where all the  water’s  coming  from,  is  busted,”  Frank
said. “It needs to be welded or sealed. You don’t know if there’s a water main or
something around here, do you? Someplace we can turn the water off? Otherwise it’
s all going to be gone and there won’t be any left for us.”
She shook her head. “Maybe there are schematics up in the—”
“There isn’t time for that!” Frank cried, and he began to laugh again. She knew
he didn’t really think it was  funny,  and  that  he  was  laughing because  he  couldn’t
figure out what else to do.
“Ah, goddammit!” Frank shouted, frustrated.
He splashed back over to the machine and began to wander around it,  poking
here and there, pulling on this and that.  He  slammed  his  fist  into  it as  hard  as  he
could, angry and frustrated. “Goddammit! Jerica, help me, will you?”

She went over to him, flinching as the water peppered her face and hair.
“Look for something, anything—a gauge or  a  button  or  a  knob,”  Frank  said.
“Something to make it stop!”
Jerica began to circle the machine. The water level was rising fast, and was nearly
halfway up her calves. She heard the pipes above her creaking and groaning from the
force of the water racing through them.
“I can’t see anything!” she hollered at Frank.
She heard a light snap, like a green tree limb cracked over someone’s knee. The
pipe directly over her head burst, and water gushed down on her.
Jerica screamed  and  sucked  in  a  mouthful  of  water.  She  gagged.  The  force
knocked her off her feet, face-down into the pool. The water falling on top of her
was too great, and she couldn’t get up and scramble away.
“Frank!” she screamed, terrified, and then she swallowed water again. She began
to struggle, unable to breathe. “Fuh…Fruh…!”
Suddenly the water stopped, slowing across her head and shoulders to a thinning
stream. Its rushing roar fell silent, and was replaced by melodic trickling, spattering
sounds.
“Jerica!” Frank splashed clumsily over to her. He got his arm underneath her and
jerked her up out of the water.
“Ellie,” he said, frightened. “El, honey, are you okay? Can you hear me?”
She nodded, choking. She spit up water and began to cry.
“Oh, God!” Frank pulled her close, hugging her. “Oh, thank God!”
“Wuh…what happened to the water?” Jerica whispered.
“I found a cut-off switch over on the other side.” Frank  knelt in front  of  her,
cradling her  face  between  his  hands.  His  eyes  were  round,  enormous  with fright.
“Are you all right? Are you hurt?”
She  shook  her  head,  shuddering  with  chill.  “I  want  my  mommy,”  she
whimpered, her eyes swimming with sudden tears.
He hugged her again, gathering her in his arms and lifting her off the ground. “Of
course you do,” he said softly, as she wrapped her arms fiercely about his neck.
 
***
 
They met Eric in the corridor on the way to the infirmary. His gait was shuffling,
clumsy and he leaned his shoulder against the wall.
“Jerica…Frank,  what  happened?”  He  reached  out  to  touch  her,  but  she  was
suddenly angry at him, furious for not telling her about his leg.

She  ducked  around  his  hand.  “Leave  me  alone,”  she  snapped  at  him  hotly,
watching with satisfaction as he recoiled, hurt. “Just go away!”
She took off running down the hall, feeling the water squish up out of the soles
of her shoes every time her feet smacked against the floor. She was freezing, and her
wet clothes clung to her skin, feeling nasty.
She ran until she reached her mother’s room and ducked inside. The door slid
shut  behind  her.  She  kicked  one  shoe  and  it bounced  off  the  wall over  the  bed,
leaving a wet spot. She hopped on one foot and yanked the other shoe off.
She wriggled out of her wet clothes. She pulled on a clean, dry shirt and began
to  fight with the  buttons.  Her  fingers  felt  like  ice,  numb  and  uncooperative.  She
shook her head and her damp ringlets whipped around. She grabbed a towel off of
the chair by the bed and tried to wrap her hair up in it the way her mom would.
There was a knock at the door.
“Go  away!” Jerica  climbed  into  bed  and  curled  up,  fetal-style.  She  drew  the
covers up to her chin and shivered.
“Jerica, it’s me, Eric.”
“I don’t want to talk to you.”
The door opened and Eric walked in. Jerica could tell he was limping, and she
could hear the noises the hinges and lifts were making in his leg; soft, sliding sounds,
metal against metal.
“Get out,” she said. But she was worried about him, even if he had lied to her.
He looked like he was hurting.
“Jerica, are you okay?”
“I’m fine. Get out.”
“What did I do?” he asked, bewildered. “Why are you mad at me?”
Jerica sat up. The towel dropped off her head. “I thought you were my friend.”
She scowled and threw the towel at him.
“I am your friend.” He caught the towel, came to her bedside and knelt before
her. “What are you talking about?”
Jerica looked at him solemnly. “Your leg is really fucked up.”
Eric blinked and then laughed. “Don’t say that.”
“What?”
“Fucked up. Don’t say that.”
“Why? You can say it. Mom says it. Frank says it—a lot.”
“So?” Eric raised his brow. “Doesn’t mean you can—”
“Why didn’t you tell me about your leg?” She touched his face, tracing down
the slope of his nose with her fingertip.

“I just…I…how come you know, anyway?”
“Frank told me. I kept trying to wake you up, and he finally just  told  me  you
were sick because of something being wrong with your leg.”
Eric looked down at the floor. “I’m sorry.”
“I mean, I can see why you wouldn’t want Mom to know. She’d just freak out.
But you know I won’t say a word. Frank said he had an idea of how to fix it. Maybe
I can help.”
He smiled at her. He touched her cheek and his hand was warm. “Thanks.”
“I  knew  anyhow,  though.  You  look  terrible.  And  you’re  limping.  And  it’s
making some kind of weird noise.”
“I know.”
“What’s the matter with it?”
She was afraid,  terribly, desperately  afraid  for  a  second  that  he  was  going  to
open  his  mouth  and  talk  to  her  like  she  was  a  little  girl,  like  she  was  dumb  or
something. She  really wouldn’t  blame him if he  did.  She  was  a  little girl, and  no
matter how smart she was, it was a difficult thing to forget sometimes.
“Jerica, there’s something wrong with the fluid system,” he said instead, looking
at her straight in the eyes. “I think when it got crushed in the shuttle, it ruptured some
of the conduits. So now I think there’s lubricants leaking, making me sick, hurting
my leg.”
“What’re you going to do?” she asked quietly.
“I don’t know. Frank wants to try surgery, to cut my leg open and see if he can
stop the leak somehow.”
“What if that doesn’t work?”
“I don’t know,” Eric admitted.
“Are you…are you going to die, Eric?”
“No, Jerica,” he said, pressing his hand against her face. “I’m not going to die.”
He tried to smile but his eyes were round and bright and afraid. “I don’t want
your  mom  to  know  about  this,  okay?  Promise  me  you  won’t  tell  her.  She  can’t
handle it right now, so I need this to be our little secret.”
It wasn’t a little secret by Jerica’s estimation, but  she  didn’t  say  anything. He
was trying to make her feel better, and she wanted him to believe that it had worked.
“I promise, Eric.” She grabbed hold of him, hugging him. “You’ll be okay. I won’t
let anything happen to you.”
She knew he wouldn’t take any real comfort in her saying that. She wished she
was bigger, a grown-up, like her mom. He would believe her, be comforted by her if
she was a woman, if her arms were strong, a woman’s arms.

But she was just a little girl.
“Thanks,” he whispered. “I need that.”
Chapter Fifteen
The morphine was wearing off fast.
Eric stumbled in the corridor outside of Jerica’s room. He caught himself against
the wall. He rested his forehead against the back of his hand and stood there, leaning
heavily, his breath coming in quick, ragged gasps.
His face was hot, burning up. His leg hurt so bad he wanted to curl up and cry.
He tried to walk a few more paces, and staggered into an open doorway. He saw
Frank standing with his back to the door. He was naked from the waist up, pulling
on a clean, dry jump suit.
There was a strange, raised mark on Frank’s left shoulder,  maybe  four  inches
long and two inches wide. It looked like a figure eight rolled over onto its side.  It
was familiar to Eric, but he couldn’t figure out where he’d seen it before.
Frank seemed to sense  him standing  there,  and  he  glanced  over  his  shoulder.
“You shouldn’t be on that leg.”
“I know, but I…” Eric began, still troubled by the mark on Frank’s back.
Frank  straightened  and  pulled  the  suit  up  over  his  shoulders.  “See  something
green?” There was a strange, cutting edge to his voice. Eric glanced down at his feet,
admonished.
“The morphine wear off already?” Frank said.
Eric nodded. “I don’t…I don’t feel so good.”
“Come here.” Frank went to his side and led him across the room, helping him
sit against his bunk. He knelt beside Eric and prodded carefully at  his  knee.  “The
swelling’s getting worse. You’re going to have to keep off your feet as much as you
can. Did Jerica tell you about the water tank?”
“Yeah.”
“We’re going to have to postpone that surgery now, at least for today.” Frank
glanced at him, apologetic. “I’m sorry, Eric. Kat’s going to need at least one of us
to help survey the damage. We can try tomorrow.”
Eric nodded,  even  though  the  idea  of  waiting even  another  day,  enduring  the

swelling pain in his leg made him press his lips together, stifling a dismayed whimper.
“Lie down,” Frank said, easing him back. “Let me go down to the infirmary, get
you some morphine. You’re due for another shot.”
Eric  closed  his  eyes  against  a  miserable  wave  of  vertigo.  He  heard  Frank’s
footsteps as he walked out of the room. He lay against  Frank’s  bed,  trembling in
pain.
“Eric?”
His eyes  snapped  open  as  he  heard  Kat’s  voice,  tinny  through  the  intercom.
“Frank? Where are you guys?”
He sat up, and this  time there  was  nothing he  could  do  to  stop  himself from
groaning  aloud.  He  doubled  at  the  waist,  crumpling  against  Frank’s  tangled
bedclothes.  He  knocked  Frank’s  nightstand  with his  elbow,  sending  a  dog-eared
paperback and Frank’s watch spilling to the floor.
“I’m in the  infirmary, Kat,”  Frank  said  over  the  intercom.  He  sounded  light,
nearly chipper, as if all was well in the world. “Good morning. There’s coffee in the
commissary, if you want any.”
Eric grimaced as he reached down, picking up Frank’s fallen watch and returning
it to the nightstand. God, please don’t let Kat see me like this, he thought.
“Why is there water all over the floor in the hallway?” Kat asked.
Eric leaned over, his fingertips fumbling against Frank’s book. He picked it up
and caught sight of the title before he set it back on the bedside table: Foundations
for A New World Economy, by David McDonald. The book was cheaply made, the
cover stock thin, the binding flimsy, as if someone had them made at a small-town
print shop.
“Why  don’t  I  meet  you  in  the  commissary?”  Frank  said  to  Kat  over  the
intercom. “I’ll explain it to you then.”
Like the peculiar mark Eric had seen on Frank’s back, something about the book
seemed familiar to him. He couldn’t quite put his finger on it. He turned the book
over in his hand, trying to focus his bleary gaze on the back cover blurb:
In this practical handbook for  a  changing  global  market,  David  McDonald
identifies  key  elements  for  continuing  domestic  diversification  and  international
profit-sharing while exploring… 
“David McDonald,” Eric murmured. I’ve heard that name before.
He glanced down at the floor and saw a business card lying face-down against
the tiles. Frank had been using it as a place marker in the book, and it had fallen out.
He reached for it, lifting it in hand. He had less than a second to read the name Reba
Crowe  and  to  see  the  words  New  England  Militia  inscribed  beneath  that  same

strange, sideways eight he had seen on Frank’s back before he heard footsteps in
the hall—Frank returning from the infirmary.
He tucked the business card at random inside the book and shoved it back onto
the nightstand just as Frank ducked through the doorway.
“You shouldn’t be sitting up.” Frank held  a  readied  hypodermic  needle  in his
hand as he hurried to the bedside. “You’re only making things worse for yourself,
Eric. You need to listen to me.”
David McDonald, Eric thought. New England Militia. Why the hell does that
seem so familiar to me?
“I need to go talk to Kat.” Frank slipped his arm around Eric’s waist. “Come
on. I’ll help you to your room.”
They limped together down the hall, with Eric leaning heavily against Frank. He
all but collapsed onto his mattress once they staggered across his threshold. Frank
pulled a rubber strap out of his pocket and knelt in front of the bed.
He pushed Eric’s shirt sleeve back and tied the rubber band taut about his arm.
Eric thought of his dream when they’d  returned  from  retrieving the  black  box,  of
how Doc had come to him and forced morphine on him.
Take it, boy. Take your medicine. 
“See something green?” Frank asked him again, glancing up and smiling slightly
as he pulled the needle back from Eric’s arm.
“No.”  Eric  shook  his  head,  feeling the  morphine  sweep  over  him in a  heavy,
soothing cloak. “No, I…I didn’t see anything…”
His voice faded, his eyelids fluttered and his mind succumbed to shadows.
Chapter Sixteen
“You better this morning?” Frank asked Kat.
She sat across from him in the kitchen and shook her head, sipping her coffee.
She hadn’t seen Eric yet that morning, but had made no effort to do so. She  had
deliberately taken a different route through the maze of hallways in the compound to
avoid his room. She didn’t know why, but the idea of seeing him, of acknowledging
even wordlessly  what  had  happened  the  night  before  left  her  filled  with  clammy
anxiety. “No. I don’t think I’ll be better for awhile.”

“I wish I had something good to tell you…” Frank said.
“But you don’t.” Kat half-laughed. “Hit me with it,  Frank.  Nothing else  could
make it worse.”
Frank raised his eyebrows as if to  say  “Okay,  you  asked  for  it.” He  told  her
about the water purification and storage machine.
Kat stared at him blankly. “How…” she said, and then she licked her lips. “How
much water do we have left?”
“Near  as  I’ve  been  able  to  tell  with  the  shitty  equipment  in  the  command
center…ten, maybe twelve days. And that’s if we all cut down to  a  shower  every
other day and don’t flush the toilets.”
“Ten to twelve days?” Kat exclaimed. “Jesus, what else! Well, that’s no big deal.
The platform will respond to our emergency beacon sooner or later and send help
our way. And we know it rains here. We must have driven past a dozen streams and
ponds on our way out to the crash site to retrieve the black box.”
“Yeah, but they’ll all have to be tested,” Frank said. “I mean, we  don’t  know
anything about the toxicology of the resources  on  this  moon.  If  the  water  here  is
drinkable, why would the company’ve gone to all the trouble of that fancy storage
and purification system?”
Kat sighed. “Thanks for the optimism.”
“Kat, optimism is nice, but I think we need to be realistic here. Besides, there’s
more. I found these.” He handed her three empty glass vials.
“Morphine. Where were they?” But she didn’t need to ask. She knew where he’
d found them; she knew with a terrible, despondent, twisting feeling in her gut.
“In  Eric’s  room,  just  under  the  bed,”  Frank  said,  wrenching that  knot  all  the
more.  “And  there  are  more  bottles  missing out  of  the  infirmary.  He’s  got  to  be
shooting up again.”
Kat closed her eyes, dismayed. “God, Eric…”
“He’s bad off, Kat. I cornered him about it this morning, and he told me there’s
some  kind  of  lubricant  leaking  in  his  leg.  It’s  poisoning  him,  Kat,  affecting  his
judgment. He didn’t want me to tell you about it. Kat, we’ve got to do something. If
we were on board the Daedalus I’d say put him in stasis until someone comes to—
”
“If we were still on the Daedalus, none of this’d be happening.” If we were still
aboard the Daedalus, Alex would be in charge. Alex would take care of it.
Frank was coming to her because they weren’t on the Daedalus anymore, and
Alex wasn’t in charge. Kat was. Alex was dead, and Kat was second-in-command.
And all at once, she would have given that up in a heartbeat.

Frank met her gaze evenly. “I know this is hard for you. But you know I’m right.
We have to do something.”
Kat sighed heavily, blinking past his shoulder to stave  off  the  sudden  sting  of
tears. “What do you have in mind?”
“There’s medication here that can put him into a stasis of sorts,” Frank told her.
“It will keep him sedated. And there’s plenty of narcotics to help his pain…”
“No.” Kat shook her head
“Kat—”
“No, goddammit!” she snapped. “No.” Her voice faded, choked with tears, and
she looked down at her lap as she felt them spill down her cheeks. I can’t do this,
she  thought,  the  damn,  whining voice  of  the  girl Chris  used  to  beat  rising to  the
surface  in her  mind.  Kat  had  thought  it behind  her  forever.  Please  just  leave  me
alone. I don’t want to be in charge anymore.
“We can put him under and I can try to open up his leg surgically. If I can find
whatever’s leaking in him, maybe I can stop it somehow,  or  at  least  keep  it from
getting into his system anymore. He’s not going to let me do that on his own—I’ve
already tried. I told you, he’s irrational. The pain, the drugs, the leaking chemicals—
they’re affecting his mind.
“This  is  his  only  chance.  If  we  don’t  do  it,  he’ll  probably  die.  Do  you
understand?  If  the  infection  in  his  leg  doesn’t  kill  him,  then  he’ll  kill  himself  on
morphine.”
Kat thought of the ominous, hissing sound Eric’s leg kept making; the pain that
would visibly cross his face. She wiped her eyes with the side of her hand and drew
in a deep breath, struggling to compose  herself,  to  force  the  weak and  frightened
woman within her away. “All right. Tell me what you have in mind.”
Chapter Seventeen
She’d agreed to Frank’s plan, but that didn’t mean she had to like it. Or not feel
like shit about it. Kat stood outside the door to Eric’s room, hesitant and uncertain,
her hand raised to knock, but unmoving. Frank didn’t know she was there. She’d
offered him some pretense  of  taking a  shower  first,  before  they  put  his  plan  into
action. I can’t do this to Eric, she thought. Not until I’m certain. Not until I look at

him again—see with my own eyes that what Frank wants to do is for the best.
She rapped her knuckles lightly against Eric’s door, but there was no reply. She
knocked again, more loudly this time, but still no response. “Eric?” she called quietly
through the door, sparing a quick, cautious glance over her shoulder to make sure
the corridor was clear. She didn’t want Frank to hear her, or come upon her in the
hallway.
Because he’ll want to know what I’m doing, and he’ll try to talk me out of it.
His mind is made up, and he thinks mine should be, too, but it’s not. I don’t want
to do this—any of it. I don’t want to be in charge, but goddamn it, I am, and I
need to be sure. I have to know this is the right thing.
She opened Eric’s door and slipped inside. The room  was  dark,  the  lights all
off, except for the dim glow of fluorescents from the bathroom, spilled in a narrow
path along the tiled floor. She could see him lying on his back in bed, bathed in this
faint illumination. He  was  naked  from  the  waist  up,  the  sheets  swathed  about  his
hips, hiding his legs from her view. She could hear him breathing; even from across
the room, she could tell her was hurting. She  could  hear  it clearly in each  ragged
gasp.
Oh, God, Eric, she thought, moving toward him. She knelt beside the bed. His
skin was glossed with a light sheen of feverish sweat. He was trembling. She touched
his face,  stroking  his  hair back  from  his  brow  and  his  forehead  felt  flushed  and
ablaze. Her heart ached. Why didn’t you say something? Why didn’t you tell me?
Maybe we could have done something, Eric, figured out some other way…
He jerked in start at her caress, his dark eyes flying wide.  “It’s  me,”  she  said
softly, and he visibly relaxed, blinking at her in sleepy bewilderment.
“Hey,” he murmured.
Kat smiled at him. “Hey, yourself.”
He reached for her, uncurling his fingers and cradling her cheek against his palm.
He propped himself up on his elbow and leaned toward her. She let his hand guide
her near,  and  closed  her  eyes  as  he  kissed  her.  His  lips  settled  softly,  and  then
parted, his tongue slipping against her own with deepening passion.
She moved from the floor, climbing into bed with him, and he  rolled  onto  his
back as she straddled  his  hips.  She  kissed  him desperately,  urgently, helping him
fight with her clothes, jerking against  the  fasteners  of  her  jumpsuit,  shrugging and
tugging her  way  free.  She  wanted  him;  she  needed  him—all  at  once,  more  than
anything, she needed Eric because she’d made up her mind to go along with Frank’s
plan. She’d decided from the moment she’d heard his pained gasps for breath when
she’d stepped into his room, when she’d understood at last just how bad things had

become for him.
Eric’s hand fell against her breast, pulling her bra down. He kissed her throat, his
lips settling against the angle of her jaw, the tip of his tongue circling the pulse point
of her flesh. Kat whimpered as his fingers toyed with her nipple, stroking until the
sensitive nub  hardened  fully, and  when his  mouth  moved  from  her  neck,  trailing
toward her breast, she closed her fingers in his hair, moaning aloud. He slipped his
fingers beneath the hem of her panties and between  her  legs,  stroking  against  her,
exploring the wet warmth of her apex. She shifted her weight and tightened her grasp
against his hair as he slid first one finger and then two deep inside of her, reaching up
into her sheath.
She could feel his arousal, hard and hot against her, and she  reached  between
them,  shoving  the  sheets  aside.  He  was  naked  beneath,  and  with  a  few  quick
movements,  a  wriggle and  kick  to  send  her  flightsuit and  panties  tumbling  to  the
floor, so was she. They said nothing; they didn’t need to. His urgent, nearly frantic
need was apparent, mirroring her own.
He caught  her  hips  between  his  hands  and  lowered  her  against  him,  pushing
himself fully into her. Kat folded herself over him, kissing him fiercely, falling into an
immediate, pounding rhythm, driving him in and out of her. She closed her eyes and
tried to cement this in her mind—the scent of him, the taste of him, the feel of his
body, strong and warm against her. She knew what she meant to do when this was
over, and that it would be a long time before she could be with Eric like this again—
if he’d even want her when it was over. When she climaxed, she felt tears that had
been  stinging  behind  her  eyelids  spill  down  her  cheeks.  Oh,  God,  Eric,  please
forgive me.
He  clutched  at  her,  gasping  against  her  mouth,  his  fingers  tightening  as  her
release drew his own. His entire body went rigid with the force of it, and when at
last, he relaxed beneath her, she tucked her cheek against his shoulder, turning her
face away so he wouldn’t realize her grief.
“Please don’t go,” he breathed. He sounded exhausted and in pain,  and  when
she rolled onto the bed beside him, frightened that her weight was hurting his leg, he
reached for her. “Please don’t leave me, Kat. Not yet. Please.”
She  managed  to  wipe  her  eyes  without his  notice  and  looked  at  him,  tucked
against his side. “I won’t,” she promised. She caressed his face with her hand. He
nodded once, his eyelids drooping closed.
She thought he fell asleep, and she lay in the darkness watching, him, her eyes
still swimming. It’s not fair, she thought, pressing her lips together in a thin line to
stave their trembling. It’s not fair, goddamn it, Eric. It shouldn’t be like this.

“I…I remember before,” he murmured suddenly. “When my Sovereign crashed,
I remember that was the worst part, thinking I would die all alone.” He opened his
eyes and looked at her. “I don’t remember how it happened, the crash. They told me
later something had malfunctioned on my navigation system.  Flying in space…it’s
like swimming underwater sometimes. You can get turned all around, flipped upside
down, going ass-backwards and you don’t even realize it. There’s no horizon, like
with a plane—nothing to orient you.”
He never  talked  about  his  crash,  not  like this;  not  more  than  in  passing.  Kat
watched as his gaze grew distant, his eyes somewhat forlorn, and realized she was
likely the only person to whom he’d ever confided.
“It didn’t hurt at first,” he said. “I crashed on this piss-ant, half-forgotten little
chunk of rock orbiting Saturn, but it had enough gravity that I was stuck there.” He
moved his hand demonstratively between them, hovering it in the air. “Like being in a
swimming pool almost. Everything was floating. Broken pieces of metal and glass,
engine  fluids,  coolants…blood  from  my  leg…everything  in  big,  round  globules,
everywhere, all around  me.  Everything in my  ship  was  cut  off,  only  the  auxiliary
generator was operational, so I had this one pale blue light from somewhere over my
shoulder to see by. It glittered off of everything.”
He looked at her. “Christ, I was scared. I’d never been frightened of anything in
my whole life, I don’t think, but I was all alone there on that rock, and I…I could see
how bad off my leg was. There was so much blood. The nose of my Sovereign had
struck first, and had pretty much sheared off  sideways  on  the  surface.  The  entire
front console had collapsed, and I could look down and see the inside of my leg.
My flight suit, my skin…it had all ripped away, and I…I could see meat and bone,
and everything was mangled…”
His voice faded, growing momentarily choked.
“You  don’t  have  to  tell  me  this,”  she  whispered,  her  brows  lifting  in  gentle
sympathy.
“Yes, I do.” He nodded, his brows narrowing slightly as if he summoned some
inner  resolve.  “I’ve  never  told  anybody.  I’ve  spent  the  last  few  years  trying  to
forget…pretend  it never  happened.”  He  looked  at  her,  pleading.  “I  want  you  to
know.”
Kat kissed him lightly, sweetly. “All right, Eric.”
“The life-support system to my helmet was leaking. I knew that. I could hear it in
my headset, this hissing sound, and I could see it—my oxygen leaking out  in this
thin, silvery little vapor trail in the cabin. It beaded on the windshield, freezing there
in a spiderweb pattern. It was so fucking cold. My auxiliary power wasn’t enough to

run any of the heaters. I…I couldn’t stop shaking.”
He was trembling again beside her, although whether from the recollection, or the
fever his leg was causing, she didn’t know. Kat snuggled closer to him, wanting to
comfort  him  now,  wishing  she  could  somehow  go  back  in  time  and  hold  the
frightened young man who had nearly died  on  that  desolate  moon  so  many years
earlier.
“All I kept thinking was that I didn’t want to die,” Eric said. “Not like that. Not
in some piece of shit corner  of  space  where no  one  would  ever  find  me.  Not  all
alone. That’s a scary fucking thing…to be all alone.”
“You’re not alone, Eric. Not here, not anymore.” And you’re not going to die,
Kat added in her mind. I promise, Eric. I’m going to help you.
He smiled at her. “I know.” He leaned forward and  kissed  her,  letting his  lips
linger against hers.
“How long were you out there?”
He shook his head. “I don’t know. Long enough to succumb to hypothermia. It
was so cold, and I remember this strange feeling coming over me all of a sudden,
like I just didn’t give a shit anymore. I wasn’t scared or hurting. I just…I remember
looking at the windshield, and it was frosted thick now with ice  from  my  airpack,
and I knew I had to be about out of oxygen, but it didn’t matter. I just felt tired. I fell
asleep. I had this weird dream where my dad came to get me, that he was standing
outside of my ship somehow in the middle of space, and he kept knocking on the
glass, trying to get me to wake up. I was going to be late, he kept saying, late for my
classes at West Point.”
He waggled his hand in front of her, and she caught the wink of light from the
bathroom against a gold band on his finger; his class ring from the military academy.
“Never  mind I’d  already  been  through  classes  and  graduated  by  that  point,”  he
remarked with a smile. He raised his brow slightly. “Jerica ever mention to you that
she wants to go there some day? West Point, I mean.”
Kat smiled. “Because you went there, yes.” Jerica wants to do everything like
you do, Eric, she thought and she blinked against the sting of new tears. You’ve been
a better father to her than her real one ever could be…or Alex, too…anyone, for
that  matter.  And  she’s smarter  than  me,  because  she’s seen  it  all  along.  She’s
always known.
Eric noticed her tears, and his brows lifted. “What is it?” he asked, brushing the
pad of his thumb against her cheek, catching one as it spilled. “Kat, what’s wrong?”
“Nothing.” She ducked away from his hand.
He studied her for a long moment, his dark eyes somewhat sorrowful, and she

knew he didn’t believe her. Not for a moment. “Kat, I…” he whispered. “There’s
something else I want you to know. It’s important and I…I should  have  told  you
before now, but I…I just…”
His voice faded, helpless and pained. It’s all right, Eric, she wanted to tell him. I
know.  Instead,  she  rolled  toward  him,  straddling  him  again,  positioning  herself
astride his hips once more. “Make love to me, Eric,” she breathed, leaning over and
kissing him. “Please just make love to me again.”
He cradled her face between his hands. “All right,” he said, smiling and nodding
against  her  mouth,  and  anything  else  he  might  have  told  her  went  unsaid  as  he
tenderly obliged her.
Chapter Eighteen
When Kat awoke later, she found herself alone  in the  bed.  She  dimly recalled
having heard the shower running earlier, but there was nothing but silence now. She
sat up, feeling groggy, tucking her hair behind her ears.  Eric’s  flight suit  from  the
Daedalus lay in a pile on the floor by his closet. His wallet, watch and West Point
ring all lay, neatly arranged, on his bedside table.
“Eric?” she called. There was no reply. For a moment, she nearly forgot about
Frank and his plan, but when she glanced at Eric’s watch and realized the time, her
heart seized with sudden, dismayed recollection.
“Shit!” She crawled out of bed, retrieving her own clothes from  the  floor  and
hurriedly redressing. She had wanted to draw Jerica aside before they put Frank’s
idea into action, to explain what they were going to do to Eric and why, so that the
little girl wouldn’t be frightened. Now, she realized, there probably wouldn’t be time.
“Shit!”
She left the room and rushed down the corridor, almost running headlong into
Frank as he ducked out of a neighboring storeroom.
“Where the hell have you been?” he asked, his voice low and sharp, his brows
narrowed. He grabbed hold of her elbow and she frowned, flapping him loose.
“I fell asleep.”
“Asleep?” His eyes flew wide and incredulous.
“Yes, Frank, asleep,” Kat hissed, balling her fists. “That’s what people do when

they’re exhausted—when it feels like their whole goddamn world is crashing in on
them. They fall asleep. And then when they wake up, they’re better.”
His expression softened, growing sheepish and somewhat ashamed. “I’m sorry.
I know this is hard for you. Do you think it’s easy for me?”
He looked pained, genuinely distraught, and Kat sighed. “No, Frank. I know it’s
not.”
“I’m trying to help Eric,” Frank said.
“I know.”
“He’s in the kitchen.” Frank nodded down the hall. “If we’re going to do this,
then we need to now.” He pulled something out of his pant pocket and offered it to
her—a capped syringe. When she didn’t immediately reach for it, his brows raised.
“Kat, we’ve talked about this. I thought we agreed—”
“We did.” Kat snatched the syringe out of his hand.
“It’s what’s best, Kat. He’s hurting. He’s in bad shape and he—”
“I  know,  Frank,”  she  snapped,  shoving  past  him  and  tromping  down  the
corridor.
“Remember our plan,” Frank said.
It’s your goddamn plan, Frank, not ours, she thought, frowning. I’m just going
along with it because it’s what’s best for Eric. God, please, it has to be.
She found Eric in the kitchen. He was leaning heavily—too heavily—against the
metal cabinets, watching coffee drip down into a small glass pot.
“Hey,” she said, and he turned, smiling at her.
“Hey, yourself.” He was pale, nearly ashen, and his normally handsome features
were gaunt and haggard. There were deep, cruel shadows around his eyes. He rested
most of his weight on his right leg and hip.
“How are you?” she asked, but it was an unnecessary question.
“I’m okay. How about you?”
She walked over to him, ran her fingers through his tousled hair. “Much better.”
His smile was weary, fragile. She leaned forward. “Oh, Eric,” she whispered.
She kissed his mouth gently. He kissed her back, with no hesitation.
“I love you, Kat.” He ran his hands up her back, tangling them in her hair.
She felt tears well in her eyes at this, and she struggled to contain them. “I love
you, too, Eric.” More than anything, Eric, please you have to believe me.
She forced herself to pull away. The longer she stood against him, the weaker
her resolve became.
“Are  you  hungry?”  she  asked,  and  she  walked  over  to  the  large,  industrial
refrigerator. She  opened  it and  pulled  out  a  small container  of  flour,  and  a  small

carton of liquefied eggs. “I thought I might make some pancakes.”
“Man, I haven’t had pancakes in forever.” Eric folded his arms across his chest
and watched her hunt for a mixing bowl. “I don’t think since I was a kid. I’m not
much of a cook on my own. Open a can of something and heat in the microwave—
that’s my idea of dinner.”
Kat didn’t look at him as she measured flour into the bowl. She blinked against
the sting of tears in her eyes.
“My mom used to make pancakes for me and my brother,” Eric remarked. “She
’d put little blueberries or slices of apples in them. They always tasted best in the
winter, on a snow day, when we’d get to stay home from school.”
Kat couldn’t look at him. She began to feel vaguely nauseous. She made herself
to turn around, to put a smile and force a note of nonchalant good cheer into  her
voice.  “Damn.  Would  you  do  me  a  favor  and  grab  the  milk out  of  the  fridge?  I
forgot to grab it.”
“Sure,” he said, and when he moved, she could see his limp clearly, and how it
hurt him to put weight on the leg. She could hear the hiss of the mechanics in his
hinges and lifts. She wanted to warn him, to cry  out,  protect  him, but  that  sound
haunted her, silenced her.
He walked toward the refrigerator. “Does the name David McDonald ring a bell
to  you?”  he  said,  turning  to  look  at  her.  His  expression  had  changed,  his  eyes
growing troubled.
Puzzled,  Kat  shook  her  head,  but  then  remembered.  “Wait  a  minute.  Yeah.
Colonel David McDonald? He’s a politician or something, isn’t he?”
At the word Colonel, something in Eric’s face had shifted. “Not a politician. He’
s the head of Legion.”
“Legion?”  Again,  it  took  Kat  a  moment.  She  recalled  a  snippet  from  her
conversation  with  Trina,  less  than  an  hour  before  the  Daedalus  had  exploded.
“They’re a militia group, aren’t they? The ones that tried to secede Texas? Trina told
me they’ve been blowing up federal buildings back at home while we were all still in
cryostasis.”
“Yeah,  I  read  that  on  the  news  feed  before  the  crash.”  Eric  opened  the
refrigerator door. She had no accounting for the troubled look on his face, the way
his brows started to narrow. “Where’s Frank?”
“He’s…uh, around, I’m sure.” As she spoke, she saw Frank duck through the
doorway, creeping into the room. She  cut  her  eyes  back  toward  the  mixing bowl
before Eric noticed her attention and followed her gaze.
“I need to talk to you later on,  then,  when he’s  not,”  Eric  said,  propping  the

refrigerator door open against his hip, an odd note in his voice. “In private, just the
two of us. Maybe after breakfast?”
She looked at him. “What’s going on?”
“Nothing.” He shook his head, reaching for the milk. “I mean, probably nothing.
I saw something today, this morning, a mark on his back. It looked familiar at the
time, though I couldn’t quite place it, but then I saw a book on his—”
Frank grabbed him from behind.
Startled, Eric dropped the milk, and it fell to the floor, splashing across his boots
and the tiles.
“Kat!” Frank yelled. Eric struggled with him, fighting.
Kat slipped the hypodermic Frank had prepared out of her jumpsuit pocket and
pulled the little plastic cap off the needle.
Eric saw the syringe and began to fight harder with Frank. “What are you doing?
Kat! No! No, no, goddammit, let go of me!”
He managed to pull his arm away from Frank and accidentally hit Kat, knocking
the syringe out of her hand.
“Goddammit, Kat!” Frank yelled.
Kat dropped down on her hands and knees and tried to reach the needle. It had
fallen underneath a cabinet, and it was a tight squeeze. She looked up and saw Frank
ball his  hand  into  a  fist  and  slam  it into  Eric’s  leg.  Eric  twisted,  screaming,  and
immediately quit fighting. He slumped, limp, in Frank’s arms.
“Eric!” Kat cried.
“Get  the  needle,  Kat!”  Frank  was  red  in  the  face,  breathing  hard  from  the
struggle with Eric.
Her fingers brushed against it and she grabbed it.
Frank twisted Eric’s arm and forced it down across the countertop. “Do it!”
Eric tried to pull his arm away. “Kat, no!” He shook his head. “Please don’t do
this—whatever he’s told you, don’t—”
Frank clapped his hand over Eric’s mouth, muffling him. Kat stuck the needle in
his arm, deep into the meat of his muscle like Frank had instructed, and depressed
the plunger. She glanced at his face, and that was a mistake. His eyes were wide and
dismayed, screaming wordlessly at her, What are you doing?
She pulled the needle out and staggered away, horrified and disgusted. It slipped
out of her fingers and bounced off the floor.
Frank let Eric go and he staggered against a nearby countertop. Frank reached
for him, but Eric shrugged him away. “Don’t…touch me…” he seethed. He directed
his words to Frank, but kept his eyes pinned on Kat, hurt and bewildered.

“Eric, I…” Kat began, but she didn’t know what to say.
The drug worked fast, and he swayed, collapsing clumsily to his knees. Frank
knelt beside him, and again, Eric tried to push him away.
“Don’t touch me,” he groaned, his voice breathless and slurred. “You…you son
of a bitch…” He crumpled forward, slumping against Frank’s chest. Kat watched as
Frank gently lifted the younger man in his arms. Eric moaned lightly.
“Yes,  I  know,”  Frank  said  to  him, quietly, soothingly,  turning his  face  down
toward Eric’s. “I know that hurts.”
Kat followed  Frank  as  he  carried  Eric  to  the  infirmary.  She  felt  ashamed  of
herself for tricking Eric, for what they were about to do to him.
It’s not  too  late,  she  told  herself.  It’s  not  too  late  to  stop  it.  You’re  still  in
charge. Frank will listen to you. Say something. Stop it now, Kat.
But the frightened girl inside made  her  keep  her  mouth  shut,  pressing  her  lips
together,  biting down  against  them,  the  way  she  would  when  she  tried  to  avoid
rousing Chris’ violent anger.
It is too late. I’ve done everything wrong. I don’t want to be in charge. Frank
is right…this has to be what’s best for Eric… 
She followed Frank into a small room off the infirmary. It was bare except for a
small hospital cot. Frank laid Eric down and immediately began to cinch restraining
straps around his wrists and ankles.
“What are you doing?” Kat said, dismayed. “No, Frank, come on—”
“It’s to protect him, and us. You saw how violent he got. He hit you. What if he
wakes up and decides to go after Jerica?”
Kat blinked at him. “Eric wouldn’t do that. He’d never hurt Jerica.”
“You don’t know that, Kat,” Frank told her grimly. “You don’t know him now.
He’s in pain and he’s an addict—he’s not the man you knew. He’s totally irrational.”
She fell silent, clutching her hands together, rubbing her fingers, pushing against
her knuckles. “Please don’t hurt him.”
Frank turned to her, and his brows lifted in pity. “I’m not going to hurt him.” He
walked over to her and pressed his hand gently against her cheek.  “I’m a  doctor,
Kat. I want to help him. This is so hard for you. I know. But we’re doing the right
thing. Please believe me. You can trust me.”
He stroked her hair. “Let me give you a mild sedative. Something to calm your
nerves and I’ll finish up here. I’ll take care of everything.”
“No,” she said. “No, I’m in charge, and I…”
“It’s okay. Let me take care of it.”
She  nodded  wordlessly,  and  let  him  lead  her  back  into  the  infirmary.  She

watched him prepare the syringe. “Roll your sleeve up, Kat,” he told her.
She did, fumbling with her cuff button.
“Now I want you to go straight to your room and relax.” He waggled his finger
at her, feigning severity. “What  is  it you  told  me  earlier? ‘That’s  what  people  do
when they’re exhausted—when it feels like their whole goddamn world is crashing in
on them. They fall asleep. And then when they wake up, they’re better.’”
Kat knew that if she slept for the next hundred years, she wouldn’t wake up any
better. But at least it would dull her pain away, and help her forget what she’d done.
“Okay.”
“Smile,” Frank told her.
She cracked a small grin that felt flat and insincere, but it seemed to appease him.
She didn’t even wince when he stuck her with the needle.
 
***
 
She found Jerica in the TV room. The little girl lay snuggled under a blanket on
one of the couches, watching a movie on the enormous TV screen.
“Scoot over,” Kat said, wriggling under the covers with her.
Jerica slid her body over to make room. When Kat was situated, Jerica turned
onto her side and rested her head just above her mother’s left breast.
“Pup, I gotta talk to you for a sec.” Kat kissed the top of Jerica’s head. She put
her arm around her daughter’s narrow, delicate shoulders.
“You and Frank are going to keep Eric drugged up in the infirmary because of
his leg,” Jerica  said  without even  looking away  from  the  movie.  “I  know.  Frank
talked to me about it earlier. He wanted to know if I thought it was a good idea or
not.”
Kat blinked, startled. “What did you say?”
“I said I thought it was. Otherwise, Eric’d keep trying to pretend  nothing was
wrong. He’d keep sneaking morphine. He needs to be off his leg, Mommy. It was
only making things worse.”
Kat followed  Jerica’s  steady,  unflinching gaze.  People  were  screaming  on  the
TV, and things were exploding in great, fat fire balls.
“This is what’s best for Eric.” Jerica shifted slightly and snuggled closer to Kat.
“I think so, anyhow. So does Frank. So will you, you’ll see.”
Kat was quiet. She closed her eyes and tried to think of how to go to sleep. She
wondered if she could hibernate, like a bear, and sleep for months.

Chapter Nineteen
Two days later, Kat had not budged from her bed. She stayed there all day and
all night.
Frank  explained to  Jerica  that  she  was  suffering  from  shock  and  exhaustion.
“She just needs some time,” he told her, resting his palm against the cap of Jerica’s
head in a kind, somewhat fatherly gesture. “This is all been very shocking to her.”
Jerica still found it unsettling and a bit creepy.
Two nights after Eric had been  sedated,  Jerica  peeked  around  the  corner  into
Frank’s room. It was late, and he had snuggled her under her covers several hours
ago.  He  had  left  the  bathroom  light  on,  and  the  door  open  slightly,  as  per  her
instructions, but Jerica had been unable to sleep anyway.
She’d tiptoed  down  the  corridor,  hesitating outside  of  Frank’s  doorway.  She
was uncertain about turning to Frank for comfort. She’d always gone to her mom
before,  or  Eric.  She’d  almost  gone  down  to  sit  in  the  infirmary  with  Eric.  She
thought maybe she could draw some comfort simply from his presence, but in the
end, the thought of the dark, cool, silent infirmary, and Eric laying there as still and
quiet as a corpse was too creepy.
He was sitting with his back to her at a small table.  His  shirt  was  off,  draped
across his chair. She sniffled quietly, and he glanced behind him, startled.  “Jerica,
hey.”
He turned around in the seat to face her. He ran his hand through his hair, trying
to straighten it. “What’re you doing up?” His voice was low and gentle.
She shrugged uncertainly, pressed against the doorway.
“Come here,” he said and he held his hand out to her.
She shuffled over to him, twisting her fingers in her tousled yellow curls.
Frank touched her shoulder and pushed her hair back. “You okay, punkin’?”
Jerica nodded.
“You scared?”
“A little,” she said, and she was certain he would laugh at her. The little genius
scared of the dark.
But Frank  didn’t  laugh. He  hoisted  her  onto  his  lap,  put  his  arm  around  her

narrow shoulders and drew her close. “You don’t have to be scared. Everything’s
going to be just fine.”
“I don’t want bad things to happen to my mommy,” she whispered. “Or Eric.”
“Nothing will.” He gave her a squeeze. “I promise, El. I’m going to take care of
you.”
She closed her eyes and leaned against Frank’s chest. “Who’s El?”
“Huh?”
“El. You’ve called me that twice now. Once, down when the water tank busted,
and just now.”
“I…I’m sorry,” he said, and there was something very sad in his voice that made
her look up at him. “It just slipped out.”
“Who is she?” Jerica asked, and she happened to catch a glimpse of the tabletop
over his shoulder.
Frank had spread the contents of his billfold out: small, battered wallet-cropped
photos. Pictures of a beautiful dark-haired woman, another of an Indian woman, and
one of a little girl with black hair and bright, piercing blue eyes.
“Here.” Frank moved, twisting at the waist and taking one of the photographs.
He handed it to her, and  she  studied  it for  a  long  moment,  running her  fingertips
across the worn, curling edges. “Elaina. She’s my daughter. She’d be your age now.
She was four there.”
Jerica looked at him, puzzled.
“She died,” Frank told her. “Two years ago. She was very sick, and there was
nothing anyone could do for her.”
“She was very beautiful.” Jerica could plainly see the look of stunned, raw pain
in his face. His eyes were distant, staring at the tiled floor.
“Sometimes I think she was the whole world,” Frank said. “I loved her so much.
It felt like someone had just…cut my heart out.”
“I’m sorry, Frank.”
Frank shook his head slightly as if emerging from a reverie and smiled. “No, don
’t be silly, Jerica. It’s nothing for you to be sorry for.”
“Is this your wife?” Jerica asked, pointing to the woman in the other picture.
Frank nodded. “Yes. That’s Lauren. We’re divorced now. Do you know what
that means?”
“Yes. My mommy and daddy got divorced a long time ago.”
Frank  smiled.  “Well,  anyway,  that’s  how  I  ended  up  doing  this.  Deep  space
travel. I didn’t have anything waiting for me at home  but  memories,  and  I…”  His
voice faltered and broke off. “It was cheaper than therapy,” he finished, winking at

her.
Jerica smiled politely. She knew Frank was only trying to make a joke so that she
wouldn’t be upset.
“You remind me a lot of El. I guess that’s why I slip up and call you that. I’ll try
to be more careful.”
“That’s okay.” Jerica put her arms around his neck because he looked like he
needed it. “I don’t mind.”
As she hugged him, she noticed a mark on his back, just slightly down on his
shoulder, a figure eight rolled over onto its side, like a scar. “What happened here?”
she asked, touching the raised curve of flesh curiously.
“What?”
“This mark, here.”
“It means infinity,” Frank said.
“Is it a scar?” Jerica frowned. “It looks like it was burned.”
“It was. It was a brand.”
“Did it hurt?”
“A little.” Jerica looked at him, her eyes wide and he laughed. “It’s all right. I
wanted it done. It was a gift of sorts, from a friend.”
He tapped the photo of the Indian woman. She was plain looking, and her eyes
were small and closely set.  Jerica  thought  she  resembled  a  cartoon  rat;  there  was
something dark and not quite right about her.
“She did that to you?” Jerica asked, and Frank nodded. “Who is she?”
“Her name is Reba Crowe.”
“Is she your girlfriend?”
Frank chuckled. “I guess you could say that, sure.”
“Really?” Jerica asked, and she frowned. “She looks scary.”
Frank laughed. “No, she’s not scary, Jerica. She’s really very smart. She knows
a lot, about a lot. You’d like her. You two’d get along great.”
“You think?”
Frank nodded. “Oh, sure. Maybe you’ll get to meet her some day.” He stood,
lifting Jerica easily into his arms. “I think I’ve spilled enough guts for one night, huh?
Besides, it’s time for you to go to bed.”
“I’m not tired,” Jerica  said,  but  she  was  stifling a  yawn with the  back  of  her
hand.
“No, not at all,” Frank agreed, and Jerica giggled. She rested her  head  against
him, and let him carry her back to her room.

Chapter Twenty
Kat waited four days before going to see Eric. She spent that time in her room
for the most part, curled up in bed.
She listened carefully. She could hear Jerica and Frank sometimes, their voices
drifting up the corridors from the kitchen or the infirmary or the TV room. She didn’
t pay attention to the words. There didn’t seem to be any discernible, actually. Just
gentle, rhythmic, hollow sounds.
Sometimes she could hear Jerica laughing, high, shrill, squealing, and the rapid
thump-thump-thump of her feet as she scurried up and down the hallways, playing.
She didn’t come in to sleep with Kat anymore.
Frank brought her in plates of food, but Kat had no appetite. She didn’t really
feel like eating. She picked at it and forced most of the meals down.
She didn’t miss the careful, guarded way Frank looked at her.
She was afraid of them talking. She was afraid he  and  Jerica  would  decide  to
drug her up, too.
After  four  days,  she  got  out  of  bed.  Her  body  had  become  stiff,  sore  and
cramped. She knew she  had  to  smell, and  took  a  long  shower,  despite  the  water
situation. She brushed her hair and dressed in clean clothes. She went down the hall,
walking softly, resting her weight on the balls of her feet. She didn’t want Frank or
Jerica to hear her.
The infirmary was empty, and she crept into the adjoining room. Eric appeared
to be sleeping. There were several IVs hooked up to him, dripping mysterious clear
liquids into him.
He looked so peaceful.
Kat reached out and took his hand. His fingers were unresponsive, but very soft
and warm. “Eric,” she whispered, squeezing his hand. She touched his face. “Eric,
can you hear me?”
His fingers tightened slightly, pressing against hers. His eyes opened half-mast,
and  he  blinked at  her  sleepily, dazed.  “Kat,”  he  murmured.  His  voice  seemed  to
come from miles away. He closed his eyes again.
“Eric, how…how are you…?” she said, and suddenly her eyes burned. She felt

tears  coming,  swelling into  fat  beads,  and  starting  to  drip  down  her  cheeks.  She
reached up and rubbed at them, ashamed, guilty, embarrassed and lonely.
“How were your pancakes?” he asked in an exhausted, stoned voice.
“Please don’t hate me, Eric.  I’m sorry.  I  thought…I  thought  I  was  doing  the
right thing…”
His eyes opened. He  looked  at  her.  “Please…”  He  tugged  weakly against  the
wrist restraints. “Please, Kat…you can’t keep me here…like this…”
“Eric, no, no, you have to. You’re in so much pain, and—”
“No,” Eric said, his voice stronger. “No, Kat. I can…I can deal with the pain. I’
ve been through worse…much worse…and you and Jerica…you can’t be alone with
him…you can’t…”
“What?” Kat leaned forward. “What do you mean, Eric?”
He closed his eyes and was so quiet, she thought he had drifted back to sleep.
“Kat,” he murmured, semiconscious. “Kat…he’ll hurt you…he’ll…”
“Who will? Frank?”
Eric nodded once, not opening his eyes.
“Eric, no, Frank’s not going to hurt us.” She stroked his hair. “It’s okay. Frank’
s a good man. He’s our friend. I know it must not seem like that to you, but he’s
worried about you. He wants to help you. That’s why he—”
“You…you don’t…” Eric gasped, and she could tell he was struggling to remain
conscious. “You don’t know…what he is…what he does…he’s not…”
His voice faded off, and he lay still and silent, asleep again.
Kat felt his fingers relax and go limp in hers.
 
***
 
She found Jerica and Frank in the TV room. They were watching a movie and
sharing a huge bowl of popcorn.
Jerica saw her coming, and rushed over to her. She leaped up into Kat’s arms
and hugged her. “Mommy!” she cried with a grin. “Mommy! You’re okay now!”
“I’m fine, pup,” Kat said, and Jerica kissed her lips. Her small mouth tasted salty
from the popcorn. “I’m just fine now.”
Jerica’s long golden hair was piled up into a ponytail on top of her head. “This is
pretty.” Kat tugged on it playfully.
Jerica giggled. “Frank did it.”
“He did?”
Jerica nodded. “Are you gonna be better?” she asked, her pretty, porcelain-doll

features pinched with stern, parental concern. “I was worried about you.”
“Positively. I promise.”
“Cross your heart?” Jerica still didn’t look convinced.
“Of course.” Kat kissed the tip of Jerica’s nose. “I love you, pup.”
She sat on the couch opposite where Frank was stretched out. Jerica plopped
down next to her, wiggling happily. “How is Eric?” Kat asked.
Frank  smiled.  “He’s  just  fine.  The  drugs  have  slowed  his  systems  down.  It
should keep the stuff that’s leaking from spreading  so  fast  through  his  body.  His
swelling has slowed tremendously, and he’s resting comfortably.”
“When are you going to do the surgery?”
He acted like he was absorbed in the television. “Soon. Maybe tomorrow.”
What are you waiting for? Kat wanted to ask.  She  pressed  her  lips  together.
She didn’t know what Eric had meant when he’d said Frank would hurt them.
You don’t know…what he is…what he does…he’s not… 
What? she wondered. He’s not what?
“I’d like to see him,” Kat said and Frank cut her a sideways glance.
“Ah, Kat, I don’t know if that’s such a great idea right now. This is  a  critical
time. I don’t want to take a chance of upsetting him. It’d just make things  worse.
Maybe  after  the  surgery,  a  few  days,  when I  can  be  sure  he’s  going  be  okay.  I
promise you can see him then. As much as you want.”
“Me, too?” Jerica asked.
“Of course, Jerica,” Frank said. “I know how much you both care for him.”
This seemed satisfactory to Jerica, and she tucked her legs underneath her like
some sort of small egret. “Quit hogging the popcorn, Frank!”
He handed her the bowl. It was almost twice again as wide as her lap.
“Want some, Mommy?” Jerica offered the bowl.
“Sure.” Kat glanced over at Frank, but he was lost in the movie again, his gaze
riveted away from her. “I’m starving.”
 
***
 
They stayed up late. In Kat’s absence, Jerica and Frank had uncovered a horde
of games that had been put into storage for the colonists. After they grew bored with
the movie, Frank produced a deck of cards and they all sat around the coffee table,
munching popcorn and laughing while they  played  spades.  Jerica  grew  sleepy  the
longer they played, and finally Kat called it quits so that they could all turn in.
“Oh, Mom!” Jerica protested, but it was just for the principle of the whole thing.

She was tired and wanted to go to bed.
“You want to sleep in with me?” Kat stood, holding out her hand.
“No, I have my own room now,” Jerica replied primly, hopping to her feet. “I’m
not a baby, you know.”
“No, of course not,” Kat said. “Lead the way.”
Frank walked with them to Jerica’s room, and stood in the doorway while Kat
tucked  the  little girl in. “Good  night, pup,”  Kat  told  her  and  kissed  her.  “Sweet
dreams.”
“You, too, Mommy. I love you.”
Kat walked with Frank to his room, only a few doors down the corridor.
“This is my stop,” Frank said with a smile.
Kat paused for a moment. “Thanks for looking out for Jerica, Frank. These past
few days, I mean…I…”
“I didn’t mind. She’s a great kid.”
You don’t know…what he is…what he does…he’s not… 
Kat studied Frank’s face for  a  moment  before  walking away.  What  were  you
trying to tell me, Eric?
She didn’t go straight to her room. She waited until the light under Frank’s door
went out and then tiptoed up the hallway, toward the command center.
To her great surprise, she found all of the monitors operational, and all of  the
surveillance cameras apparently functioning.  There  were  bird’s-eye  vantages  of  all
different areas of the compound. She observed the empty  TV  room,  and  Jerica’s
darkened bedroom. She could see the little girl, curled up in her bed, her hand in her
hair, snoozing. In another, she saw Frank lying on his back in bed, his eyes closed.
In other monitors she saw  the  darkened  and  empty  kitchen,  the  infirmary and  the
small room where Eric lay in his  induced  coma.  She  also  saw  her  room,  and  her
messy, empty bed.
Someone had pulled a chair up close to the monitors, like they’d had a seat and
just observed.
She  found  Eric’s  room  on  one  of  the  screens.  There  was  some  kind  of
recording  device  underneath  the  screen,  and  Kat  examined  it  for  a  few  minutes
before figuring out how the “rewind” worked.
She stopped it after a moment. She saw herself, lying on Eric’s bed. Eric was
next to her, propped on his elbow. There was no sound, but Kat watched as Eric
leaned over and kissed her. She watched as in the video, she spread her fingers in his
hair and pulled him down toward her.
Kat’s hand shot out and she slapped the “stop” button. The monitor obediently

jumped back to its current view of the empty bedroom.
“What the fuck…?” She could have sworn Eric had told her on their first day
that none  of  that  kind  of  stuff  was  hooked  up.  Only the  most  primary computer
functions were supposed to be active upon their arrival. It was to have been Doc’s
job to bring everything else, including the security system, online. And it had never
been online before, when she and Frank had been examining the  Daedalus’ black
box.
Frank  must  have  brought  them  online.  She  couldn’t  imagine Jerica  doing  it,
even if the child had been able. Why would she want to?
But then again, why would Frank? 
Again, her mind turned to Eric, and the delirious warning he’d offered. You don’t
know…what he is…what he does…he’s not…
There’s four people in this compound, she thought. Why in the hell would you
want to spy on four people?
Chapter Twenty-One
The next day, Kat woke up and dressed without showering. She didn’t pull her
boots  on.  She  walked down  the  hall  in  her  bare  feet.  Her  footsteps  were  quiet,
although she wasn’t really trying to be discreet. She decided if Frank  was  up  and
about, if he cross-examined her, she would be up front and honest with him. And
then tell him to go to hell.
She  had  tossed  and  turned  most  of  the  night,  too  troubled  to  sleep.  The
surveillance cameras bothered her. The images of her and Eric making love bothered
her.
He was watching us, she thought, the idea making her shiver. Frank sat there in
the dark and watched us. He recorded it so he could watch it over and over again.
You don’t know…what he is…what he does…he’ll hurt you. 
What  did  Eric  know  about  Frank  that  she  didn’t?  He’d  tried  to  tell  her;  the
morning that they’d tricked him, in the kitchen as he’d reached  for  the  milk, he’d
started to tell her. I saw something today, this morning, a mark on his back…
What were you trying to tell me, Eric? And why the hell didn’t I listen? 
The infirmary was dark and quiet. The tiled floor was cold against the soles of

her  feet.  She  went  into  the  small  adjoining  room.  She  hesitated,  lingering  in  the
doorway. She watched Eric sleeping.
His face was turned toward the  doorway,  his  expression  peaceful  and  serene.
Kat walked over to the bed. She reached down and touched his hand, tracing along
his fingers. “What were you trying to tell me?” she whispered.
Her eyes flew wide and she abruptly jerked her hand away. It fluttered up to her
breast like a small dove with a broken wing.
Eric’s skin was cold.
Oh, my God. 
“Eric?” Kat whispered.
She pressed her forefingers against the side of his neck.
Oh, my God. 
His throat was cool. There was no pulse. She could see that he wasn’t breathing.
“Oh, my God!” Kat sucked in a whistling mouthful of air. She jerked her hand
away from him. She held it suspended in midair, out in front of her and floundered
back away from the bed. She could hear herself gasping for breath, wheezing, nearly
hyperventilating. “Eric…oh…!”
She thought of making love to him, the incredible warmth of  his  body  against
hers, the press of his breath against her face, the sound of his voice as he’d gasped
her name over and over with mounting insistence.
She thought of his kiss, his touch, his smile; that day on the Illinois tarmac so
long ago, when she had first fallen in love with him, when he had been her hero for
the first in a long series of countless times.
Her shoulders  hit the  doorframe,  and  she  stumbled.  She  was  making  strange
mewling, hiccupping sounds. Her knees folded and her legs buckled underneath her.
Her spine slid down the wall until her ass met the floor.
She  thought  of  him  telling  her  about  crashing  his  Sovereign  fighter,  of  how
frightened he had been in the ruins of his spacecraft. All I kept thinking was that I
didn’t want to die. Not like that. Not in some piece of shit corner of space where no
one would  ever  find  me.  Not  all  alone.  That’s a  scary  fucking  thing…to  be  all
alone.
“Oh, God,” she whispered, because that’s exactly what had happened. Eric had
died alone  in the  infirmary, tucked  in the  corner  of  some  wretched  compound  in
some piece of shit corner of space where no one would ever find them. And it’s all
my fault…!
She didn’t cry. She couldn’t  breathe.  Her  chest  hurt,  deep  down  beneath  her
breast. Her throat tightened and constricted.

“Mommy?”
Jerica stood in the door to the infirmary. Her hair was fuzzy and disheveled, and
her eyes were swollen and sleepy.
“Jerica, get out of here,” Kat gasped at her.
“Mommy, what is it?” Jerica walked in, bare-legged and bare-footed. “Is it…is it
Eric?”
She started to move past Kat, to go to him but Kat  grabbed  her  small wrists.
“Jerica, no.”
Jerica tried to pull away. “Stop it, let me go.”
Kat held her easily. “You can’t go in there, pup, let me explain…you just—”
“Let  me  go!”  Jerica  screeched,  struggling  violently.  Kat  realized  that  the  girl
understood what had happened. “Let me go, Mommy, let me go! Let me go!”
Kat released her, and Jerica stumbled. Her cheeks were bright with color, and her
eyes glistened moistly. She brushed by Kat and scurried over to Eric’s bedside.
Kat turned  her  face  down  to  the  floor.  She  touched  her  bottom  lip  with  her
fingers.
“Eric?” she heard Jerica say, so quietly and tenderly it nearly broke  her  heart.
She watched Jerica take his hand, either oblivious to or unafraid of the coldness of
his skin.
“It’s okay.” Jerica reached up through the bars around the bed and touched his
face. Her tiny fingers traced along his brow, his eyelids, the slope of his nose. She
touched his mouth, and ran her fingertip along the arch of his cheek. She pushed his
hair off of his forehead. “It’s okay, Eric.”
“Jerica… Pup, Eric is…he’s…”
“No,” Jerica said calmly. “He’s okay. He’s just sleeping.”
Kat slowly got to her feet. She felt light-headed. She swayed, and struggled to
focus on her land legs. She didn’t want to go near Eric again. She thought it would
shatter her heart to look at him.
She made herself walk toward her daughter. “He’s dead, pup,” she whispered,
and then she thought for sure she would cry. But there was nothing.
“No, he’s not. He’s just sleeping. He’s okay.”
“He’s not sleeping, pup.”
“Yes, he is!” Jerica jerked away from her, her eyes flashing angrily. “He’s not
dead,  he’s  sleeping! I  told  him I  wouldn’t  let  anything  happen  to  him.  He’s  my
friend.”
“I know, Jerica,” Kat said. “He’s my friend, too, and I love him as much as—”
“No, you don’t!” Jerica’s hands were balled into angry fists. She glared up  at

Kat, and she was suddenly the little woman again, with her ramrod-straight spine and
her furious, adult eyes. “You let this happen to him! You don’t love him! Look what
you’ve done to him!”
Kat drew back, hurt.
But there’s more than that, isn’t there? a hateful, scolding part of her mind—
Chris’s voice within her—hissed. You stupid bitch, you did let this happen to him—
and you know it. Frank may have done the dirty work, but you didn’t stop it. You’
re in charge. You had the power to prevent this, to take control, but it’s too late
now.
“Jerica, please don’t say that…I…”
Jerica  shoved  past  her,  fleeing  the  infirmary,  her  voice  choked  with  loud,
distraught tears. “Leave me alone! I hate you! Leave me alone!”
Chapter Twenty-Two
Frank sat in front the little monitors, watching them. It was dark in the command
center except for the soft blue glow of the screens, which bathed his face in dim,
eerie light.
You don’t know…what he is…what he does. Eric’s words echoed in her mind.
He’ll hurt you.
“Frank.”
He looked over at her. His expression was unreadable; she could have sworn he
was bored.
“Frank, Eric’s dead.”
He just kept looking at her in that blank, dull, what-the-fuck-do-you-want way. It
made her nervous, and she took a hedging step back.
“I know he’s dead, Kat. I killed him.”
Kat blinked at him. Her breath drew abruptly still and she struggled to find her
voice. I misheard him, that’s all, she thought. “I…I’m sorry…?”
“I said I killed him, Kat.” Frank leaned forward and crossed his arms in his lap.
“I gave him an overdose of morphine.”
She thought she was going to faint, or throw up. She couldn’t believe what he’d
just said. Her legs shook and weakened under her. She caught herself on the back of

the closest chair. It swung in her grip and she stumbled again. She fell to her knees.
Eric’s words resounded in her mind—You don’t know…what  he  is…what  he
does…he’ll hurt you—and she looked around quickly, frantically for some sort of
escape. She hadn’t closed the command center door behind her. She could bolt for
it, but Frank was less than three feet away. She couldn’t be sure that she could beat
him.
“Here, I’ll show you.” Frank held his hand out to her, his wrist cocked. She saw
he was holding some kind of remote control.
All of the screens jumped in unison and flashed to show the same scene. It was
the room where Eric lay, prone in bed. She saw Frank standing next to the bed, his
hands in his pockets.
She watched Eric’s head roll toward Frank.
“Now  listen closely,”  Frank  said.  There  was  something  in his  voice  that  was
nearly gleeful. “The sound quality is for shit, but you can make it out.”
“Frank…” Kat heard Eric say, his voice low and clouded with static.
“How are you feeling, Lieutenant Nagel?” Frank asked, sounding cheerful.
Eric tried to raise his arms, but the restraining straps held him securely.
On the screen, Frank chuckled. “Whoah, that was effective, wasn’t it? Might as
well lie still. You aren’t going anywhere.”
“I  know  you,”  Eric  said,  surprisingly  lucid.  “That  mark  on  your  back…that
brand…I…I know what you are…”
“Yeah,  well,  I’m  really  fucking  worried,  can’t  you  tell,  Lieutenant?”  Frank
reached down and grasped Eric firmly by the chin, forcing his head back.
“You…you killed Doc…”
Frank laughed. “I did. I cut his goddamn gook throat wide open—right after I
set thermal charges in the cargo bay of the ship.”
Kat swung toward Frank, her mouth dropped in a shocked, disbelieving gape.
“You…” she whispered. “Alex and I did hear an explosion. You blew up the ship.”
“Wuh…why…?” Eric asked on screen, taking the words out of Kat’s lips.
“Because there was no other way to get this,” Frank said to Kat, spreading his
arms  wide.  “All of  this,  the  entire  colony  of  X-1226.  Unspoiled,  undisturbed—a
whole new world.”
She  watched  as  Frank  delivered  Eric’s  lethal  injection.  He  had  pumped  the
morphine  into  one  of  the  many IV  tubes  sticking out  of  Eric.  She  watched  Eric
struggle  against  the  restraints  that  held  him  firmly.  She  saw  the  unmistakable
expression of terror on his face as Frank administered the morphine.
“No!” Eric cried. “No, no, God…don’t…”

Frank leaned over the bed rails again. Eric tried to turn his face away, but Frank
seized him roughly by the hair and forced his head back.
“Don’t worry, Eric. I’ll take good care of Kat and Jerica in your absence.”
“You son of a bitch…” Eric seethed. “You son of a bitch…don’t you fucking
touch them…”
And then the morphine had smashed into his brain.
His voice immediately faded as he swooned, his mind caving to the effects of the
drug. His struggles fell still, his entire body relaxing against the restraints. She could
hear his breathing slowing, growing heavier and weaker with each ragged, rhythmic
draw.
“Eric,” she whispered helplessly, and she placed her hand on the nearest screen
as if she hoped somehow to reach back through time and touch him, comfort him.
In  the  video,  Frank  kept  his  hand  across  Eric’s  forehead  as  if  to  console,
murmuring in a low, taunting voice. “Take it, boy. That’s it. Take it all.”
Eric was finally still. His head rolled to one side, and he looked just as he had
when Kat had discovered him.
“I’m sorry, Kat.” Frank pivoted in his chair toward her and started to rise to his
feet. “I would have let him live, I really would have, but he—”
Kat grabbed the nearest terminal keyboard and smashed it into the side of Frank’
s  face.  He  staggered  sideways,  crashing  into  the  security  monitors  and  then  Kat
whirled. She moved instinctively, scrambling for the door, but it slid shut in her face.
She heard the audible whine of the laser locking mechanisms. She  whirled to  face
Frank, frightened, and pressed herself against the door.
“Amazing little things, these computer remotes,” he remarked, waggling the little
control  at  her.  “Especially  once  I  figured  out  everything  I  could  hook  up  to  it.
Doors, cameras…you name it. I guess I’ve always had a knack for this shit, though.
Did I forget to stick that on my resume?”
He touched his fingertips gingerly against  his  temple,  where the  keyboard  had
gouged blood. He winced slightly and looked at Kat. “You didn’t have to do that. I’
m not going to hurt you, Kat. You or Jerica.”
“What do you want from us?” Her main avenue of escape was gone; she cut her
gaze around the dimly lit room, searching for any other exit, anything else she could
use as a weapon.
“Everything,” he said. “I want it all, Kat. Only…you don’t know what that is, do
you? You don’t even know what you’ve got.”
He laughed. “Right here, this place, this compound—you, me and Jerica. It’s the
greatest thing in the world. I mean, can you imagine…no, no, of  course  you  can’

t…your heart ripped out of you, thrown on the table so you can watch it wriggle and
dance and squirm…”
He began to pace, muttering and laughing, his fingers toying with the bloodied
place on his forehead. Kat stared at him in blank fright and disbelief. He’s crazy. Oh,
my God, I’m locked in here with a crazy person.
“I  held  my  baby  girl’s  hand  and  she  died!”  Frank  whirled to  her,  screaming,
making her shrink back in terror. “Why? I’m a doctor, for Christ’s sake! It was my
responsibility, my job…and I let her slip away…I…”
He fell silent. He  lowered  his  head,  and  his  shoulders  slumped  in  toward  his
chest. For a moment, Kat thought he was weeping.
“Frank…?”
He raised his head, and she saw he was laughing, silently, nearly breathlessly.
“I can have it all again,” he said. “A goddamn bona fide family. All for me. I can
see it in Jerica’s eyes. Ah, sweet Jesus, such a beautiful, fucking brilliant piece  of
genetic engineering is that kid, Kat. My friends are gonna love her.”
“Your friends?”
He nodded. “Yeah.” He started to unbutton the front of his flight suit. “We’re
Legion. Maybe you’ve heard of us.”
A leaden  chill  shuddered  through  her  as  again,  she  remembered  the  day  the
Daedalus had exploded; she had been talking to Trina, aboard the sister ship, Icarus
.
That militia group, Legion’s been bombing government buildings again. They
blew up federal depositories in six  states.  Killed  several  hundred  people.  Really
gruesome. 
Frank pulled his arm out of his sleeve and turned around slightly so she could
see an odd mark on his back. She remembered the morning they’d tricked Eric, he
had  tried  to  tell her  something  about  it.  I saw  something  today,  this  morning,  a
mark on his back…
And then, just now on the  recording,  she’d  heard  Eric  mention it again. That
brand…I…I know what you are…
Oh, God.
“We’re branded with the mark of infinity,” Frank said. “Our fight will never be
over until democracy flourishes again.”
He turned  to  her.  “And  this  is  where it will happen.  X-1226.  Fuck  American
colonists…fuck an American stellar empire. Legion is going to conquer and control
the Number Nine platform, and then we’re going  to  establish  our  own  world,  our
own democratic, free home here.”

Kat blinked at him, unable to comprehend everything he was saying.
I think it’s safer up here, personally, Trina had told her. Where freaks like that
can’t get to you.
Don’t count on that, Trina. 
“It’s already starting.” Frank walked toward her. “Why do you think we haven’t
heard back from the platform yet? Because by now, Legion will have seized control
of it. Hopefully, they’ve already dispatched some men down here, so we can get to
work setting up some kind of defenses.”
He had been speaking in a robotic fashion, as if he regurgitated someone else’s
rhetoric from  memory.  Now,  his  face  softened.  His  eyes  lost  some  of  the  manic
glaze. “But none of that matters to me, not really. Those are their plans, their agenda
—Legion’s, not mine.” He looked at her, pleading. “All I want is to have a family
again. A wife, a daughter—you and Jerica.”
Kat blinked at him. “Me  and  Jerica?  You’re crazy.  No.”  She  shook  her  head
fervently. “No.”
Frank went to her, and she had nowhere to run. When she tried, he caught her
roughly,  his  hands  clamping  painfully  against  her  cheeks.  “Kat,  don’t  you  see?
Legion would have just loved to come down here and find Eric. I mean, a goddamn
Sovereign  pilot—the  government’s  golden  boy?  I  had  to  kill  him.  That  was  the
kindest way…the only way. I knew if they found out who he was, they would torture
him. Just for shits and grins. Just because of who he was.”
“No,” Kat said. “That wasn’t kind, you bastard. What you did to him wasn’t—”
He slapped her in the face, sending her sprawling.
The shock of the blow stunned her more than the pain, at least at first.  It  had
been a long, long time since a man had last struck her. Kat landed hard against her
hip on the floor. She touched her mouth and her  fingertips  came  away spotted  in
blood. She could feel it filling her mouth, warm, bitter and salty.
Frank  moved  toward  her  again,  and  in  that  moment,  she  felt  her  strength
dissolve, the strong woman she’d built up over the years abandoning her.  All that
was  left was  the  frightened girl, Chris  Emmente’s  timid  bride,  and  she  cowered,
trying to cover her face with her hands.
Franks grabbed a handful of her hair and yanked. Kat cried and stumbled to her
feet. He clasped her by the throat and slammed her backwards, into  the  wall. Her
head hit painfully, and her brain rattled.
“What  do  you  think Legion will do  to  you  and  Jerica?”  he  snapped.  “Jesus
Christ, Kat, they’ll kill you both, too, without me here to protect you. You need me.
You and Jerica—if you want to stay alive, you need me.”

He slapped her across the face, first with his palm and then again with the back
of  his  hand.  She  wailed miserably,  and  then  pressed  her  lips  together,  her  voice
stifling to a mewl. She had learned about being beaten a long time ago from Chris,
her ex-husband.
Lesson Number One: the sooner you stopped crying out, the sooner it might be
over. 
“We’re going  to  be  a  family,  Kat.”  Frank  leaned  toward  her  until  they  were
nearly nose to nose. “You understand me, you stupid bitch? You, and Jerica, and
me.”
Kat didn’t  answer  him.  It  was  Frank  Brown  speaking,  but  Chris  Emmente’s
voice she could hear, his face she could see before her, superimposed over reality in
her terrified mind. She could feel blood coursing down her face now, from her nose
as well as her mouth. She could feel her left eye starting to puff up and burn; soon it
would bruise and swell closed.
Frank  shoved  Kat  with  all  of  his  might  across  the  room.  She  fell  against  a
console,  taking the  brunt  of  the  blow  with her  belly. He  was  somehow  still  right
behind her, with his hands in her hair again. Kat tried to twist out from under him,
and he slammed her face-first into the console.
“We don’t really even need you,” he seethed at her. “You’re expendable, Kat. I’
ve got a woman coming down from the platform who will make a better mother to
Jerica than you could ever dream of being. Reba could teach her things you can’t
even imagine.”
She felt him jerk her face up again and slam it back down again. The room began
to swim.
“But I don’t want that, Kat,” he said, his breath against her ear. “I want you to
be a part of things. I want you to understand how things are going to be from now
on.”
She felt him jerking at her pants, trying to force them down over her hips.
“No.” She tried to struggle against him. “No, Frank, please…”
He was  leaning over  her,  using  his  superior  weight  and  strength  to  keep  her
pinned forward. He jerked her pants down, and she heard the zipper fly break from
the force. The material cut into her skin, raking her outer thighs as he pulled  them
down.
“I want you to understand.” His fingers touched her bare ass, fumbling roughly
between her legs.
“No.” Kat began to squirm harder, forgetting the pain in her head and face. “No,
no, please, don’t…”

He covered her mouth with his hand, and forced her legs apart, using his thigh to
shove his way. She felt him against her, the swollen, awful length of him and then she
began to cry, weeping against his palm as he forced himself inside of her with rough,
scraping, furious thrusts.
She lost herself.
In her mind, she snapped back to a summer day…
  
At the picnic…in Illinois…Jerica had been smaller then and Eric had picked
her  up…her  bare  legs  had  brushed  against  the  gun  he  kept  tucked  in  a  small
holster in the waistband of his faded Levi’s… 
“What’s that?” she asked him. She had this ridiculous pair of hot  pink  plastic
sunglasses on. They were too big for her face. The lenses were purple.
“What?”  Eric  replied,  glancing  over  at  Kat  and  handing  her  his  bottle  of
Heineken before Jerica could kick it out of his hand.
She remembered taking it, stealing a sip. The beer  was  cold  and  tasted  good.
Alex had his arm around her, and he smelled good, and she felt loved by him.
“This.” Jerica reached down toward Eric’s ass, startling him. She remembered
leaning her head against Alex’s shoulder and how the two of them laughed.
“That’s my gun.” Eric caught Jerica’s hand against his hip.
“Why do you have a gun?” Jerica asked.
“I’ve got one, too,” Alex said, swallowing a mouthful of beer.
“Why?”
“In case we have to shoot somebody,” Alex told Jerica solemnly, and then he
and Eric laughed.
“No, really, we got them in the Corps,” Eric said to Jerica.
The sky was so blue and flawless. The sun blazed in Jerica’s golden mane.
“Officers always carry their guns with them.”
“But you two aren’t in the Corps anymore.” Puzzled, Jerica looked between the
two men. She had a pink, sun-kissed nose and cheeks.
“We carry them anyway,” Alex explained. “Always. Don’t leave home without
them.”
“I don’t think I could ever use a gun.” Kat eased closer to Alex without even
realizing, shivering despite the warm day.
She  remembered  Eric  looking  at  her,  smiling,  as  Alex  had  offered  her  a
momentary  squeeze.  “Sure  you  could,  Kat.  You  have  to  defend  yourself,  your
home, Jerica? Yeah, you’d use a gun.”
 

Frank finished and she slumped to the floor. She could feel something sticky and
wet against the small of her back, her buttocks. It had splattered there when Frank
had pulled away from her.
She thought she was going to throw up.
Frank turned to her, and Kat shrank. He was  flushed  and  winded,  running his
fingers through his hair, trying to smooth it back. “I didn’t want to do that,” he said,
his voice hoarse. “You didn’t leave me much of a choice.”
He pulled the remote out of the pocket of  his  suit,  and  opened  the  command
center door.
“Go on, clean yourself up. If you try to run from me, or hide somewhere in the
compound, I’ll find you, and I’ll kill you.”
Kat believed him. She  scrambled  into  the  corridor,  and  then  forced  her  tired,
hurting legs  to  run.  She  began  to  sob.  It  had  been  a  long  time since  she’d  been
beaten up, and she had almost forgotten how it felt to have a busted lip, a boxed,
blackened eye, a bloodied nose.
Her crotch ached. She felt filthy and nasty and dirty. Her pants kept wanting to
slip down her hips, and  she  had  to  keep  hitching them up  around  her  waist.  She
heard footsteps, light and  soft,  coming  toward  her  from  behind  and  she  shrieked
crazily, whirling around.
Oh, God, he followed me! 
She crumpled to her knees and cowered against the wall, trying to make herself
as small as possible.
Please no, no, no I can’t. 
“Mommy?”  Jerica  said.  She  ran  over  to  Kat,  her  little  feet  pounding  noisily
against the floor. “Mommy, what’s wrong? Mommy!”
Jerica touched her mother’s shoulder, and Kat looked up at her.  Jerica  shrank
back  when she  saw  Kat’s  bloody  face.  “Mommy…!”  she  gasped,  bursting  into
tears. “Mommy, what happened? Mommy!”
She threw her arms around Kat’s neck. Kat took her daughter by the shoulders
and pulled her away so they could look at each other in the eyes. “I’m all right,” she
said, struggling to speak coherently. “Jerica, Jerica, honey…listen…listen to me…”
Jerica touched Kat’s mouth with careful fingers. “You’re bleeding, Mommy…”
“I know, pup.” Kat nodded. “Listen to me. Frank…Frank is not your friend. He
’s a very bad man.”
Jerica blinked at her, her eyes swimming with new tears. “Frank did this to you?”
“He’s a very bad man, Jerica. He…he put bombs on board the Daedalus and
that’s  why  it  crashed.  He  killed  Eric…pup,  he  murdered  him…and  now  he

wants…he wants…”
“It’s because of the Legion, isn’t it?” Jerica whispered.
Kat stared at her. “How do you know…?”
“Because he told me,” Jerica said. “He said they just wanted to come here and
live and be free. Free from the government.”
“Oh,  my  God.”  Kat  jerked  Jerica  against  her,  squeezing  her  tightly.  “Oh,
Jerica…”
“I didn’t know it meant he’d kill Eric, Mommy.” Jerica began to cry. “Or…or
that he’d hurt you…I just thought…I didn’t know…!”
“I know, Jerica.” Kat glanced up and saw a wink of yellow light. She frowned,
puzzled, and then realized it was a surveillance camera, hiding in the shadows near
the ceiling. It had turned toward them, and light had reflected off of its small, smooth
lens.
Frank doesn’t need to follow me. He’s got his cameras. 
His goddamn cameras. 
“Come on,” Kat said, and she stood, holding Jerica’s hand.
The little girl stared up at her, wide-eyed. “Where are we going to go, Mommy?
What are we going to do?”
“I  don’t  know.”  Kat  led  Jerica  down  the  hall.  She  scanned  the  ceiling  with
suspicious eyes, watching for more cameras.
They walked until they reached Eric’s room.
“In here,” Kat whispered, ushering Jerica in quickly.
Jerica stood by the bathroom door, looking confused. “Why are we here?”
Kat placed her index finger over her lips. Shhhhh.
Jerica’s eyes widened; she understood. She nodded, pushing  her  lips  together
into a thin line.
Kat looked around the ceiling, trying to remember the angle of the view on the
command center monitors. She saw the camera angled just above the doorway.
She  picked  up  the  small  aluminum  trash  can  from  near  the  sink.  She  went
underneath the camera and raised onto her tiptoes. She swung the trash can up over
her head and smashed it into  the  unblinking, unflinching black  eye  of  the  camera.
There  was  a  tinkle of  broken  glass,  and  a  spattering  of  blue-white  sparks.  Jerica
squealed and backed away, frightened.
Smoke rose in a thin grey line from the broken camera.
“Fuck you, Frank.” Kat dropped the trash can.
She closed and locked the door to Eric’s room.
“Come on, pup,” she said, and she wiped at her face on her sleeve. The blood

was staving, crusting on her cheeks and chin, making her skin feel tight. She began
snooping  around  the  room,  poking  in  the  closet,  nosing  through  the  small  metal
bureau.
“What are you looking for, Mommy?” Jerica asked quietly.
“Something,” Kat said.
Something I remember from that picnic in Belleville… 
“Don’t leave home without it.” Alex had laughed around a mouthful of baked
beans, and I’d seen it tucked down the back of Eric’s jeans. When the wind would
blow, it would push the material of his shirt against it, outlining it. 
She lifted the mattress up off the  bed,  and  there  it was,  lying against  the  box
springs.
Of course! How stupid of me! He would’ve put it here, where Jerica wouldn’t
find it. 
“Mommy?”  Jerica  said.  She  was  all  eyes  on  the  military-issue  9-millimeter
semi-automatic pistol that Eric had carried on him at all times, tucked in the back of
his flight suit, probably like he’d had it in his blue jeans that beautiful summer’s day
a million or so years ago.
Even when we crashed, Kat thought. Don’t leave home without it.
Kat snatched it up, and felt its reassuring weight in her hand. The well-oiled metal
was cold against her skin. She slipped the clip out and checked to make sure it was
full. She smacked it back in, and then double-checked the safety.
“You’re my hero again, Eric,” she murmured.
Eric’s wallet was on the nightstand, along with his watch and gold  ring. Jerica
had found this, and was holding it in her palm, studying it.
“Look, Mommy.” Her voice was soft, reverent. “It’s his West Point ring.”
Kat took it and held it up. It had a large, smooth red stone in the middle of it.
She could read the words carved around the ruby: West Point Military Academy.
Inside the ring band, in a small, gilded script, Eric William Nagel.
“It’s so beautiful,” Jerica remarked.
Kat looked down at her and smiled. It made her lip sting, and the gash along her
cheek hurt. “I think he’d like for you to keep it.” She pressed the ring against her
daughter’s hand.
Jerica held it uncertainly, looking at it. “I’m afraid I’ll lose it.”
“No, you won’t.” Kat sat on the bed, wincing at the pain that shot through her
lower body. She put the gun next to her, and picked up his wallet.
There was nothing spectacular inside; less than maybe fifty dollars, his well-worn
American Express card, his driver’s license.

Kat looked at the license for a long time. He was younger in the photo; his hair
was shorter, closer to the tight crop he’d worn in the  Stellar Corps.  But  his  eyes
were bright and confident, and he had a cocky, go-to-hell grin on his face that she
had loved.
She wanted to memorize that picture, to remember him like that, and not how he’
d looked after the crash; gaunt, haggard, hurting. Alone, she thought. Oh, God, he
looked alone, and that’s what terrified him the most…how I left him to die. Alone.
Kat folded the wallet closed and pressed it against the base of her throat.
“I have to take a shower, pup.” She tried to stand, and pain lanced through her
pelvis. She winced, buckling slightly.
“Mommy?”
“I…I’m okay,” Kat said, forcing a smile for her daughter. “I’m okay. I just…I
need a shower. I’ll only be a few minutes, but you don’t open the door, okay? Not
under any circumstances. Got it?”
Jerica nodded mutely. She had wrapped her fingers around Eric’s ring, and held
it against her chest.
Kat limped into the bathroom and stripped naked. She stepped into the shower
and turned the water on as hot as she could stand it. The pelting stream hurt her face
and she burst into helpless  tears  as  she  tried  to  clean  the  wounds.  She  scrubbed
between her legs with a washrag until she was sore and tender. She could still feel
Frank’s fingers on her, feel him shoving himself inside of her.
“Bastard,” she muttered, weeping more and hating him. She rested her forehead
against the shower wall. “Bastard!”
Chapter Twenty-Three
She finished her shower and turned the water off.
She stood, shivering in the stall, momentarily bewildered. She tried to think about
what she should do next.
She wrapped a towel around her trembling body, and patted carefully at her face
with another. Her eyes were still swollen and sore, but at least all of the bleeding had
stopped. She ached all over. It sure as hell wasn’t the all-time grand  champion  of
beatings—that  particular  honor  was  reserved  for  Chris,  and  that  sunny  Easter

morning when he’d seen fit to knock out her teeth and to try and force a miscarriage
of their child—but it had been awhile since a man had struck her, and it hurt like hell.
She walked out of the bathroom. “Pup?”  She  looked  over  at  Eric’s  bed,  and
Jerica wasn’t there. “Jerica?”
She whirled, her gaze darting all around the room but didn’t see the girl. “Jerica!”
Kat cried,  pulling open  the  closet  door  and  looking  inside.  She  knelt  down  and
looked under the bed.
Jerica was nowhere to be found.
“Oh, my God,” Kat whispered.
The gun was still lying on  the  bed,  next  to  Eric’s  wallet. Kat  grabbed  it.  The
towel drooped down off of her and fell onto the floor. She ran  over  to  the  door,
naked.
It was unlocked.
The intercom on the wall beeped loudly, and she heard Frank’s voice.
“Hey, Kat, you feeling better?”
She looked around, as if expecting him to be hiding in the room with her. She
smacked  the  com.  “Where  is  she,  you  son  of  a  bitch?”  Her  voice  shook
uncontrollably.
Frank  chuckled.  “She’s  up  here  in the  kitchen,  with me.  I  thought  I’d  fix  us
some breakfast. How about it? You hungry?”
Jerica spoke over  the  intercom.  She  sounded  bright  and  cheerful.  “Come  on,
Mommy. Frank found some cans of little potatoes, and we’re going to fry them. Get
dressed and come down!”
Kat stared at the intercom in disbelief. I told you to stay put. I told you not to
answer the door.
“Mommy? Are you coming? Everything is almost finished. I’m starving, come
on!”
“Yeah, Kat.” Frank’s voice dripped honey. “Come on.”
She  heard  her  daughter’s  high,  sweet,  melodic  laughter,  and  then  the  com
transmission ended.
Kat looked around wildly for something to wear. She grabbed Eric’s flight suit
from the Daedalus from a pile on the floor and pulled it on. Her fingers flew on the
front fastens, and she tucked the pistol into her hip pocket. The suit was baggy and
loose on her, and the gun was well hidden in the drooping folds.
She pushed the sleeves up. She caught a faint, familiar whiff of Eric’s cologne
from the material. It made her feel lonely and helpless. She touched the bulge of the
gun. Its solidness, its presence reassured her and strengthened her.

She headed for the commissary.
 
Jerica was sitting on top of one of the kitchen counters, eating bite-sized cubes
of fruit from a can of sweet cocktail.
“Jerica!” Kat cried, running over to her.
“I’m okay, Mommy.” Jerica frowned, trying to push her away when Kat went to
hug her. Frank walked over, and Kat hedged away. He reached out and grabbed her
by the front of her flight suit. He jerked it so he could read the name patch above the
left breast, “NAGEL.”
“Nice skivvies, there, Kat,” he told her, dropping a wink. He gave  her  a  small
shove  backwards,  releasing  her  clothes.  He  took  her  face  in  his  hands  and  she
cringed.
“Why don’t we…” He leaned close to her. The tips of their noses touched, and
his breath pushed against her lips. “…find you something else later on?”
She nodded, frightened, expecting him to strike her again. Instead, Frank kissed
her on  the  mouth.  His  lips  squelched  down  hard  against  hers,  and  he  forced  his
tongue between her lips. She tried to pull her head away, and he let her.
“Frank, they’re going to burn,” Jerica whined. She had hopped down from the
counter, and was trying vainly to stir the potatoes.
“Here, I’ll get them.” Frank was all smiles. He left Kat,  and  she  began  to  rub
slowly at her lips with the sides of her fingers, wiping away his saliva.
“Get me one of those plates over there, yeah,” Frank said to Jerica. She brought
him a plate, and he began to scoop golden-fried potatoes onto it. “Why don’t you
get some milk out, too?”
“Okay.” Jerica nodded
They all sat around one of the cabinets. Frank  and  Jerica  had  made  potatoes,
scrambled eggs, and had fried some canned meat. Kat watched them eat. She picked
dully at her plate, pushing the eggs around with her fork.
It felt strangely familiar to her, sick and surreal. This is how things always were
with  Chris.  First  he’d  hit  me,  then  he’d  pretend  nothing  had  happened.  Like
everything was the same as it had ever been.
“You’re not eating, Mommy,” Jerica observed, taking a long drink of milk.
“My mouth hurts. The salt burns where it’s cut.”
“Drink some milk.” Jerica offered her cup. “It’s nice and cold.”
Kat took a quick sip. She forced a dry smile. “You’re right, Jerica. That feels
much better.”
“You want a cold pack for your eye?” Frank reached out and touched her hand

gently.
“No,” she replied, pulling her hand away and letting it fall into her lap.
“Frank says Legion will be here soon,” Jerica said. “At least a month. And guess
what, Mom? After that, they’ll start bringing lots of people down. Kids, too.”
Kat looked at her. She seemed genuinely excited by the prospect. Her eyes were
bright and happy.
“I think we’re going to be real happy here.” Jerica finished off her milk.
“I know we are.” Frank smiled at Kat.
“Frank, will you get me some more milk, please?” Jerica asked, shoveling in a
large forkful of potatoes.
“Sure, pup.” Frank took her cup. “Think those are any good?”
Jerica nodded, chomping.
Frank walked away from them, toward the refrigerator.
Kat stared at the back of his head, hating him.
She felt Jerica kick her shin.
Hard.
She  looked  over  at  Jerica  angrily. Jerica  narrowed  her  eyes  and  cut  her  gaze
toward Frank. “Do it,” she mouthed silently at Kat. “Do it now.”
Kat blinked, startled.
Frank opened the refrigerator door and leaned forward, looking for the milk.
Jerica stared at Kat, imploring, alarmed. Do it! Do it!
Kat reached down into the pocket of her flight suit. Her fingers curled around the
metal barrel of the gun. She slipped it out. She and Jerica watched Frank’s back.
She brought the gun up.
“I don’t think I could ever use a gun…” 
you have to defend yourself… 
your home… 
Jerica… 
yeah, Kat, you’d use a gun 
She aimed for the base of Frank’s skull.
“Do it,” Jerica whispered, her voice gossamer.
Kat thumbed the safety off, and Frank paused, as if he’d heard the faint click.
He started to turn, his mouth open as if he would speak.
Kat shot him.
Frank  jerked  violently,  slamming  into  the  refrigerator.  Plastic  bottles  and
containers  of  food  spilled,  falling to  the  floor.  He  dropped  the  milk bottle  and  it
bounced off the tiles, splattering milk everywhere.

He slumped to his knees. He clutched at his shoulder, his fingers  splayed  and
clawing for his back. Already, the dark scarlet spread of blood across his shirt was
widening in circumference.
He didn’t cry out, but Kat could hear his quick, dragging gasps. He looked at
her, his eyes wide and genuinely surprised.
“You…” he said. She saw blood pepper up out  of  his  mouth,  lighting on  his
chin and upper lip in a faint spray. She could hear the whistling, sucking sound of his
labored breathing; the bullet had punched through a lung.
“…you…bitch…” Frank wheezed.
He fell forward,  catching  himself clumsily with his  arm.  His  face  twisted  with
pain.
Kat  walked  around  the  edge  of  the  cabinet  and  regarded  him  evenly.  Jerica
hopped out of her chair and went to stand by her mother. She stayed close to Kat’s
hip.
“He’s  not  dead.”  Her  voice  was  flat and  cold.  She  studied  Frank  with  great
scrutiny, her eyes calculating, almost aloof.
“You little bitch,” Frank gasped at Jerica in complete shock. “You…you tricked
me…you little—”
Kat fired the gun again, and Frank’s  right knee  exploded,  spraying  blood  and
thick clots of bone and flesh. He shrieked and flopped onto his side, clutching his
leg desperately.
“Go to the TV room, pup,” Kat said.
“But, Mommy, I…”
“Go on, Jerica. I’ll be there in a minute.”
Jerica stared down at Frank for a long moment, and then turned away and left the
room.
“You…you can’t do this…!” Frank gasped. “Don’t you get it…? When Legion
gets here…finds out what you did…they…they’ll kill you…you and Jerica…they’ll
kill you…”
“But you can protect us,” Kat said.
He nodded frantically. “Yes! You know…I can…”
“We can all be a family,” Kat said. “You, me, Jerica…”
“Yes…they won’t…hurt you with me…”
Kat fired again.
Frank’s left knee shattered. He screamed again, arching his back  and  howling.
“OOOOWWHH GODDAMN YOU BITCH!”
“That was for Eric,” Kat said calmly.

“Just do it, then!” Frank shrieked. He spat blood. “Do it, goddammit!”
“Eric kept his clip full,” Kat told him. “And that only made three shots.”
She shot him in the crotch.
He screamed, his voice ripping up octaves, hitting soprano notes.
“That makes four, you fuck.”
And then five.
for what you did to me 
The gun bucked against her palm.
Six.
for what you did to my friends 
And seven.
for fucking with my daughter 
the smell in the air
thick and bitter, smoke and blood
The kick of the pistol against her hand.
Chapter Twenty-Four
Kat hummed as she and Jerica dragged Frank’s body outside.
It was another scorcher on X-1226. It was barely noon, and already it sweltered
at somewhere around 90 degrees, with what felt like 90 percent humidity.
Kat whistled as they hauled Franklin out past the security field. He was heavy,
and their progress was slow. She watched flies buzz around his face, landing on his
lips, darting into his mouth, preening their small, fuzzy legs on his eyes.
She saw them prance on the ruins of his knees and on the bloody smear that had
once upon a time been his testicles.
The flies rose in a small, indignant, buzzing cloud  when she  shoved  his  body
down a steep incline, toward a creek bed. She listened to the rustle  of  leaves  and
rapid snapping of branches and brambles as he rolled past them.
She whistled some more as she and Jerica walked back into the compound.
 
***
 

Kat and Jerica held a quiet, simple ceremony for Eric.
She fought terrible pain in her battered face and abdomen to dig a long, relatively
deep  ditch  along  the  east  wall  of  the  compound.  There  was  something  close  to
shade there, but it was still amazingly hot, and she ended up doing a majority of the
work in her underwear.
When she was finished, she showered again. She tried to be  quick;  she  could
feel the water pressure waning, and realized that the shortage was going to become a
very engaging problem by the end of the week.
The gurney Eric had died on rested on four small wheels,  which made  getting
him outside relatively easy. Jerica stayed  close  to  Kat,  almost  pressed  against  her
hip. She watched quietly as Kat tried to gather the sheets around Eric, and smoothed
the folds against his hips, shoulders, and the cyborganic leg that  had  cost  him so
much so dearly.
Kat started to bring the sheet up over Eric’s head.
“No…”  Jerica  murmured,  suddenly  touching  the  pant  leg  of  Kat’s  fresh
jumpsuit. “Don’t cover his face.”
Kat looked down at Eric. In the dim light of the corridor, she couldn’t notice the
ashen,  waxy,  almost  transparent  appearance  of  his  skin.  He  looked  like  he  was
sleeping, like at any moment he would open his eyes and blink at her.
She pushed the gurney outside, into the bright, hot sunshine.
They buried him, and  Kat  cried.  She  sat  in the  dry  earth  next  to  her  friend’s
grave—the man she had loved—and covered her face with her hands.
 
***
 
It rained the next ten days.
Every  day,  Kat  and  Jerica  would  put  pots  and  pans  and  bowls  out  in  the
downpour  to  fill.  They  began  to  store  the  water  in  the  kitchen’s  large  walk-in
coolers.
Kat didn’t let Jerica drink any of the rainwater at first. She tested it on herself to
make sure  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  it.  After  several  days  without  dying  or
getting dysentery or some other horrendous ailment, Kat decided the rain was safe
for drinking, and the water problem was taken care of.
 
***
 
Three weeks later 

“Mommy?”
Kat woke with a start as Jerica shook her shoulder.
“Mommy, come quick.”
Kat sat up and tucked her hair back from her face. “What is it, pup?”
“There’s  someone  outside  the  compound,”  Jerica  said,  wide-eyed  and
breathless.
“Okay.” Kat untucked her legs. The floor was cold under her bare feet.
“I think it’s them.” Jerica watched Kat pull on her clothes  and  wiggle her  feet
into her boots.
“How many did you see?” Kat asked, fumbling with the lacings.
Jerica stood  by  the  door,  looking out  into  the  hallway  uncertainly.  “Just  one
outside the perimeter field.”
Kat stood up straight. “Where is the…?”
“In the drawer there.” Jerica pointed to the  nightstand.  She  flipped  her  yellow
curls back off her shoulder. She had hung Eric’s ring from a piece of black string
around her neck. It bounced against the front of her shirt.
Kat opened the drawer and pulled  out  the  pistol.  She  made  sure  the  clip  was
secure. “Show me, pup.”
She followed Jerica down the corridor.
“I’m scared,” Jerica said.
“It’s okay,” Kat told her. “Stay inside while I go check it out.”
 
There was a woman in the front yard of the compound.
She was taller than Kat, wearing a khaki brown uniform. She staggered  across
the lawn, her long black hair hanging in loose, disheveled strands from her ponytail.
She appeared to be a Native American.
She saw Kat standing just beyond the doorway to the compound and froze. Her
eyes widened. She looked like a doe pinned by a tractor trailer’s headlights.
The woman held a strange, awkward-looking rifle in one hand, and some sort of
square metal box in the other. Kat’s appearance startled her, and she dropped the
box in the grass. She raised the snout of the alien rifle at Kat and stumbled back a
step.
“Who are you?” she said. Her brows pinched  together,  and  she  regarded  Kat
with dark, suspicious eyes. Her face was narrow, her features standing out in precise
angles and curves. She had a long, narrow nose, and small, thin lips. Her skin was a
deep golden brown, with patches of bright, frightened color in the apples of each of
her high cheeks.

“I…I’m Kathryn Emmente,” Kat replied. “Who are you?” She still held  Eric’s
pistol at her side. She was shocked to see  another  human being,  she  hadn’t  even
thought to raise it.
The Indian woman kept staring at her. Kat realized she had a huge, bluish-black
bruise forming on her forehead, above her left eye. Kat noticed that there was a fat
column of dark grey smoke rising above the tree line, not too far past the security
perimeter.
“Where is Frank?” The woman ignored Kat’s question and cut her gaze around
the yard, wide-eyed and dazed.
The door opened behind Kat, and Jerica came out.
“Jerica, no—go back inside,” Kat said.
The  woman  swung  the  rifle  toward  the  little  girl.  Jerica  shrieked  and  darted
behind Kat.
“No!”  Kat  cried,  and  she  brought  Eric’s  pistol  up,  aiming  the  muzzle  at  the
woman’s head. She reached behind her with her free hand and touched Jerica’s hair.
“I told you to stay inside, damn it.”
“I’m sorry, Mommy.” Jerica hiccupped. “I got scared. I didn’t know what was
going on!”
“Where’s  Frank?”  the  woman  shouted  at  them,  clutching  her  gun  with  both
hands. Her voice ripped hysterically.
“Put the gun down and I’ll tell you!” Kat yelled back, not lowering her  pistol.
“Put it down now!”
They stood there, facing off in silence until a loud explosion ripped through the
woods. The line of smoke darkened, becoming black, and began blowing across the
horizon in fat, billowing clouds.
That was a ship—her ship—exploding! Kat realized.
The woman pivoted at the noise and watched the smoke. She turned back to Kat
and Jerica. She looked anguished, horrified. “Where is Frank?”
“It’s  her,”  Jerica  whispered  suddenly,  her  voice  quiet  and  stunned.  “Reba
Crowe.”
“What?” Kat glanced down at her.
“Reba  Crowe,”  Jerica  repeated,  louder,  stepping  slightly  from  behind  her
mother. “That’s your name, isn’t it?”
“Shut up.” The woman had let the muzzle of  her  rifle lower,  but  she  raised  it
again, shoving it at them. “Where is Franklin Brown? He said he would be here, he’d
be waiting for me. Where is he?”
“He’s dead.” Kat nodded toward the tree line outside of the perimeter field. “He

’s over there somewhere, out in the bushes.”
The  woman’s  mouth  dropped  open  in  a  nearly  perfect  circle.  “What?”  She
shook her head. “No…he…this is all wrong. Everything…it’s all gone wrong, but he
said he’d be here…he said… How did he die?”
“I killed him,” Kat told her evenly.
She could see the rage flash across the woman’s face, like the edge of a breaking
wave. She could see it ignite something behind the woman’s coal black eyes.
“Jerica—” she began, and then the woman fired her rifle.
Kat felt something slam into her chest, just north of  her  left breast.  The  force
was incredible. It jerked her backwards;  she  felt her  boot  heel dance  hard  across
Jerica’s small feet behind her.
Another round punched into her forearm, and another into her right shoulder.
Behind her, Jerica began to scream.
Kat toppled to her knees. She tried to catch herself on the ground, but the grass
was  suddenly  slippery  and  soaked  with something  hot.  She  stared  dumbly  at  the
blood spilling down her arm and pooling around her splayed fingers.
“Mommy!  Mommmeeeee!”  Jerica  shrieked.  Kat  could  feel her  little hands  on
her, grabbing desperately. She raised her head and saw the woman point the rifle at
Jerica. Kat threw her elbow back, smacking hard into Jerica’s chin.
Get down, she wanted to scream. Jerica GET DOWN!
“Guungh!” Jerica cried, and she crumpled.
Kat forced her arm to work, to bring Eric’s pistol up. Her finger squeezed in on
the trigger, and she felt the gun kick against her palm…one…two…three times.
“You murdering bitch!” the Indian woman, Reba Crowe screeched, and then a
bullet ripped into the left side of her face, shearing away a large section of her scalp
and skull cap. She twisted and fell back, landing in the lawn. She moved smoothly,
her arms  trailing in her  wake,  like a  marionette whose  strings  have  been  abruptly
severed.
The gun fell out of Kat’s fingers, and she pitched face-first into the grass. She
drew in a gasping, hurting mouthful of air. She was dimly aware of Jerica shaking her
shoulder,  sobbing  and  pleading:  “Get  up,  Mommy,  pleeeease  get  up!  Mommy!
Mommeeee, nooo, no please no NOOOooo!”
And another sound. A faint roaring sound that was growing louder and louder,
reminding her of static on an open com link. It felt like someone had covered her up
with a feather-lined comforter, and she was suffocating. Somehow, despite this, Kat
was freezing.
Oh, pup, she thought, over the increasing roar of the static noises. Just let me

sleep for a little while and I’ll be  okay.  I’ll  fix  you  a  grilled  cheese,  how  about
that? I’ll even cut the crusts off because I know you like it that way the best…
Chapter Twenty-Five
Kat sat in a white oak rocking chair on her enormous wraparound porch, looking
out over the northern California coast.
Jerica was down on the beach, standing at the very edge of the ocean, and Kat
watched her poke daintily at sea foam with her toes. She was talking to a young man
whose family vacationed in a house up the beach from them. He was seventeen, tall
and handsome, and completely infatuated with the beautiful, fifteen-year-old Jerica.
Kat  studied  her  daughter’s  posture,  the  casual  angle  that  pushed  her  young
bosom out toward her beau. Jerica gave her head a quick, coy nod, and her sheaf of
golden hair flipped obediently over her shoulder.
Kat reached over and gently, absently massaged her left forearm. There wasn’t
much sensation left in her arm or shoulder, only what her doctor called  “phantom
sensations”. It had been explained to her that these ghostly feelings of pain, itching
or burning were common among amputees.
She sometimes wondered if Eric had felt the ghost sensations in his leg.
Legion’s attempt to conquer the stellar platform and X-1226 had failed. But by
the time rescue ships made it down to the moon’s surface, the bullet wounds  Kat
had suffered had gangrened terribly. She had been lucky to be alive.
The tissue damage had been so extensive, almost 95 percent of her arm was now
cyborganic, like Eric’s leg had been. The entire left side of her shoulder girdle had
been refitted with biomechanical joints, bones, muscles, ligaments. The government
had paid for the operation and prosthetic, every last dime. She’d received an official
commendation from President Conner Dade himself, and she  and  Jerica  had  been
invited guests at the White House.
In the five years since, Kat hadn’t really thought too long or often about  what
had happened to them. She thought about Eric sometimes, like when her arm would
itch in places that no longer should.
The left side of her body always felt heavy and numb, like it had been shot up
with Novocain, or carved out of wood. She often wondered if Eric had felt that way.

Sometimes she would forget his face, and she would pull out his driver’s license
and touch the young man in the picture. She couldn’t remember  the  sound  of  his
voice, but sometimes, late at night, alone in her bed, she could remember what it felt
like to have him laying beside her, with his arm around her. If she tried hard enough,
she could imagine his hand holding hers, the warm pressure of his fingers through
hers.
Sometimes she still cried for him.
Kat had  become  a  writer. Her  first  two  novels  had  been  modest  best-sellers,
enough to have paid for the beach-front house. She was at work on a third, and had
ideas already in mind for a fourth and even a fifth.
She hadn’t written about X-1226, or about her life before that, even though she
was frequently pressured to. In fact, she and Jerica rarely spoke to anyone except
for their therapist about what had happened.
She  had  become  a  quiet  advocate  for  abused  women  and  children,  donating
funds to various organizations, and helping to found  a  local  support  center  called
Harmony. She spent lots of time at the center, finding strength and comfort from the
past with her friends there.
She had found the she was no longer the frightened girl Chris Emmente used to
beat, but nor was she the tough-as-nails woman she had struggled to be aboard the
Daedalus.  She  had  changed;  X-1226  had  changed  her,  and  she  had  become  a
combination of these, strong and weak, vulnerable and capable all at once.
She found she liked it best that way.
The phone rang, breaking Kat’s train of thought. It was Brenda, her agent and
self-appointed best friend.
“Hey, Kat, these chapters look great.”
“Thanks, Brenda.”
“Is…is she all packed yet?”
Kat looked  out  at  Jerica  and  the  young  man.  They  were  standing  very  close
together now, and she watched her daughter tuck a loose strand of hair behind her
ear.
“I don’t really know.” She laughed. “She’s been saying good-bye to all of her
suitors.”
The melody of Jerica’s sweet laughter floated up from the water’s edge, reaching
Kat.
“…she’s going to  do  great,”  Brenda  was  saying.  “How  many girls get  in the
West Point Sovereign fighter program period, much less fifteen-year olds?”
“Jerica can do anything she sets her mind to.”

“Gets that from her mother. Are you sure you’re okay with this, Kat?”
“Yes,” Kat said quietly, although the prospect of the big, hulking, empty, silent
house terrified her. “I just…I’m really going to miss her.”
Brenda rambled on and on about how Kat should be grateful she was going to
miss the height of Jerica’s teen rebellion years, but Kat didn’t pay much attention.
“I know it’s hard, but it’ll be good for you, you’ll see,” her friend Melanie at
the center had told her. “You need to find your own place in things, on your own.
It’s your turn, to be true to yourself.” 
“Yeah,” Kat had replied somewhat sadly. “I need to be my own hero.” 
She watched Jerica rise onto her tiptoes and kiss the boy lightly, briefly on the
lips. Then she turned and ran up the beach toward the house, looking back to wave
once. Her  long  skirt  billowed around  her  legs,  and  she  gathered  a  handful of  the
material to keep from tripping over the hem.
“I’ll talk to  you  later, Brenda.”  Kat  cut  the  agent  off  gently and  hung up  the
phone as Jerica mounted the porch steps. “Hey, pup.”
“Mom.” Jerica frowned slightly, insincerely. “I’m not a pup. You know I  hate
that.”
She plopped gracefully down in the rocker next to her mother, kicking her long,
pretty legs up in the air and tilting back in the chair. She picked up Kat’s glass of
lemonade and took a long sip.
“Ooo!”  Jerica’s  nose  wrinkled, and  she  set  the  glass  back  down.  “Spiked  it
pretty good there, Mom.”
“Just a little vodka,” Kat replied primly.
The two laughed.
“Who’s that?” Kat brought her hand up to  shield  her  eyes  from  the  sun.  She
watched the young man Jerica had kissed walk away down the beach, his head hung,
his footsteps dragging.
“Brandon Hall,” Jerica said.
“Nice guy?”
Jerica glanced at her mother and smiled wryly. “Pretty nice, yeah.”
“You ready to go tomorrow?”
Jerica pushed at the folds of her skirt. “I guess so. I’m pretty nervous.”
Kat reached over and touched Jerica’s hand. Jerica looked at her, and wrapped
her fingers through Kat’s.
“Will you be okay, Mom?” she asked quietly, her eyes large and round. It took
Kat back for a moment, back five years—a whole lifetime—ago.
“Yeah, pup.” Kat squeezed Jerica’s hand.

They  sat  quietly  on  the  porch  for  a  long  time,  watching  the  sun  slowly,
inexorably sink toward the horizon.
Jerica reached up to her throat and Kat watched out of the corner of her eye as
she began to pull Eric’s West Point ring back and forth across a chain around her
neck. Jerica’s fingers absently rubbed at the gold, pressing and prodding across the
lettering, the bright red stone. She looked distantly, dreamily out at the ocean, at the
small gathering of sea birds that ran this way and that on the sand.
Kat pressed her fingers against her biomechanical arm, trying vainly to scratch an
itch that wasn’t real but sure bugged the hell out of her anyway.
“You ready for some supper, Jerica?” she asked.
Jerica  blinked  dazedly.  “Oh,”  she  said,  coming  out  of  her  own  little  private
garden of thoughts. “Yeah. Sure, Mom. I’ll probably turn in after that. I mean, I’ve
got to get up pretty early tomorrow to catch the red-eye shuttle and…” Her voice
faded, leaving an awkward silence.
“Yeah.” Kat smiled at Jerica. “I know, pup.”
They stood and gathered up their drinks and towels to go inside.
“What sounds good to eat?” Kat asked.
“How about grilled cheese?” Jerica suggested. “With the crusts cut off. They’re
best like that.”
Kat looked over at the lovely young woman  her  daughter  had  become.  In  her
heart, she started to loosen the tethers that bound them together.
Oh, pup, I will miss you so much. 
“I know,” she said.
She  followed  Jerica  inside,  leaving  the  screen  door  open  to  let  in  the  fresh
evening breeze.
 
About the Author
Sara Reinke is the author of  several  books  and  is  a  member  of  the  Louisville
Romance Writers chapter of Romance Writers of America, EPIC and the Flowers
and Hearts Authors Group.
To learn more about Sara Reinke, please visit www.sarareinke.com. Send an

email to Sara at mailto:sara@sarareinke.com or join her Yahoo! group to join in
the
 fun
 with
 other
 readers
 as
 well
 as
 Sara.
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/tiralainn
 
  
You have been exposed to subversive influences: 
for your own security and well being, you will now be terminated. 
  
Homeland 
© 2006 Michael Amos 
Available now in digital and paperback from Samhain Publishing
 
Tracy Dwayne Jocelyn Higgs has a problem. Not only is he a Security Officer
saddled with a girl’s name, he has awoken to find himself in a vast shopping mall
with no recollection of how he came to be there. 
Worse  still,  the  mall  is  under  almost  constant  terrorist  attack.  The  security
apparatus operates a permanent state of emergency and none of the other terrified
inhabitants of the mall have any idea how they came to be there or how to get out.
 
Stalked  by  the  obsessive  femme  fatale  Mandy,  shadowed  by  the  annoying
Information Officer Simms and in love with the no-nonsense Doctor Jodi Francis,
Higgs must find out where he is, get in touch with his feminine side and save the
inhabitants of the mall before he is terminated for his own security and well being.
 
 
Enjoy the following excerpt for Homeland:
“We have a problem, Higgs. The mall is under almost constant terrorist attack.
The terrorists have been distributing subversive materials.”
Jared paused and clicked his fingers at one of the androids. It turned slowly and
picked up a plastic bag from the desk, holding it aloft for Higgs to see. It contained
a notepad and a pen. Joints hissing, the android returned the bag  to  the  desk  and
placed its hand back on its gun.
“So far we’ve been unable to work out how they are operating and where they
are based. Before you were injured, you were getting close to finding out what was
going on. I need you to pick up from where you left off, find them and stop them.”
Higgs considered for a moment. “Did I leave any briefing papers or notes?”
For a moment—just a fraction of a moment—Higgs thought he saw the look of a
haunted man in Jared’s eyes. Jared shook his head.

“Your notes were destroyed in the terrorist attack which injured you.”
Are you lying? It wouldn’t make sense for you to lie to me. “Sir, why are the
terrorists attacking the mall?”
Simms, who had been quietly forgotten up until this point, gasped and ducked
back.  The  two  android  guards  stepped  forward  and  leveled  their  guns  at  Higgs,
prepared to fire. Higgs stared open-mouthed, surprise dulling his instinctive reaction
to dive for cover.
“Overruled.” Homeland’s voice filled the room.
The  androids  lowered  their weapons  and  returned  to  the  desk.  Higgs  looked
from Jared to the androids and back again, opening  and  closing  his  mouth.  Jared
seemed completely unfazed by the actions of the guards and continued as if nothing
had happened.
“Terrorists  are  the  enemies of  freedom.  It  stands  to  reason  that  they  should
attack the freedom of the mall. Only a subversive would suggest otherwise.”
Higgs realized he was holding his breath and let it out. Beside him, Simms visibly
relaxed. With one  eye  on  the  androids,  Higgs cleared  his  throat.  “Why  can’t  we
leave the mall?”
Both  he  and  Simms  flinched  as  the  androids  leapt  forward,  guns  leveled  at
Higgs. Homeland’s voice stopped them again. “Overruled.”
Higgs and Simms breathed out.
“Why should anyone want to leave the freedom of the mall? Only a subversive
would want to leave the mall.” Jared smiled benignly, still apparently unconcerned by
the androids’ murderous intentions on Higgs.
Higgs felt emboldened to try his luck. “Why is everyone in the mall so afraid?”
“Overruled.”
The androids did not even get the chance to move this time. Higgs noticed they
did seem to glance sideways at each other. They weren’t supposed to think, Simms
had said.
Jared  smiled.  “The  people  are  not  afraid.  The  people  are  happy,  safe  in  the
freedom  and  security  provided  by  Homeland.  Only  a  subversive  would  think
otherwise. Really, Higgs, if it were not for the trauma of your recent injury which is
clearly clouding  your  reasoning,  I  would  have  to  conclude  that  you  were  posing
these questions to test my reactions.”
Higgs opened his mouth to speak and then thought better of it.
Homeland spoke. “You are confused, Security Officer Higgs, and that is only to
be expected after the trauma of your injury. Please return to your quarters. There will
be some clearance tests before you can resume your duties.”

Higgs rose slowly from his chair. “Thank you, ma’am. I think you’ll find that I
won’t let you down.”
 
As Higgs and Simms hurried away from  Jared’s  office,  and  back  through  the
security center, Simms was incredulous.
“You are so lucky, Higgs. You came this close to being terminated.” He held up
his thumb and index finger a fraction apart. “Subversive questions like that are going
to get you into a lot of trouble.”
“What the hell was subversive about them?”
“You heard Jared, only a subversive would think like that.”
Suddenly, Simms put a hand on Higgs’s shoulder and stopped him. He leaned
close and whispered, “You’re not really a subversive, are you, Higgs?”
Higgs started to laugh but stopped short when he saw the look of deadly earnest
in Simms’ eyes.
“No. No, of course I’m not.”
 
How much would you give to live your fantasy? 
Think fast—your Wishstone is waiting. 
 
With Nine You Get Vanyr 
© 2006 Teri Smith and Jean Marie Ward 
Available now at Samhain Publishing
 
At  Atlanta’s  Dragon-Con,  nine  fan  girls  make  a  wish  on  the  mysterious
ancient  artifact  known  as  the  Wishstone  and  find  themselves  transported  to  the
world  that  inspired  their  favorite  TV  series.  Only  the  show  couldn’t  begin  to
prepare them for the real thing. 
Domain is a world without change, frozen in a time of magic and superstition,
where the immortal sons of the goddess Reyah fight a never-ending war—mostly
with themselves. Reyah doesn’t seem to care. The way she sees it, her boys will be
boys. They’ll settle down once they meet the right girls. 
But Earth girls aren’t that easy. They’ve got serious issues with this gig. They
like their computers, cell phones, double-ply toilet paper. 
And they don’t believe in fate. 
Welcome to Domain. 
 
Enjoy the following excerpt for With Nine You Get Vanyr.
For a minute, Thea was sure Reyah was  going  to  turn  her  and  Liz into  flying

monkeys. But at the last possible minute Reyah retreated into sugar-coated  Glinda
mode. 
“I’m sorry. It was a rough day for us all, wasn’t it? And I did wake you a little
sooner than I should. Transmogrification can be ever so unsettling. But I can’t help
you settle into your new home unless I know the details of the wish you made.”
Thea’s chin nearly hit the table. 
“New home?” Liz sounded as dumbfounded as Thea felt. “Are you saying this
is a permanent arrangement?” 
Several gasps from the other end of the table spared Reyah the need to answer.
How convenient, Thea thought. 
Thea  heard  two  soft,  ominous  clicks.  A  chair  thudded  the  carpet.  The  new,
lethally armed Sarah backed away from the table. 
“Who the hell are you people?” Sarah’s voice growled from the pouty lips of her
cyber-character’s face. In each hand Sarah held a compact crossbow, primed and
ready to fire. “Don’t anybody move.”
“Oh my God! It worked!” Pandora shrieked. “We’re in Domain, Sarah. You’ve
got the coat and the crossbows and everything like you wrote it!” 
Pandora jumped up from the table to do a happy dance. Blonde hair, beads and
blue chiffon flailed in every direction. Her chair crashed into the wall of the alcove.
Sarah aimed both crossbows at her. Liz’s face twisted as if in pain. Brigid punched
Sarah’s left elbow.
Sarah yelped and fired high. One dart buried itself in the paneling over Pandora’s
shoulder.  The  other  shot  between  Kait and  Free,  straight  into  the  blue  curtain  of
energy. The arrow vaporized with a sizzle and puff of smoke. Liz buried her face in
her hands.
“Sarah, are you out of your mind?” Marisol grabbed  the  spent  weapons  from
Sarah’s hands. “Those things are dangerous. People could get hurt.”
“People like you,” Anna said. “This is a palace, not  a  pigsty.  Look  what  you
did! That is hand-carved walnut, and you splintered the top half of the panel. How
are you going to pay for that?”
“Damn it, Anna. You knew my ex was sending me death threats. What did you
expect me to do?”
“Yeah, we look like a bunch of hitmen—as if.” Kait rolled her eyes. She caught a
glimpse of her new face and sleek, muscled arms. Thea wondered what Kait thought
about what she saw. Charming as her new face was, Thea didn’t see much of the old
Kait in it.
Kait puckered her lips in an air kiss and pulled her long, strawberry blonde braid

a few  times.  “Cool,  the  Wishstone  slapped  some  glam on  me.  Hey,  where’s  my
sword?” Kait patted down  her  leathers.  She  pushed  Anna’s  skirts  aside  to  check
around  her  chair.  Kait’s  eyes  widened.  She  stroked  the  hilt  of  her  broadsword.
“Sweet!”
Free bent over the table, almost nose to nose with her reflection. One of Free’s
small, girlish hands traced the image while the other stroked a delicately pointed ear.
She whispered, “This is how I’m supposed to look. Now Stefan will love me. He
has to.”
“Hell, you’re supposed to be the ‘Mistress of Sorcery and Spells’. You fix the
damn panel,” Sarah said. “How hard can it be?”
“Not hard at all, if I say the ra-aht spell,” Anna said, her Georgia drawl growing
broader by the word. “But the only rhyme I can think of for ‘repair’ involves tyin’
you to a chair.”
“Ooh, kinky,” Brigid said.
“Ladies,” Reyah began.
Pandora  stopped  flapping  her  arms  and  spinning  long  enough  to  spit  out  a
mouthful of hair. “Arrrggghhhh! Where did all this hair come from?” 
Pandora grabbed the skirt of her filmy dress and yanked it up to face level. More
beads rained over the floor. “What happened to my overalls? What happened to my
Nikes? Where’s my backpack? Oh no! I’m...I’m...” She dropped the skirt and lifted
two handfuls of platinum blonde hair to the ceiling and wailed, “I’m blonde!”
Sarah slicked a strand of hair off her forehead. “And I’ve got black hair. So?”
Pandora  put  her  hands  to  her  face.  “My  glasses!  How  will I  see  without  my
glasses? I’m blind!”
“This,” Reyah said, “is not what I wanted.”
“No, it isn’t,” Liz said in a  soft  voice.  The  face  Liz lifted toward  Reyah  was
whiter than her dress, and her eyes  glowed  the  unnatural blue  of  the  magical veil.
Some inner sense Thea never realized she possessed vibrated with an awareness of
pain. She reached for her friend. Liz grabbed Reyah’s wrist.
Time stopped when the three women touched.
 

