
Book of Dragons – Volume 3 
Copyright © 2007 Sara Reinke 
 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. 
Published in the United States by Double Dragon eBooks, a division of Double Dragon 
Publishing Inc., Markham, Ontario Canada. 
 
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or by any 
information storage or retrieval system, without the permission in writing from Double 
Dragon Publishing. 
 
This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are products of the 
author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events or locales 
or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental. 
 
 
A Double Dragon eBook 
 
Published by 
Double Dragon Publishing, Inc. 
PO Box 54016 
1-5762 Highway 7 East 
Markham, Ontario L3P 7Y4 Canada 
http://www.double-dragon-ebooks.com 
http://www.double-dragon-publishing.com 
 
ISBN-10: 1-55404-425-1 
ISBN-13: 978-1-55404-425-2 
 
A DDP First Edition February 13, 2007 
 
 
Book Layout and 
Cover Art by Deron Douglas 
www.derondouglas.com 
 
 
 

 
Chapter One 
 
Temu awoke to the soft sound of Yeb’s voice, murmuring incantations and the 
whisper of his boot soles in the snow and fallen pine needles as he walked slowly 
around the perimeter of the campsite. “Ene mor ayu manu jaga,” Yeb said softly. “Ta 
yadaqu getulku dotura ene yajar.” This line shall be our border. You cannot pass into 
this place. 
Temu sat up, drawing away from the warmth of Toghrul’s body. Toghrul 
shrugged his shoulder, settling himself comfortably beneath his blankets without stirring. 
Temu rubbed his eyes sleepily and looked out from beneath the lean-to’s canopy. He 
could see Yeb, more silhouette than solid form, moving on the far side of the clearing, 
just beyond the circumference of the fire’s glow. The shaman held a dalbuur―a small 
ritual fan made of thin hide stretched taut across a frame of wood―in one hand, 
flapping it over the ground as he passed. In the other, he held a small pouch upturned, 
letting something that looked like sand or ash sprinkle down onto the snow. 
“Ugei rid ayu boke adali manu buyu,” Yeb said. “Ba minu kucun ayu masi tomu. 
Bi ibegel bide.” No sorcery is stronger than mine, and my power is vast. I shall protect 
us.  
His quiet words did not disturb anyone else among the sleeping Oirat. Jelmei and 
Nakhu, the two Kelet guards assigned to the watch sat near the fire, watching Yeb with 
interest. A light, but persistent snow had started to fall, filtering down through the pine 
boughs overhead. 

“Ugei lus, ugei kelberi getulku bi,” Yeb said, waving his fan skyward and then 
down at the ground again. No spirit, no form shall pass me. “Bi managa degere bide. Bi 
ibegel bide.” I am guard over us. I shall protect us. 
Temu crawled out from beneath his blankets and furs and stood, keeping one 
burlagh hide wrapped about his shoulders against the chill. He ducked his head and 
stepped carefully among the dozing forms of his friends. He moved into the 
circumference of firelight, drawing Nakhu and Jelmei’s gazes. Yeb did not seem to 
notice Temu’s approach at all, and continued walking slowly, sprinkling the contents of 
his little pouch, flapping his fan and chanting. 
“What is he doing?” Temu whispered to Jelmei, wide-eyed with wonder. 
“Buyu,” Jelmei whispered back. Magic. 
Temu sat next to the two guards as they watched Yeb in fascination. He noticed 
Rhyden asleep across from them by the fire, curled beneath heavy layers of furs. 
Aigiarn slept near him, resting on her side facing the warmth of the blaze. She was 
close enough that the cap of her head nearly met Rhyden’s, and her hand lay draped 
against his.  
He is lonely…alone… Aigiarn had told Toghrul of Rhyden. As though he is 
haunted by things he cannot bear to recall, but does not dare to forget. I can see it in his 
eyes sometimes…when he thinks no one is looking… 
Temu had always been able to see Aigiarn’s own loneliness and sorrow in her 
eyes. Yeb was right; a part of her still mourned for his father. She was isolated by her 
grief, imprisoned by it.  

The way he looks at Temu…it is as though Temu draws him out, chases that 
burden from his heart…when he smiles at Temu, that sorrow lifts from him and he is 
beautiful for it. 
Temu smiled softly. Aigiarn could have just as easily been describing herself with 
those words, and the effect Rhyden had on her lately. A couple of days earlier, while 
they had brought the knarr briefly ashore, Rhyden had coaxed Aigiarn into playing a 
round of pingachu with him and Temu. When she had accepted, Temu had been 
astounded; he had never seen his mother play anything before. She was not the sort for 
games or goofing, and he had been further astonished when Aigiarn turned out to be 
very good at pingachu―she had beaten them both, as a matter of fact. She had 
laughed with them, a deep, visceral, joyous laugh Temu had not heard from her in a 
long, long time. She had opened her mouth in a wide, happy smile and laughed aloud 
with abandon, and Temu had been nearly dumbstruck with wonder. 
“What do you think it means?” he had whispered to Yeb once they had been 
underway once more that morning. He had kept his voice low, lest Toghrul overhear. 
Toghrul had not missed the playful exchanges between Aigiarn and Rhyden, and to 
judge by his scowl, he had not approved. 
“I think it means perhaps other destinies were meant to be served by Rhyden’s 
company than just Ag’iamon’s promise,” Yeb had replied quietly. He had glanced at 
Temu, raising his brow. “Does it trouble you, Temu?” 
Temu had blinked at him, surprised. “No, Yeb,” he said, shaking his head. “Not at 
all. It is just different about her, that is all. I like it―I like that she is happy.” 

Yeb had tousled Temu’s hair with his fingertips, smiling. “For every winter, no 
matter how long it may seem in the duration, Temu, there is always a spring.” 
Temu thought he understood what Yeb had meant, although he was not certain. 
Aigiarn had found within Rhyden a like mind and heart. Both of them had withdrawn in 
their own ways following the deaths of those beloved to them―and both harbored 
feelings of shame and responsibility for those deaths. Aigiarn never spoke of such 
things to Temu, but he had sensed them about her, just as he could about Rhyden, 
without Rhyden saying a word. 
Toghrul had always understood Aigiarn’s pain, because he, too, had known his 
share of loss and grief, but he had never shared in it. Toghrul railed against his sorrow 
in actions and anger; Aigiarn had retreated from it. She had harbored it very much in 
private and secrecy, just like Rhyden had with his own. The two shared this common 
bond, and when they were together, somehow it lessened upon their hearts for awhile. 
For every winter, no matter how long it may seem in the duration, Temu, there is 
always a spring, Yeb had said, and Temu smiled again, gazing at the Elf and his 
mother, at the simple but somehow poignant image of their hands folded together, 
aglow in the firelight.  
“It is late. You should be asleep,” Yeb said, startling him from his thoughts. He 
had not even heard Yeb approach and he blinked at the shaman as he sat on the 
ground, folding his legs beneath him. 
“I heard you chanting,” Temu said. He watched as Yeb folded his dalbuur and 
tucked it within the bogcu pouch at his sash. He produced two small, relatively flat items 

in place of the fan, each wrapped carefully, deliberately in squares of wool. “What were 
you doing, Yeb? What was that you spilled on the ground?” 
“It is a ritual called toyuriqu,” Yeb replied. He set the two bundles on the ground 
before his lap and set about unwrapping one. It was a toli, a small, circular amulet made 
of silver. The medallion was smooth and featureless, polished like a mirror. It was 
fastened to a loop of sinew, which Yeb drew over his head, draping about his neck.  
“I spilled salt upon the ground,” Yeb said, glancing at Temu. “I drew a ring around 
our campsite. It is a jaqa, as a spiritual barrier, to keep our uthas within―yours, mine 
and Rhyden’s―and keep any spirits or spells the Khahl send to spy on us from drawing 
near.” 
“Will it work?” Temu asked, watching as Yeb unfolded the second bundle. This 
one contained seven dark, shriveled, dried berries tucked inside. Yeb pinched two of the 
berries between his fingertips and popped them in his mouth. He chewed slowly, but did 
not swallow. 
“I do not know,” he said. “Kagan Targutai’s yeke idugan has powerful hiimori. I 
am stronger than she is, but she conjures many spells and incantations in tandem with 
her shaman council. Rhyden’s endur spirit, his utha, Trejaeran handled them when they 
tried to spy on us before, but I would do my part, whatever I can, to keep them from us 
should they feel bold enough to try again.” 
“What are these?” Temu asked, leaning over to peer at the berries.  
“Qola’nidu,” Yeb replied. “They are summer fruit of the woodlands. They serve 
many purposes to shamans, including as part of the qaraqu ritual―which I am about to 
practice.” 

Temu knew of the qola’nidu plant. It was a type of forest scrub, with thin leaves 
that flowered in late summer with scattered bell-shaped blossoms. The qola’nidu’s hard 
green fruit that yielded to darker hues of scarlet and purple toward the autumn was unfit 
for eating, because they were poisonous. 
Yeb saw the look of startled, horrified realization cross Temu’s face, and he 
chuckled. “It is alright, Temu,” he said. “They lose some of their potency when dried in 
the sun. They help me see things.” 
“What sort of things?” 
“Spirits,” Yeb said. “They open my mind, my visai―my senses―to the presence 
of spirits. They enhance my hiimori, focus it, bolster it. I do not plan to sleep tonight. I 
will allow my mind to awaken fully and will practice qaraqu.” 
“Qaraqu?” Temu said. 
“My ami suld will leave my form,” Yeb said. “It is a dangerous ritual, and not 
without its risks. Anytime a shaman releases his or her ami, they must depend upon 
their utha sulds, and our rituals of buyu to keep our amis from thinking we have died, 
that it is time for them to return to the spirit tree.” 
“Yeb…!” Temu breathed, wide-eyed. 
Yeb smiled. “Do not be frightened, Temu. I have done this many, many times. 
Ogotai will be with me. His strength, and the power of the jaqa perimeter I have cast 
around the fire in salt will contain my ami here in this place. I will keep vigil over us 
against the Khahl shamans’ trickery.” 
“Can you stop them if they come, Yeb?” Temu whispered anxiously. 

“I can keep them from us,” Yeb said. “The jaqa and the incantations of toyuriqu 
will keep them away, but should any spirits draw too close, I will drive them back with 
this.” He took the toli between his fingers, showing it to Temu. “This toli mirror is spiritual 
armor of sorts. It repels attack by sulds, deflects dark buyu back toward the conjurer. 
This one is most powerful indeed. It belonged to my father. It has served me very well 
for many long years.” 
Temu was quiet for a long moment, looking down at the dried berries. “If I took 
one,” he said quietly. “Would I see spirits, too, Yeb? Would I…” He glanced at the 
shaman. “Would I be able to see my father?” 
“I do not know, Temu,” Yeb said gently. 
“Could I try?” Temu asked. “I…I could help you with toyuriqu.” 
“Not tonight, Temu,” Yeb said. “Go back to your pallet and rest now. Let me tend 
to this.” 
“Even if I go back to the pallet, I will not sleep,” Temu said. “I am not tired at all. 
Please, Yeb. I am awake. I could help you.” 
“No, Temu. Not tonight.” 
Temu blinked at him, crestfallen. “You…but you said I have strong hiimori, too…” 
“I did, yes, and you do,” Yeb said, nodding once. “But you are inexperienced with 
your gifts, Temuchin, and qaraqu is no idle undertaking for young shamans. Tonight is 
not the time for introductions or lessons to its methods.” 
“Please, Yeb,” Temu pleaded. “You said the jaqa and toli would keep you safe, 
and that Ogotai would be with you. Would not my father be with me to protect me? You 
have always trusted me―trusted my hiimori. Please, will you not now?” 

Yeb smiled at him kindly. He reached out and brushed the cuff of his knuckles 
against Temu’s cheek. “Yesugei is always with you, protecting you, Temu,” he said. 
“You were so certain of it earlier, when you stood against Toghrul. Why has your faith 
waned so soon, in so few hours?” 
Temu blinked down at the ground, shrugging away from Yeb’s hand. “I…I just 
want to see him,” he whispered. “Just once, Yeb, I want to see him.” 
“I know, Temu.” 
“He would come for me just this once, I know he would.” Temu stared at the 
shaman, imploring. “Please, Yeb.” 
Yeb was quiet for a long, pensive moment. He regarded Temu wordlessly, his 
eyes kind but unwavering. At last he reached down, lifting one of the berries from the 
scrap of wool. He pressed it against Temu’s palm, holding the boy’s gaze. “You will 
listen to me,” he said, and Temu nodded, his mouth unfurling in a bright smile. Yeb 
cupped his hand against Temu’s cheek, his grave expression making Temu’s 
enthusiasm falter. “You will listen to me,” he said again. “You will stay near to me. When 
I tell you to, you will hold my hand and you will not turn loose of me. You will not leave 
my side.” 
“Yes, Yeb,” Temu said, nodding again. 
Yeb reached into his bogcu and pulled out another small package. It was another 
doli, this one smaller than his own. “Here,” he said softly, draping the loop of sinew 
around Temu’s neck, drawing the amulet down to hang against Temu’s heart, above the 
swell of his father’s ongon outlined beneath his clothes. Temu stared down at the small 
mirror, wide-eyed. 

“This was my first toli,” Yeb told him, drawing his gaze. “Bugu Inalchuk, my father 
gave this to me when I was just a boy and I embarked with him upon my first qaraqu. It, 
too, has served me very well over the years…as it will you.” 
“I can keep it?” 
Yeb smiled. “Yes, Temu.” 
Temu smiled again. He leaned forward and embraced the shaman, wrapping his 
arms around Yeb’s neck. “Thank you, Yeb.” 
Yeb canted his head and pressed his lips against Temu’s brow. “You are 
welcome,” he said softly, stroking his hand against the top of Temu’s cap. When Temu 
sat back from him, his expression grew solemn again. “Bite into the qola’nidu, but do not 
swallow it,” Yeb instructed. “Tuck it between your back teeth and hold it there. Chew 
only a little. Let the waters of your mouth soften the fruit and call forth its buyu.” 
Temu nodded. He opened his mouth and slipped the berry between his lips. He 
settled his back teeth against the withered scrap of fruit and caught a hint of pleasant 
flavor, similar to ripened blackberries. 
“Do not swallow it,” Yeb said again. He cupped his hand demonstratively beneath 
his chin and spat out his own berries. He tossed them into the fire. “When the buyu is 
within you, then you may spit it out.” 
“How will I know the buyu is within me?” Temu asked. 
Yeb smiled at him. “You will know,” he promised. “You must be patient. Watch 
the fire, Temu.” 
Temu nodded his head, letting his gaze settle on the fire. He watched the flames 
lick against the scraps of wood and bark; Jelmei and Nakhu had added more kindling to 

the blaze, stoking it. He could hear the soft scrabbling of fire against dead pine. He 
could smell the bitter, heady incense of sap infused within the smoke. He watched as 
embers darted from the tips of the flames, scampering skyward, and he followed them 
with his eyes. The glowing embers danced with snowflakes on a soft current of air. 
He could feel the qola’nidu berry softening in his mouth. He could taste it against 
his tongue. The warmth of the fire lulled him, and he felt his shoulders settle 
comfortably, his eyelids drooping. He relaxed, his breath slowing beneath his chest, 
marking a deep, steady rhythm. Temu watched the fire, and it seemed that after a few 
moments, he grew very light, as though his form became unfettered from the earth and 
floated in the air, a wayward, downy seedling caught in a faint and distant breeze. 
The light of the fire seemed to dim, like shadows draped gently down from the 
surrounding tree boughs, snuffing its glow. Temu became aware of another light from 
this direction, however, and he blinked dazedly at the blaze, his breath stilling 
momentarily as he said softly, wondrously, “Oh…” 
Rhyden was glowing. His entire body was surrounded by bright, golden light. The 
illumination radiated out from his chest, enfolding his form. There was no such light 
around Aigiarn, or any of the Oirat sleeping beneath the lean-tos, and puzzled, Temu 
turned to Yeb. 
The shaman watched him with a soft smile. Like Rhyden, he was aglow; Yeb’s 
light was scarlet, like the edge of the horizon during a brilliant autumn sunset. When 
Yeb breathed, vermillion light, like a mist, drifted gracefully from his mouth, his nose. 
“Yeb…!” Temu whispered breathlessly. He glanced down at himself and realized 
he, too, was glowing. His own light was blue; there was a bright corona of it ablaze over 

his heart, and it branched from here, spreading all over him, enclosing him in an 
illuminated sheath of delicate blue. “What…what is this? Is it buyu?” 
“It is your gerel,” Yeb told him gently. “The light of hiimori within one’s heart, their 
soul. The qola’nidu has opened your mind to it. You can sense it now, see it in yourself 
and others.” 
“Bugger me,” Temu gasped, incredulous. He blinked at Yeb, realizing what he 
had said and feeling abashed until he saw Yeb shake his head, chuckling softly. 
“The gerel of a shaman is red,” Yeb said. “That is how we know who will become 
one of us. Yours is blue, Temu―you alone in all of history bear the blue gerel fire. You 
are the Negh. This light is as much a part of your destiny as the mark of the seven 
sacred stars of Dologhon.” 
“Why is Rhyden’s golden?” Temu asked, turning to look again in wonder at the 
Elf asleep by the fire, the glow of his own form, his hiimori brighter than the blaze. 
“Because he is the golden falcon, Temu,” Yeb said. “That is how I have known 
from the first that he was meant to be with us―that he was the one Ag’iamon promised. 
I could sense the strength of his gerel, even when I could not see it. Like yours, it 
thrums within the air like music. Do you hear it? Can you hear him?” 
Temu blinked, his eyes widening in new awe. He realized he could hear a low 
and trembling vibration, like the resonant echoes of heavy, overlapping drumbeats. “I 
can hear it, Yeb,” he said. “That is Rhyden?” 
“It is the sound of his soul, and ours, Temu, our powers together here in 
harmony.” 
“Tere ayu sayiqan,” Temu breathed. It is beautiful. 

He rose to his feet and walked away from Yeb, approaching the fire. He lifted his 
face toward the sky, looking up at the snow. Time itself had seemed to slow; the 
delicate flakes hovered, suspended in the margin of air between clouds and earth. His 
own footsteps felt weightless and effortless, and he could not feel the press of the 
ground against the soles of his gutal.  
When he looked again at the fire, he realized the flames crept against the wood 
now, spindly fingertips splayed and outstretched, poised and groping along each log 
and branch. The smoke dangled in the air, a motionless, translucent haze twining up 
toward pine boughs. He turned to Jelmei and Nakhu and found the two Kelet unmoving 
as they sat nearby, their faces turned together. Nakhu looked down between his boot 
toes while Jelmei leaned toward him, his chin lifted, his lips parted as though he spoke 
quiet words against his friend’s ear. Neither of them blinked nor breathed.  
“Take my hand now, Temu,” Yeb said. 
“Why?” Temu asked, turning to the shaman. As he did, he gasped sharply, his 
eyes flying wide in frightened realization. He was floating, the soles of his gutal poised 
at least a foot off of the ground. “Yeb―!” he cried, breathless with alarm, pedaling his 
feet in the empty air. 
“Your ami has left your body,” Yeb said, smiling as he reached up, taking Temu 
by the hand. “Do not be frightened. The buyu is within you.” 
Temu smiled in wonder as he closed his fingers against Yeb’s palm. “I am doing 
it,” he said quietly. He beamed at Yeb. “I am doing it, Yeb―just like you! I am doing it!” 
“Yes, you are,” Yeb said with a nod, the corner of his mouth lifted gently. He 
pulled gently against Temu’s arm, drawing him to the ground. Temu felt his boots settle 

against the snow, as weightless and effortless as a feather in a draft. He could see 
himself, his own form behind him, sitting against the ground with the burlagh fur 
swathed about his shoulders. Yeb still sat beside of him, and they both gazed at the fire, 
their eyes heavily lidded and drowsy, and Temu gasped again in new astonishment. 
“Yeb…” he whispered, incredulous, staring between the Yeb beside the fire and 
the Yeb who stood beside him, holding his hand. “Yeb, how…how did we…?” 
“This is the jabsar,” Yeb told him. “The spiritual between, the boundary between 
our mortal plane, the eternal light of the spirit world and the unknown darkness of 
qarang’qui. There is no time here, not in any measure we could hope to understand, 
and our physical forms have no meaning in this place.” 
“But I can see you…” Temu said. He looked down at their clasped hands. “I…I 
can feel you, Yeb, your fingers against mine. I can…” 
“You see my form, and yours, Temu, because that is what your mind expects to 
find,” Yeb said. “Our amis have no shape of their own. They can take our appearance, 
or assume the likeness of birds as they soar toward the spirit tree. Your ami 
encompasses your mind, Temu, and yours is unaccustomed to leaving your body 
behind. It tries to show you things, present this plane of existence to you in ways you 
can understand, forms that are familiar to you.” 
“I am not real, then?” Temu asked, glancing down at himself. He patted his free 
palm against his chest, his eyes round and amazed. It seemed real enough to him; he 
could feel his hand thumping against his heavy clothes, his ribcage. “You are not real, 
Yeb?” 

“Oh, we are both very real,” Yeb told him, smiling again. “We are different here, 
that is all. Your spirit can float here, Temu―as you have seen. It can pass through 
walls, locked doors, the pine boughs above us like sunlight or wind. It can be as solid as 
stone, as diffused as smoke. You can cross great distances without blinking your eyes. 
You can fly above the trees, the ocean and the Bith―” 
“We can fly?” Temu gasped. 
“Yes,” Yeb said, and he chuckled. “But you must very careful, Temu. There are 
good reasons shamans do not linger within the jabsar.” He tapped his fingertip in the air, 
pointing to their bodies seated before the campfire. “It is not good to leave our forms 
unattended for too long.” 
“Why not?” 
“Because our life-forces…the whole structure of the Bith, Temu, is based on the 
balance of the Tegsh,” Yeb said. “Within our forms, this means a balance between our 
amis―our minds―and our suni sulds―our bodies. Leaving our sunis alone within our 
bodies puts them at great risk, for there are many restless, formless spirits within nature 
who would try and take our forms from us, to slip inside with us unaware.” 
Temu’s eyes widened at this, and he looked nervously at his body. 
“There are other risks besides,” Yeb said. “Here in the jabsar, our amis do not 
feel pain. However, our bodies can still be hurt, and because of the Tegsh, pain and 
injury are shared with us. If the suni is injured, it is felt within the ami. So we must be 
careful, and never stray too far from our forms, and never allow our amis to keep too 
long from our bodies.” 

“Can we see other spirits here, Yeb?” Temu asked. “If they to sneak inside of our 
bodies, would we see them?” 
“We would, yes.” Yeb offered Temu’s hand a reassuring squeeze. “But we do not 
need to fear for that tonight. The jaqa will keep any restless spirits in these woods from 
reaching our forms. They cannot cross the line of salt I have drawn about our camp.” 
“But then, where is Ogotai? Where is my father?” Temu asked, looking around in 
confusion. “You told me the jaqa would keep them inside of the boundary with us. Why 
can we not see them?” 
Yeb looked about himself, his brow arched as he realized the absence of his utha 
suld for the first time. “I do not know, Temu.” 
“I thought we would be able to see them,” Temu said, crestfallen and dismayed. 
“Yesugei has been an enigmatic utha to you,” Yeb said. “I did not know if he 
would allow us to see him or not. But Ogotai should be with us…” He frowned, turning 
his head this way and that, looking around the campsite. “He has been most agitated 
and anxious today. He is the one who bid me to perform the rituals of toyuriqu and 
qaraqu, to cast the jaqa and hold counsel with him here in the jabsar. He wanted me to 
come―it seemed very urgent to him.” 
“Is it the Khahl?” Temu asked. “You said Ogotai was upset tonight about the 
visions of the crows. Does he know more, Yeb? Does he know what happened to the 
Uru’ut aysil?” 
“I do not know,” Yeb murmured. He looked troubled all at once, his brows 
drawing together, pinching along the bridge of his nose.  
“Where is he, Yeb?” Temu whispered. “Has something happened to Ogotai?” 

“I do not know,” Yeb said again. He glanced at Temu and realized the boy’s 
mounting fear. He tightened his fingers slightly against Temu’s own and smiled. “I am 
certain it is nothing. Ogotai has been known to wander. Perhaps he ventured beyond 
the jaqa as I marked it against the ground and is trapped beyond the border now, out 
among the trees. Let me draw your ami to your form again, and I will go and look for 
him.” 
“Oh, Yeb, no,” Temu pleaded, clutching Yeb’s hand between his own in implore. 
“Let me stay here with you. I can help, Yeb, please.” 
Yeb shook his head. “No, Temu,” he said. As the boy opened his mouth, drawing 
in breath to protest, Yeb pressed his fingertips lightly against Temu’s lips, staying his 
voice. “I am not strong enough to bind your spirit and mine to this place without Ogotai. 
If something were to happen, if you were to let go of my hand beyond the jaqa line, I 
could not prevent you from returning to the spirit tree. Your mother would be very 
displeased with me if that should happen, I think.” 
He was trying to make Temu smile, without success. Temu looked at him, 
disconcerted. “But what about you?” 
“I can bind myself here, for a time at least,” Yeb said. “Long enough to open the 
jaqa and look for Ogotai.” 
“But Yeb, please, I could―” Temu began. His voice faltered as a cold wind 
stirred through the forest. He could feel it seeping through him, sudden and bitter. He 
heard it rustling in the pine limbs overhead, and watched snowflakes sweep frantically 
about them. He felt Yeb’s hand tighten all the more against his; he listened to the sharp, 
startled intake of Yeb’s breath, and as the shaman moved, stepping in front of Temu 

and easing the boy behind him, never releasing his grip against his hand, Temu 
remembered. 
This is the jabsar, Yeb had told him, as Temu had marveled over how time had 
seemingly halted. The spiritual between. There is no time here, not in any measure we 
could hope to understand. 
There is no time here, Temu realized. Nothing seems to move here because time 
does not move―so where did the wind come from? 
“Keep behind me, Temu,” Yeb said, his voice low and quiet. He did not look over 
his shoulder to speak; his gaze was fixed on the shadow-draped forest, his brows 
furrowed, his free hand darting to his breast.  
“What was that, Yeb?” Temu whispered, frightened. 
“It was Ogotai.” Yeb coiled his fingers about his ongon. “Ogotai!” he called out 
sharply. 
“Ogotai? But where is he?” 
“I do not know,” Yeb said. “Ogotai!” he called again. “Bi sonusqu ci! Bi ayu ende! 
Yegun ayu tere?” I hear you! I am here! What is it? 
“Why will he not show himself?” Temu asked, trembling. 
“I do not think he can,” Yeb replied, his frown deepening. “I think he was trying to 
warn us. Something is keeping him away.” 
“Something…?” Temu whispered. 
“I am sending you back.” Yeb turned to face the boy, keeping fast hold of his 
hand. “Close your eyes, Temu, and listen to me. Repeat my words―say them now: 
‘adag ene jegudun ba baraqu ene buyu―’” 

“But, Yeb…” Temu breathed, glancing beyond Yeb’s shoulder toward the trees. 
“There is no time, Temu,” Yeb said. “Say the words with me. ‘Adag ene 
jegudun―’” 
“Yeb,” Temu said again, hissing through his teeth. He met Yeb’s eyes and then 
averted his gaze over the shaman’s shoulder again. Yeb fell silent, his breath stilling in 
his throat. He looked at Temu, and the boy could see his own sudden fear mirrored in 
Yeb’s eyes. 
“There is someone there,” Temu whispered. “Beyond the jaqa, beneath the 
trees.” 
Yeb was quiet for a long moment, his expression grim. “Keep behind me,” he 
said at length in a soft voice. “Do not let go of my hand, no matter what happens.” 
“Yeb…” Temu said, wide-eyed, and the shaman turned. 
A silhouetted figure stood among the shadows cast by the pines and sequoias. 
Neither Yeb nor Temu could discern more than the dark outline of a human form just 
beyond the perimeter of the jaqa line Yeb had drawn, outside of the circumference of 
light from the fire. 
“Ken ayu tende?” Yeb called out. Who is there?  
The silhouetted figure gave no reply. It shuddered slightly, moving in the 
shadows, and when it laughed, its voice low and ominous, Temu could feel it within his 
mind, whispering in his head like the scuttling of rats’ feet in dried leaves. 
“Tende ayu manu jaga,” Yeb told the figure. The uncertainty and fear Temu had 
seen plainly in the shaman’s eyes was not reflected at all in Yeb’s firm tone, his 

commanding voice. “Ta yadaqu getulku dotura ene yajar, seguder’kelberi.” There is our 
border. You cannot pass into this place, shadow-form. 
The silhouette laughed again, the sensation of it crawling and shivering through 
Temu. He shied against Yeb’s back, closing his free hand against the soft wool of Yeb’s 
yellow khurim. When the figure spoke, Temu heard its voice within his mind, not with his 
ears, and he whimpered softly, cowering behind Yeb. 
You cannot keep me from this place, yeke shaman, it hissed, and it stepped 
forward, moving toward them. You do not have the power to prevent me, Yeb 
Oyugundei. 
“Keep your distance, unknown spirit!” Yeb shouted. “You are unwelcome here, 
and I will keep you from us as a shepherd keeps narsana from his herd―by vigilance or 
force, however I am able.” 
The figure stepped into the dim, outermost edge of the firelight, its footsteps 
pausing along the line Yeb had drawn in the snow with salt. They could see it now; it 
was a woman. She stood before them, nude and pale, her skin as ashen as a corpse’s. 
Her hair was wet, clinging to her face and shoulders in sodden tangles. Water beaded 
along the contours of her narrow form. Her eyes were solid orbs of blackness, margins 
of the midnight sky captured between her lids and lashes.  
Temu could see the woman’s gerel framing her body. It was not a sheath of light, 
like Rhyden’s, Yeb’s or his own; like her eyes, the woman’s gerel was black, a shroud of 
darkness about her, as though even the faintest glow feared to draw too close to her. 
“You are a fool, yeke shaman,” the woman said, her voice moist and gurgling. As 
she spoke, water spurted from between her lips, dribbling down her chin, spattering 

against her breasts. The corner of her mouth hooked in a menacing smile. “And you 
have delivered Dobun’s heir to me.” 
“I know your name, Mongoljin Burilgitu,” Yeb said. “I know your face and your 
form, and I am unafraid of you. Go back to your dark waters, your foul and stagnant 
tomb. Go back to Tengriss and tell those who serve your Duua’s kin that you have 
failed.”  
The woman, Mongoljin, laughed, more water spewing from her lips, gargling in 
her throat. “Failed?” she asked, and she stared right at Temu, her black eyes boring into 
him. I have not even yet begun, she hissed within his mind. 
She drew her hand lightly through the air before her, and the edge of salt on the 
snow scattered, a brief margin of space opening in the line of the jaqa. The woman 
stepped through this opening and into the campsite. The salt moved again as she 
passed, whispering against the snow, drawing closed behind her once more. Temu 
uttered a soft, frightened cry, his fingers tightening against Yeb’s khurim. “Yeb…!” he 
whimpered. 
“Stay behind me,” Yeb said, moving backwards, forcing Temu into stumbling step 
with him. “Ociqu, magu lus!” he shouted at the woman. Leave, evil spirit! He moved his 
hand, closing his fingers firmly about his toli.  
I have waited five thousand years for this moment, Mongoljin said. Foolish 
shaman, do you think you are strong enough to keep me from Dobun’s whelp? I will see 
you lost in the black plane of qarang’qui; I will see you broken in the shadows, your 
mind and will crushed by its eternal darkness.  

She thrust her hand toward Yeb, her long, pale fingers splayed wide, hooked in 
the air. As she moved, Yeb jerked his toli before him, holding it out, and Temu ducked 
his head, cowering. He felt something strike Yeb with enough force to send the shaman 
staggering back, and Temu along with him. He heard a loud, visceral toll like an 
untuned bell, and when he opened his eyes, blinking in fright, he saw that Yeb’s toli had 
crimped inward, collapsing toward his palm. It was as though something mighty but 
invisible had slammed into them, and the amulet had born the brunt of its brutal force. 
The only one who shall taste of eternal darkness this night, bitch-queen of 
Kharhorin, is you, Yeb snapped within Temu’s mind, and then he released his toli, 
shoving his hand toward Mongoljin.  
The woman’s head snapped back on her neck as if Yeb had just delivered a 
swift, sharp punch to her chin. She stumbled, collapsing onto the ground, catching 
herself on her hands and her hip. She whipped her face toward Yeb, her brows 
furrowed, her lips drawn back in a snarl from her teeth. “Oirat bastard,” she seethed. 
Temu heard Yeb yelp softly, breathlessly, and then the shaman’s feet were 
jerked out from beneath him. Temu cried out in terror as Yeb flew through the air, 
careening like a discarded toy.  
“Yeb!” Temu wailed, as the shaman flew beyond the perimeter of the campsite, 
disappearing into the shadows beneath the surrounding trees. “Yeb―no! No!” 
Temu started to run, darting across the clearing toward his friend, and he felt his 
feet skitter to a sudden, unexpected halt beneath him. It felt like an unseen snare line 
had tightened around his ankles; all at once, he was whipped around to face Mongoljin. 

“You are Dobun’s heir,” Mongoljin said, rising once more and walking slowly 
toward Temu. She cackled, a horrible, slobbering sound. “I felt you wriggling and 
squirming in your mother’s womb, like a centipede inside of my head, eating behind my 
eyes. How I longed even then to shove dagger points through the soft meat of your 
eyes, to listen to you as you cawed and shrieked while I pierced your feeble mind.” 
“Please…” Temu whimpered, drawing his hands to his face. “N-no, 
please…please…” 
You cannot have him, Yeb said within Temu’s mind, and Mongoljin twisted 
sideways, thrown headlong into the trees, away from Temu. Temu turned and cried out 
to see Yeb floating out of the trees and toward the fire. 
“Yeb!” he exclaimed. 
Yeb’s gutal dangled above the ground, and he held his battered toli in one hand, 
thrust before him. His other hand was closed in a tight fist, and his brows were furrowed 
deeply, his face infused with rage. 
This is my jaqa, witch, Yeb said. I can cross it as I please―and I can drive you 
from it once more. 
You will die within its measure, shaman! Mongoljin screeched, shoving her hand 
toward Yeb, her fingers splayed widely. Yeb’s toli shattered in his hand, splintering into 
twisted fragments of metal as it again bore the massive brunt of some invisible, terrible 
strike. He whirled around in a circle, as though dancing from the force of the blow, the 
long, heavy hem of his del flapping about his legs and hips like wayward wings. He 
regained his poise in the air, and levitated himself higher above the campsite. The 
scarlet light surrounding him―his gerel―glowed all the more brightly, infusing within his 

eyes now in a bright, furious blaze. He cast aside the ruined mirror and closed both of 
his hands into fists. 
You cannot harm me here in the jabsar, he said to Mongoljin. You hold no power 
over me, or the boy. Leave now, before I send you crawling back to Tengriss. 
Mongoljin thrust her hand out again, reaching toward Yeb’s body, seated by the 
fire. Yeb’s ami froze, his eyes flying wide and Mongoljin began to laugh again. Have you 
forgotten your form, yeke shaman? she asked. Your little suni all alone in the mortal 
plane? It can be harmed…there is all of the power I need over you, Oirat. 
She began to fold her fingers slowly, deliberately in toward her palm. As she did, 
Yeb’s body pitched over onto its side against the ground and began to contort. His chin 
dropped toward his sternum, and his arms and legs moved, drawing to his chest. His 
spine bowed, hunching inward; as Mongoljin closed her hand, Yeb’s form collapsed into 
a huddle. His ami writhed helplessly in the air with the sudden, searing torment in his 
body. Yeb arched his back, his face twisting with terrible pain, and his voice escaped 
him in a strangled, hurting cry. 
“Yeb―no!” Temu cried, stricken.  
“I grow stronger by the moment, yeke shaman,” Mongoljin said. “You should 
have stopped me when you yet might have had such a hope.” 
Temu…! Yeb gasped within the boy’s mind. He shuddered as he struggled to 
look at Temu. Temu―run! 
“No…!” Temu whimpered, shaking his head. He staggered in place, uncertain 
what to do, which Yeb to rush toward―his form or his spirit. “Yeb, no, please, I cannot 
leave you!” 

Run away, Temu! Yeb cried in his mind. She is a gazriin ezen, and I cannot keep 
her from you! Run into the forest…I beg of you―run away and find Ogotai―! 
Yeb’s voice dissolved in an agonized shriek resounding through Temu’s mind; 
Temu could hear his joints creaking, bending and straining against their sockets, his 
bones flexing nearly to the point of splintering. 
“Yeb, no!” Temu wailed. Instead of bolting for the woods, he lunged at Mongoljin, 
getting his feet beneath him and springing toward the woman. He clasped her 
outstretched hand between his. “Stop it! You are killing him! Leave him alone!”  
Mongoljin’s other hand snapped out, her fingers closing about his throat. She 
jerked him off of the ground; she had the strength of a dozen men, surely in her arm, 
her grasp, and she threw Temuchin, sending him flying toward the fire. He crashed 
against the ground, the breath whoofed from him, his head striking hard enough to 
leave him reeling. 
“Leave…him…” Yeb hissed. 
“I will leave his corpse for the narsana to rip apart,” Mongoljin said. “While his ami 
lingers eternally in qarang’qui, his suni shall rot here with his wretched form.” 
Temu raised his head and found himself facing his own body, still seated before 
the fire, his legs tucked beneath him, his eyes half-opened. He looked over his shoulder 
and saw his mother curled beside the fire, her hand hooked against Rhyden’s. 
“Mamma…” he croaked, crawling toward Aigiarn. “Mamma…help me…!” 
Aigiarn did not move; she did not stir or flinch at his voice. He could see Toghrul 
beyond her shoulder, past the circumference of firelight, the silhouette of his sleeping 

form beneath the canopy of the lean-to. “Toghrul!” Temu cried, bursting into tears. 
“Mamma―Toghrul! Please! She is killing Yeb! Please help us!” 
There was no use, and Temu realized it to his horror and dismay. Aigiarn and 
Toghrul could not hear him, because they were in the mortal plane. Temu’s spirit was 
somewhere in between, in the jabsar, neither a dream nor real. He could scream 
himself hoarse, plead until he was breathless and no one could hear him; no one could 
help him. 
“Do not weep for the boy’s fate, yeke shaman,” Mongoljin said to Yeb. “For the 
two of you will share in it together―alone and shrieking until the end of time in 
qarang’qui.” 
She threw her hands skyward and Yeb flew into the air, soaring into the pine 
boughs. He shrieked as he disappeared into the tree tops, and Temu stared, aghast 
and horrified, tears spilling down his cheeks, his voice escaping his throat in a soft, 
breathless mewl. 
Temu, run! Yeb screamed within Temu’s mind, his voice shrill and hoarse. Run 
away―get away from her! Run into the woods! Run―! 
He felt it when Yeb’s ami was taken into the qarang’qui; the gentle thrumming of 
his soul, the vibration of his spirit’s gerel fire within Temu’s mind suddenly fell still. His 
voice ripped to an abrupt, shrill halt, and Temu uttered a hiccupping, anguished sob. 
“Yeb…!” he pleaded, falling onto his knees. “Oh…oh, no, please…Yeb…!” 
He turned around, hooking his hands against Rhyden’s shoulder, shaking the Elf. 
“Rhyden!” he pleaded. “Rhyden, help me!” He folded himself over Rhyden’s body, 
huddled against him in terror, tucking his face against the nook of the Elf’s shoulder. 

“Rhyden, please!” he wept, clutching at Rhyden’s blankets, his clothing, shuddering 
against him. “Please, Rhyden―please, you have hiimori! Please hear me! Help me! 
Please wake up! Please…I…I am frightened! Help me!” 
He heard Mongoljin laughing softly, and he turned, moaning as she walked 
slowly toward him again. He shook his head, tears streaming down his cheeks. 
“No…please…please do not…” 
He staggered to his feet, stumbling away from Rhyden and his mother. He 
whirled about and raced for the trees. As his gutal toes met the line of salt Yeb had 
drawn in the snow, it felt as though Temu plowed headlong into a stone wall. He 
staggered backward, his feet floundering from beneath him. He sat down hard in the 
snow, and blinked in bewildered terror at the trees in front of him.  
I drew a ring around our campsite, Yeb had told him, and Temu moaned again in 
horrified realization. It is a jaqa, as a spiritual barrier, to keep our uthas within―yours, 
mine and Rhyden’s―and keep any spirits or spells the Khahl send to spy upon us from 
drawing near. 
“No…!” he whispered. He scrambled to his feet and rushed for the forest again. 
Again, he slammed into the invisible barrier, the binding spell of the jaqa, and he reeled 
backwards. 
They cannot cross the line of salt I have drawn about our camp, Yeb had said, 
and Temu began to weep again, his breath shuddering beneath his chest. 
I am trapped here! he thought. I cannot cross the jaqa! I cannot get away! 
Mongoljin laughed softly, chuckling to herself. “Where will you go?” she asked. 
“Your yeke shaman has bound and abandoned you here, within this circle, little heir. 

You are not strong enough to pass the jaqa, like your Yeb Oyugundei, or me. What will 
you do, whelp? Where will you go?” 
Temu turned toward her, stumbling until he felt his shoulders strike the unyielding 
boundary of the jaqa. He trembled as he watched her approach him. “Father…” he 
pleaded, drawing his hands toward his heart, clutching at Yesugei’s ongon. “Father, 
please…please help me…” 
He looked desperately about for Yesugei, but there was no one there. No one but 
his family, his friends, asleep and oblivious in the mortal plane, and this woman, this 
gazriin ezen, Mongoljin with him in the jabsar. 
“F-Father…!” Temu cried, cowering against the jaqa. “Father…please…where 
are you? Please…please…!” 
“There is no one left to help you,” Mongoljin said, stretching her hand toward him. 
She brushed her fingertips against the air, and the ongon snapped loose from about his 
neck. Temu cried out, trying to grab it as it darted away from him, sailing across the 
campsite and landing in the shadows beyond the fire.  
Mongoljin waved her hand again, and this time, the strap of sinew holding the toli 
Yeb had given to him about his neck jerked. He heard it break, and then the mirror flew 
away from his breast. 
He tried to run, ducking his head and fleeing for the far side of the campsite, but 
Mongoljin caught him with her buyu, her unseen hands, and she jerked him backwards, 
sending him staggering into the jaqa wall again. 

“You are the one Ag’iamon would see rebuild the empire?” Mongoljin asked. “The 
lord of dragons and men who would claim my Duua’s throne?” She tilted her head back 
and cackled. “You are more child than man―and more mouse than dragon.” 
Father, help me! Temu cried within his mind. Father, please! Yeb said you were 
always with me! He told me so! Please―help me! 
“There will be no dragons for you, little heir,” Mongoljin said softly, spreading her 
fingers toward him. The corners of her mouth were lifted in a cruel smile, and her black 
eyes glittered with cold, malicious light. “No throne, no empire. There will be only 
darkness in your destiny…the black nothing of the qarang’qui.” 

Chapter Two 
 
Rhyden dreamed of walking along the soft, cold mud of the Tolui Bay shoreline. 
He could feel the cold press of the night wind, the tickling patters of snowflakes against 
his face, and he listened to the soft, burbling sounds of water lapping along the beach. 
The Oirat camp was nearby; he could glance over his shoulder and spy golden hints of 
their campfire light among the trees. He did not remember waking, or leaving the camp 
to come down to the water’s edge. He knew he must be dreaming, and looked around, 
his eyes scanning the dark-draped margin where the sea found its way ashore. He was 
not the least bit surprised to find Trejaeran ahead of him, also strolling along the beach, 
with his back to Rhyden, his hands clasped lightly against the small of his back. 
“Hullo, bidein,” Rhyden said, broadening his stride, letting his long legs close the 
distance between them. 
“All of the things, in all of the Bith you could be dreaming about, and you dream 
of this,” Trejaeran said, turning. He smiled broadly at Rhyden, arching his brow. “At this 
very moment, a beautiful woman is sleeping near you―holding your hand, for the love 
of the Good Mother―and you are here on the beach in your mind with me.” 
“A woman?” Rhyden asked. “You mean Aigiarn?” He looked over his shoulder in 
surprise. “She is holding my hand?” 
“She might hold your heart, if you would let her.” 
Rhyden smiled as he drew beside Trejaeran. “She is still in love with her 
husband, bidein.” A quick look down showed Trejaeran walked barefooted, despite the 
bitter water, the frigid air, and Rhyden chuckled, shaking his head. 

“Her husband is dead, Rhyden.” Trejaeran noticed his attention on his feet and 
laughed sheepishly, tucking his dark hair behind his tapered ears. “I like to feel the mud 
between my toes,” he said, lifting his left foot and wiggling it demonstratively. “I cannot 
do that―feel things―unless I visit inside of your mind.” 
Trejaeran had seemed exhausted to Rhyden in the dream of the palace, but 
Rhyden had been too absorbed in his own selfish grief and pain to realize it fully. He 
realized it now as he saw the ashen cast of Trejaeran’s pallor, the fatigue apparent in 
his face, and his light-hearted mood dimmed, his expression turning grave. 
“Are you alright, bidein?” Rhyden whispered, reaching for Trejaeran, touching his 
friend’s shoulder. 
Trejaeran nodded. He pressed the heel of his hand against his brow and sighed 
quietly. “I…hoah, I am just tired, Rhyden,” he said. “I am sorry I have kept away. I had to 
do something and I am still weakened for it.”  
“You drove the Khahl’s shaman spirits away,” Rhyden said. “Two days ago. I 
thought I felt you…your presence…” 
Trejaeran nodded. “They are gone for now,” he said. “But they will come back. 
They are looking for you.” He looked troubled as he said this, his brows drawing slightly, 
his gaze wandering toward the trees beyond Rhyden’s shoulder. “I will keep them 
away,” he said. “But I need to rest.” 
“Did the Khahl attack the Uru’ut aysil, Trejaeran?” Rhyden asked. 
“I do not know,” Trejaeran replied. “I cannot see it. I could go there and find out, 
but it would weaken me even more. But if you asked me to, Rhyden, I would.” 

He looked at Rhyden, his blue eyes tired but earnest, and Rhyden blinked at him, 
disconcerted and confused by his words. “No, bidein,” he said, shaking his head. “No.” 
“I have worried you,” Trejaeran said with a tired, fleeting smile. He patted his 
hand against Rhyden’s arm. “I am sorry. I will be alright…another day or two, and my 
strength will have restored in full. I used too much of my energy against the shamans.” 
He chuckled. “I think the Oirat are right. You must have separate souls for your mind 
and body―and the body spirit must hold all of your vigor. I do not know where my 
body’s soul went when I died, but Mathair Maith, I miss it sometimes. I am fairly well 
spent with little effort.” He smiled at Rhyden. “Being near to you, being drawn into your 
mind like this helps. I get my strength from you, from your sight.” 
Rhyden stopped in his tracks, bewildered. “But I…” he said. “The only reason I 
have the sight is because of you, Trejaeran.” 
Trejaeran’s smile widened slightly. “No, Rhyden,” he said. “You are wrong.” 
Rhyden blinked at him in confusion as Trejaeran walked along the beach again. 
“What?” He followed Trejaeran, reaching out and catching him by his sleeve, drawing 
his gaze. “What are you talking about, bidein? You took the sight from me―from all of 
the Elves. You gave it back to me and Qynh when the Book of Shadows was destroyed. 
She told me that. She said you had meant to all along.” 
“I know what Qynh said,” Trejaeran said. “Because that is what I told her. I gave 
the sight back to her when the Book was destroyed, but I had not meant to all along. I 
gave it back to her for you, Rhyden, because you love her. Because you are lonely 
without her, and I thought to see her…to sense her would make you happy. I did not 

know it would only hurt you. I have caused you so much pain…all of these years, and I 
have never meant for any of it.” 
“What?” Rhyden asked. “Trejaeran, you have never caused me pain. Why would 
you think such a thing? I do not understand.” 
“I know you do not,” Trejaeran said and he looked at Rhyden for a long moment. 
“You have hurt for so long, all of it for me,” he said at last, his voice quiet and plaintive. 
“You do not know what I would give to take that from you, to make you understand. You 
could not have stopped me, Rhyden.” 
Rhyden’s breath tangled in shocked surprise. “What…? I…I do not…” 
“You could not have stopped me,” Trejaeran said again, stepping toward him. His 
face was kind, filled with tender sorrow. “You could not have prevented what happened, 
no matter how fast you had run, no matter what words you might have found to offer 
had you reached me in time. I knew what I had to do. I would not have been dissuaded.” 
Rhyden took a hedging step away from his friend. “You do not know that. You 
say that now, but I…I might have…” 
“The Shadow was upon me, Rhyden,” Trejaeran said. “It had always been with 
me, a shade upon my heart. I had tasted of the duchan. I knew its power, its allure. You 
know this. In your heart, you know it is true.” 
“No,” Rhyden said, stricken. “No, you never, bidein…you defeated it. You 
defeated the duchan’s sway.” 
“But I always remembered it,” Trejaeran said. “It was always there, a soft voice 
whispering inside of me, tempting me. You did not want to believe it, but you knew it in 

your heart, and you know it now, Rhyden. You could sense it within me. I know you 
could.” 
“No,” Rhyden whispered. 
“When I was alone in the caves with the Book of Shadows, after Lahnduren had 
fallen into the chasm, I could feel the allure of the Book, of the Shadow’s power. It called 
to me, Rhyden. It pressed itself within my mind; it crawled into my heart and I wanted it. 
I wanted its power, its strength.” 
“That is untrue,” Rhyden said, his eyes widening in horror. “No, bidein, that…why 
are you saying this? Please―it is not true.” 
“It is, Rhyden,” Trejaeran said, meeting his gaze. “I took the sight from the Elves 
because I wanted the Book’s power for myself. I did not want anyone else to claim it 
and I knew if I stripped the sight from them, no one else ever could.” 
Rhyden recoiled, staggering in stunned disbelief. He whimpered softly, a 
disbelieving, anguished sound. “You cannot mean that.” 
“The Book was strong, Rhyden. Stronger than me. I could not resist it. I did not 
want to. I wanted it to be mine―I wanted all of the dark magic it commanded for myself. 
I was consumed by it even before I lay my hands against it. I wanted it. I saw the fire of 
the anam’cladh’s blade yield to shadow and I could feel the power within me like music, 
like the wind. I saw visions within my mind―dark armies of countless thousands at my 
bidding, conquering Tiralainn, taking the Bith for me by force. I saw it and I wanted it. I 
reached out with my mind―I stripped the sight from the Elves, and then, by my breath, 
Rhyden, I meant to claim it. I meant to give myself fully to the Shadow.” 

“Why are you telling me this?” Rhyden whispered in dismay. Trejaeran 
approached again and he stumbled away.  
“You told Aigiarn you might have saved me that day,” Trejaeran said. “Had you 
been a stride or two faster, if you had been able to talk to me, convince me.” He 
reached for Rhyden, meaning to touch his face, but Rhyden flinched, drawing back. 
“You did save me, Rhyden. As I took the sight away, I sensed you in the caverns. You 
were hurt…” 
When Trejaeran had stripped the sight from the Elves, the force of his mind’s 
power had rocked the caverns beneath the Midland Mountains, where he had chased 
Lahnduren and the Book―where Rhyden had followed in a desperate attempt to protect 
him. The Bith itself had quaked with Trejaeran’s might, and the caves and tunnels had 
collapsed around Rhyden. His ankle had been crushed, the bones splintered and 
shattered; he had broken ribs, and been struck brutally in the head by falling stone and 
debris. 
“I could sense your pain,” Trejaeran said. “But more than that, I could sense your 
love or me. You were hurt, but you kept coming. I could feel you crawling through the 
rubble. You wanted so badly to reach me. I could feel it within you, your love for me. 
You did not care about yourself, your pain. There was nothing in your heart and mind 
but me. I felt this and I realized what I had done, what I meant to do, and I was shamed 
for it―broken. Your love for me…your heart, Rhyden, had the strength my own lacked 
and because of it―because of you―for one moment, that one, fleeting moment, I was 
myself again. The Shadow’s hold slipped and I knew what I had to do. The only thing I 
could do.” 

“Trejaeran…” Rhyden whispered. 
“You gave me the chance,” Trejaeran said. “You set me free and because of 
you…because of your love, your faith in me, I found the strength to end it, to defeat the 
Shadow once and for all. You gave me that one moment when my heart was pure 
again, when I could call the fire of the anam’cladh out of nothing but selfless 
love―yours, Rhyden.” 
He touched Rhyden’s face, and Rhyden did not recoil from him. “There would 
have been no keeping me from it,” Trejaeran whispered. “I only found the strength to 
free myself, Rhyden―to free us all―because of you. Because of the measure of your 
love for me―the measure of your heart. That is what I meant…that is always what I 
meant when I told you ‘the measure of a man lies in his heart, not his deeds.’ I knew 
you would find me, what you had think had happened―what you would I think I had 
done and why―and there was not time to tell you the truth in full. I knew the Book 
would stir again; it would wait for its chance and that it had to be destroyed.” 
Trejaeran’s eyes shimmered with tears. “When you came to me in the tunnels, 
when you found me, held my hand, I gave the sight back to you. I used whatever 
strength, whatever power remained in me to restore it because I knew you could resist 
the Book’s powers. You were stronger than me; you could resist the Shadow’s sway 
and you could see the Book destroyed. You were so brokenhearted…all of these years, 
you have judged yourself so harshly by those words, and you never knew. You did not 
realize and I did not tell you…there was not time, and all along, the sight has always 
been with you.” 
Rhyden blinked at him, stunned anew. “W-what…?”  

“It was not my power that opened your mind again after you destroyed the Book,” 
Trejaeran said. “It was yours, Rhyden. Your power protected you, shielded you all of 
these years, repressing itself, keeping you safe from the Shadow, and when you 
destroyed the Book…when it was safe for your mind and heart to open again, they did. 
“My deeds…my sight could never compare to the strength of your heart, Rhyden. 
All of my power, all of the things I could do with my mind, and in the end, I was nothing 
next to your measure. I have remained with you all of these years…I bound myself to 
you because I am so grateful to you. And I always will be.” 
Trejaeran held up his hand, cradling the silver hilt of a bladeless sword against 
his palm, offering it to Rhyden. “I want to give you this. I want you to have it.” 
Rhyden had seen the hilt before and recognized the narrow, elongated grip, the 
unadorned pommel, the long quillons that swept forward toward the tang. He blinked at 
Trejaeran, stricken and confused. 
“The anam’cladh?” he whispered. 
“Yes,” Trejaeran said, and he curled his fingers about the hilt. As his hand closed 
around it, a sudden, bright spear of blue light extended from the hilt, a blade of cerulean 
fire that blazed against the cold backdrop of the night. 
The anam’cladh was an ancient, magical weapon and had once been Trejaeran’s 
to wield by legacy. It had been forged by the first beings believed to have inhabited the 
Bith ages ago, an immortal, powerful race called the Na’Siogai. When the hand of a 
Na’Siogai closed about the hilt of an anam’cladh, a blade of fire would appear, a 
physical manifestation of their souls. The Elfin royal family, into which Trejaeran and his 
sister Qynh had been born, were said to be direct descendents of the Na’Siogai, and by 

this birthright, the two were the only ones yet living who could summon the 
anam’cladh’s fiery blade. Trejaeran had used this blade, the anam’cladh he held in his 
hand to take his own life fifteen years earlier.  
“The anam’cladh’s fire―the purity of my soul―was restored because of you, 
Rhyden,” Trejaeran said. “I want you to have it.” 
“No,” Rhyden said, shaking his head, backing away from Trejaeran. “No, I cannot 
take it. I cannot wield it. It is yours―yours and Qynh’s. I am not of Na’Siogai descent. It 
would be nothing in my hand but an empty hilt. I cannot call its fire and I…you used it 
to…” 
“I used it to defeat the Shadow,” Trejaeran said. “Because you gave me the 
strength to do it, Rhyden. Our history tells us that I am of Na’Siogai descent, just as it 
told us that the Shadow Stone corrupted Ciardha’s heart and infused the Book of 
Shadows with its dark magic. You know differently now―you know that we were wrong 
all along. The Stone was not evil―Ciardha and her book were dark and wicked on their 
own. We were wrong about the Stone, and we have been wrong about the anam’cladh, 
too.” 
Trejaeran pressed the hilt of the sword against Rhyden’s palm. As it left 
Trejaeran’s hand, the blue fire of its blade winked out, disappearing. “You have as much 
right by birth to bear this sword in hand as I do,” he said. “All of the mortal races―Elves, 
menfolk, Fathacan, Abhacan―we feel the same, think the same, believe in much the 
same things in much the same ways. We look different from one another, but it is not 
our size, our form, our culture that makes us all kindred. It is our hearts, and here, we 
are all born alike―all from the same.” 

He cupped his fingers against Rhyden’s, folding them gently about the hilt. As 
Rhyden closed his hand, another blade of fire appeared, a gleaming, brilliant shaft of 
golden fire. Rhyden gasped, startled and amazed as the light spilled upon his face, 
dazzling him. “Hoah…” he breathed.  
“It will protect you,” Trejaeran said. “Its fire will keep you safe, if something 
should happen…if I cannot.” 
Rhyden looked from the anam’cladh’s blade, blinking at Trejaeran. “What? 
Trejaeran, what do you―” 
A gust a wind buffeted against them, rushing from out of the forest, stirring 
through the trees. Snowflakes whirled and whipped about in the abrupt current of air. 
Trejaeran turned toward the woods, his brows narrowed, his lips drawing together in a 
thin line. The wind ruffled his hair, flapping wayward strands against his temples and 
cheeks as it waned, and he closed his hands into fists. 
“What was that?” Rhyden asked in a low voice, following Trejaeran’s gaze. He 
shifted his fingers lightly against the hilt of the anam’cladh, clasping it comfortably, in a 
ready grip without even realizing it. 
“I do not know,” Trejaeran replied grimly. 
A bird burst out from the pine trees, an enormous hawk, flapping its broad wings 
and screeching shrilly as it swooped toward them. Rhyden backpedaled in alarm, 
remembering his dreams of ravens, visions shared by Yeb and Temu that had 
symbolized the approach of the Khahl. He leveled the sword, his feet settling reflexively 
into a fighting stance. 

“No, Rhyden,” Trejaeran said, holding out his arm. He followed the hawk with his 
eyes as it circled above them and out over the water, crying out repeatedly in an urgent, 
nearly frantic tone.  
“Is it a vision?” Rhyden asked. “Something the sight is showing me? Is it the 
Khahl, Trejaeran?” 
“Your sight is showing it to you, but it is no vision―and it is not the Khahl,” 
Trejaeran said quietly as the hawk hooked its wings and soared toward the forest again. 
It circled them again and again, calling to them, flying into the trees and then out once 
more, as though trying to beckon them. “It is Ogotai.” 
“Ogotai?” Rhyden asked. “Yeb’s utha, his spirit guide? What is it doing here? 
What does it want?” 
“To warn us, I think.” Trejaeran walked away from the water’s edge, approaching 
the forest, letting the hawk lead him toward the trees. “Something is out there. I have 
had a sense of it since before the sun went down tonight, and Ogotai has, too.” 
“The shaman spirits have returned?” Rhyden asked, hurrying after Trejaeran. 
Trejaeran shook his head, meeting Rhyden’s gaze. “I do not think so. It is strong, 
whatever it is…and it is very close now.” 
Run away, Temu! Yeb’s voice suddenly screamed within Rhyden’s mind. Rhyden 
staggered, his breath tangling in his throat. His hand darted for his brow, and he 
grimaced as he pressed his palm against his forehead, Yeb’s shriek resounding in his 
skull. 
“Yeb!” he gasped, hooking his fingers in his hair. “Trejaeran, that was Yeb―!” 

She is a gazriin ezen, and I cannot keep her from you! Yeb cried out. Run into 
the forest…I beg of you―run away and find Ogotai― 
Yeb’s voice cut off abruptly inside of Rhyden’s mind, and the sudden silence 
terrified him more than the shaman’s frantic shrieks. It was as though Yeb was gone; he 
had not simply been muffled, or knocked unconscious. His presence―for that fleeting 
moment, bright and apparent within Rhyden’s mind―was completely gone, as though 
he had been obliterated from the face of the Bith itself. 
“Mathair Maith…Yeb…!” Rhyden breathed. He turned to Trejaeran, his eyes 
flown wide. “He was screaming to Temu! I have to go to him!” 
“Go,” Trejaeran told him, nodding sharply toward the woods. “I will follow you 
when I can. I am going to find Yeb first―something has happened to his spirit, and I 
must hurry.” 
Rhyden was already sprinting across the beach, even as Trejaeran spoke. He 
was seized with bright panic and overwhelming terror. 
Rhyden! he heard Temu cry out within his mind. Rhyden, help me! 
“Temu!” Rhyden screamed, crashing through the trees, ducking his head as low-
hanging boughs slapped him across the face and tugged against his hair. 
Please, Rhyden―please, you have hiimori! Please hear me! Help me! 
“I hear you!” Rhyden cried, bolting for the campsite, clutching the anam’cladh in 
his fist, letting its bright fire guide him through the woods. “Temu, I am coming!” 
Please wake up! Please…I…I am frightened! Help me! 
“Temu!” Rhyden called out, anguished. He reached the clearing where the Oirat 
had camped for the night, and saw Temuchin cowering beyond the lean-tos, his hands 

drawn toward his face, his eyes enormous and stricken with terror. A woman stood 
before him, her hand outstretched, her fingers hooked into claws as she reached for his 
head. For some reason, she was nude, her body ghastly pale, like a corpse’s, and her 
hair looked wet, hanging down the length of her back in sopping tangles. 
“Temu!” Rhyden cried, racing to the boy. He did not understand―none of the 
Oirat had awoken. He could see them beneath the canopies, curled together and 
asleep, as though nothing were amiss, a stranger was not among them, threatening 
Temu. 
“Rhyden!” Temu wailed, and Rhyden could see that he was weeping, his little 
chest hitching with uncontrollable sobs. Why he did not simply turn around and scamper 
into the trees, Rhyden did not know. Temu trembled in place as though he stood before 
a wall only he could see, as though he could not go any further. “Rhyden, help me!” 
The woman whipped her face to Rhyden, her brows furrowed, her mouth opened 
in a gruesome, vicious sneer. Rhyden leaped, diving headlong against her, tackling her. 
The two of them slammed hard against the ground; the force of their impact was 
enough to jar the anam’cladh from Rhyden’s fingers. 
Whoever she was, the woman was as strong as a bear. She struggled beneath 
Rhyden, grappling with him, her voice flying from her lips with a spray of spittle in a 
garble of fierce, angry Ulusian words. Her strength―her ferocity―caught him off guard. 
She managed to wrestle him off of her, knocking him sideways and then pounced on 
top of him, landing hard against his stomach and groin, whoofing the breath from him. 
She clamped her hands around his throat, her nails digging into his flesh, her palms 
mashed against his vulnerable windpipe.  

“Who are you?” she hissed. “Are you the pretty little falcon Ag’iamon promised 
would come? You do not look like a bird to me.” It was not spittle raining from her lips, 
but water. She spewed it with every word; it gurgled in her throat and spattered from her 
mouth, trailing down her chin. Her eyes were solid black, with no discernable corneas or 
irises, and Rhyden tried to scream around the unyielding, crushing pressure of her 
hands. 
She is not human! his mind shrieked. She is dead―she is a dead woman! 
He bucked his hips violently beneath her as felt her weight shift as she moved 
her leg, meaning to ram her knee into his crotch. Rhyden gagged for air, pivoting, trying 
to block her blow with his thigh. He reached up, closed his fist in her hair and yanked 
with all of his might. The woman shrieked as he wrenched her head back, and she 
struggled against him. He managed to force his left leg up, folding his knee and planting 
the sole of his gutal firmly against her belly. He punted hard, kicking her off of him. He 
felt her hands slip away from his throat, and he gasped for air. 
“Rhyden!” Temu cried, frightened. 
“Temu―keep away―!” Rhyden wheezed. He leaped to his feet, landing on his 
toes and heard Temu scream. 
“Rhyden, behind you!” 
Rhyden whirled just as the woman lunged at him. She had her hands 
outstretched as if she had meant to leap astride his shoulders and hook her arms about 
his neck, throttling him again. He jerked sideways, out of her path and caught her hand 
as she rushed past. He heard her sharp, startled cry as he craned her wrist between his 
palms, hyperextending her arm, straining her shoulder in its socket. He released her 

hand and she staggered away from him. As she stumbled about, turning to face him, 
Rhyden pivoted and kicked, snapping his leg out and delivering his heel against the side 
of her head, catching her beneath the angle of her jaw. She uttered another cry and 
crumpled to the ground, face-first in the snow. 
“Rhyden!” Temu cried, bursting into new tears. Rhyden turned, rushing to the boy 
just as Temu darted for him, his hands outstretched. Rhyden caught him in his arms, 
holding him fiercely, drawing him against his chest. 
“Temu,” Rhyden said, cupping his hand against the back of Temu’s head. Temu 
shuddered against him, his fingers clutching desperately at Rhyden’s del. “It is alright. I 
am here. Hush now, it is alright.” 
“She…she hurt Yeb!” Temu wailed, his voice muffled as he pressed his face 
against Rhyden’s chest. “Rhyden, please―she sent him into the qarang’qui, 
she…she…!” 
“Who is she?” Rhyden asked. “Temu, what does that woman want?” 
Something plowed into him with the force of an enraged, charging bull. It struck 
his side, throwing him off of his feet, tearing him away from Temu. Rhyden flew through 
the air, and then slammed against the ground, bearing the brunt of the fall with his hip, 
smacking the side of his head hard enough to see stars. 
“Rhyden!” Temu cried out. 
Rhyden groaned, shoving his hand beneath him and raising his head from the 
ground. He tasted blood in his mouth, could feel it dribbling down his upper lip in a thin 
trail from his nose and he winced, spitting. He had landed near enough to the campfire 
to see Aigiarn laying beside of the blaze. She was curled on her side, her eyes closed, 

her expression peaceful, completely oblivious to the fact that her son was being 
attacked only feet away from her. Rhyden blinked in start to see himself, his own form 
asleep by the fire as well, exactly where he remembered lying down. Aigiarn slept near 
to him, her head nearly touching his, and Trejaeran had been right; Aigiarn’s hand 
rested atop Rhyden’s, her fingers twined loosely through his own. 
He blinked again in even more bewilderment to realize Temu sat by the fire, 
staring into the flames, his face soft, his eyes distant and sleepily lidded. Yeb lay on the 
ground beside him in a lifeless huddle, with his knees and hands drawn toward his 
chest. The two Kelet Toghrul had assigned to the watch sat nearby, their heads tucked 
together in quiet conversation. 
“What?” Rhyden whispered. “What in the duchan…?” It was just like the dream of 
Qynh and the royal palace, when he had watched her brush her hair, when he had 
helplessly listened to Kierken make love to her. It was as though he was a ghost, a dim 
shade trapped and wavering between twilight and nightfall. He was the dream, while 
everything around him was reality. Only this time, it seemed he had brought Temu along 
with him, and the woman.  
He heard footsteps crunching softly in the snow, and looked over his shoulder to 
see her walking slowly toward him, her hand outstretched, her face twisted with 
murderous fury. 
“No! Do not hurt him!” Temu wailed, lunging at the woman. She swung her arm 
toward the boy, and Temu’s feet left the ground. He snapped backward in the air like a 
naughty puppet yanked upon its strings. He seemed to strike something solid, though 
there was nothing but empty air that Rhyden could see. Whatever Temu hit, the woman 

held him pinned there, his gutal suspended at least three feet above the ground, his feet 
pedaling frantically, kicking at the open space beneath him. The woman moved his 
hand, reaching out for Temu’s body, his form seated by the fire. She curled her fingers 
together, folding them in to her palm, and all at once, the Temu that floated in the air 
behind her flapped his hands at his throat, his breath and voice whooping from him as 
though he was strangling. 
“Temu!” Rhyden scrambled to his feet. He stared at the woman, stricken and 
bewildered. Trejaeran had been the only person Rhyden had ever known who could 
move things with his mind, but this woman apparently shared the ability.  
She is a gazriin ezen, Yeb had screamed. I cannot keep her from you! 
He recognized that word, gazriin ezen. It was a sort of spirit. Yeb had told him of 
them once, and Temu had made mention, as well. They considered Trejaeran to be an 
endur, a powerful soul that dwelled within the sky; a gazriin ezen was a spirit of equal 
strength and power, one that was found on the ground, in nature. 
Trejaeran, where are you? Rhyden thought. I need you―this is beyond me. I 
cannot stop this thing. Help me. 
There was no reply. Trejaeran had said something about going after Yeb, that 
something had happened to his spirit 
She hurt Yeb! Temu had cried. She sent him into the qarang’qui! 
Rhyden did not know what the qarang’qui was―but he was willing to wager it 
was nothing pleasant. 
“Let him go,” he said to the woman, walking toward her. He held out his hands to 
her in implore. “Let the boy go. I am right here.” 

The woman looked at him for a long moment. “You are bleeding.” 
Rhyden brushed his fingertips against his nose; his glove came away spotted 
with scarlet, and he met the woman’s gaze. “Let him go,” he said again. “Whatever you 
want―I am here.” 
“You can feel pain here,” the woman said, and she giggled softly, her voice moist 
and bubbling.  
Temu blinked at Rhyden, hiccupping for breath, his frightened eyes suddenly 
growing all the more alarmed. “No…!” he whimpered, pawing at the empty air before his 
throat, as though trying to loosen choking hands. “No…no…Rhyden…!” 
“You can feel pain here,” the woman said again, laughing more loudly now, her 
breasts shivering against her pale torso. This seemed to astound and amaze her―and 
to dismay Temu―for reasons Rhyden did not understand. 
Rhyden caught sight of a glimmer of firelight upon silver out of the corner of his 
eye, and he glanced to his left without turning his head, alerting the woman. He could 
see the anam’cladh hilt lying in the snow and pine needles. It had been thrown near the 
campfire during the scuffle, and winked with soft, reflected glow. He stepped slowly 
toward it, fixing his gaze on the woman, keeping his hands raised. 
“Yes,” he told her. “I can feel pain here.” 
“Good,” the woman said, and she thrust her hand at Rhyden. The effect was 
instantaneous; again, something that felt like a catapulted mule slammed against 
Rhyden’s chest. It stunned the wind from his lungs, snapped his head back on the axis 
of his neck and sent him careening backwards, his feet flying from the ground. He 

struck the broad trunk of a pine, his shoulders and spine smashing painfully against the 
tree and he collapsed, crumpling into the snow. 
“No!” Temu cried. “No, no―do not hurt him!” 
The woman hooked her fingers in the air like talons and dragged them down 
through the air. Rhyden heard an ominous groan from above him as he lifted his head 
dazedly, a grinding snap and then a loud, fervent rustle. He tucked his chin and rolled, 
kicking with his legs. He flipped onto his side and then onto his back, just as a long, fat 
length of pine bough crashed against the ground, falling from the tree and landing 
where he had only just been lying. 
“Mathair Maith―!” he gasped, trying to rise, getting his knees beneath him. The 
branch snapped up from the ground and swung in a broad, sharp arc, slamming into the 
side of his head, sending him sprawling into the snow again. The blow knocked the wits 
from him and he lay against the ground, gasping for breath, his senses reeling. 
“Rhyden!” Temu wailed, and then his voice dissolved into garbled, gagging 
sounds as he choked.  
“No…” Rhyden whispered, his brows furrowed, his teeth gritted. He shoved his 
palms against the ground and forced himself up. The heavy tree limb lay across his 
hips; he shifted his weight and hooked his heel against the bough, kicking it away from 
him. He rose to his feet, stumbling dizzily and limping. He could taste more blood in his 
mouth, could feel it sliding down his face from a deep gash along his hairline. He turned 
to the woman, his vision side-slipping, canting blearily. “Leave him alone.” 
The woman threw back her head and laughed at him. “No.” 

Temu’s struggles in midair had waned into feeble, weak effort. His form by the 
fire twitched slightly, his face infused with deep, strained color. Rhyden could hear him, 
his frantic gulping pants for breath, his heart fluttering in terror beneath his chest. 
“Let him go,” he told the woman again, closing his hands into fists. 
“No,” she said, and again, the invisible force slammed into him. It struck from 
behind this time, sending him flying forward. His knees struck the ground first as he 
landed and the rest of him crashed in turn, with his chin smacking against the snow last.  
Rhyden moaned, his fingers scrabbling against the snow as he spit out a 
mouthful of snow and loose grit. He could see the anam’cladh; being thrown forward 
toward the fire had actually knocked him closer to the blade. It was lying just beyond the 
perimeter of the stones outlining the bed of coals and firewood, just beyond the full 
reach of Rhyden’s outstretched arm. He scooted toward it, gasping softly as pain 
speared through his chest with the movement. He had likely cracked some ribs from the 
feel of things, and he winced. 
Who are you? the woman hissed within his mind. It felt like a hand suddenly 
closed in his hair, and Rhyden gasped again as his head jerked back, his chin forced 
skyward. He could feel the woman’s presence, her mind whispering within him. 
You bear the mark of a slave, she said, and he felt invisible, icy fingertips slide 
against his cheek, tracing the curved lines of his catasta tattoo. The fingertips followed 
the contour of his cheek, brushing lightly against the tapered point of his ear. But not the 
form of any slave or free man I have ever seen. Who are you? What are you? 

He could feel her probing within his mind, trying to learn his secrets, his thoughts. 
His brows furrowed defiantly, and he shook his head against the force that had seized 
his hair. 
Get out of my head, you bitch, he thought. Let the boy go and I will tell you. 
I cannot read your mind, she said, sounding surprised and aggravated. The 
pressure against his hair tightened, wrenching his head back all the more, and he 
gasped again. Why is your mind closed to me? No mind is closed to me! Why do you 
feel pain―how can you bleed―in the jabsar? Your gerel is bright and strong―you 
cross the jaqa like a yeke shaman, yet you use no powers to defend yourself, or the 
whelp. You stand against me in the jabsar, but you fight as though we are in the mortal 
plane―with your body, your fists and feet―not hiimori or buyu. Who are you? What are 
you? 
Let the boy go and I will tell you, he said again, and he moved his right hand 
now, reaching slowly, blindly for the anam’cladh. His fingertips fumbled against the 
ground, brushing against the snow, groping for the silver hilt. 
I do not need you to tell me, man-falcon, she said. Whatever you are―whoever 
you may be―it will not matter when you are dead. 
She moved her hand, splaying her fingers toward Rhyden’s sleeping form beside 
the fire. Again, as she had with Temu, the woman closed her fingers together, curling 
them into a fist, and as she did, Rhyden felt an icy, crushing pain seize his chest. He 
gasped, twisting sharply, arching his back as agony lanced through him. It felt like her 
hand had reached into his breast and closed against his heart, crushing the rhythm and 
life from it. 

He tried to cry out. He tried to scream for Trejaeran, but the pain was too great. 
He could not breathe, as though her fingers squeezed his lungs, collapsing them in 
upon themselves, smothering him. He gasped helplessly, his hand abandoning its 
desperate search for the anam’cladh as he pawed at his chest. He hooked his fingertips 
against the front of his del, wheezing for breath as he fought to jerk the overcoat open. 
As the pressure within his chest tightened, Rhyden heard a loud thud. At the 
sound, the icy grip upon his heart, his lungs released, the grasp on his hair loosened 
and he collapsed forward, hanging his head. He shoved his palm against his aching 
chest, panting for breath. 
He lifted his head and realized Temu had dropped to the ground. The boy lay in a 
motionless heap against the snow, and Rhyden moaned softly, stricken. “No…” he 
whispered, anguished. “No…no, please…” 
The woman frowned, her expression puzzled as she looked between Temu and 
Rhyden. She reached out toward the boy, and Temu raised in the air again. As he 
moved, he groaned softly, stirring, wiggling his arms and legs. 
“Temu!” Rhyden cried, his voice damaged and hoarse. He tried to rise to his feet, 
but the woman whirled to him, her black eyes flashing in the firelight, her brows drawn. 
Her other hand shot in his direction, and again, pain stabbed through his heart. Rhyden 
cried out, collapsing forward, clutching at his chest. 
The moment her attention turned from Temu to Rhyden, however, the boy fell 
again, grunting as he toppled to the ground. The woman blinked at him, and then at 
Rhyden, the cleft between her brows deepening. She was apparently not doing this on 
purpose, and had no idea why it was happening. 

All at once, Rhyden realized. 
I…hoah, I am just tired, Rhyden, Trejaeran had told him. I am sorry I have kept 
away. I had to…to do something and it…I am still weakened for it. 
The woman was a gazriin ezen, a nature spirit likely equal to Trejaeran in 
capability and strength. Rhyden did not doubt that the Khahl shamans had found a way 
to conjure this spirit, to solicit its aid in their efforts against the Oirat as a means of 
countering Trejaeran’s formidable abilities and powers.  
I am sorry, Rhyden, Trejaeran had said. I will be alright…another day or two, and 
my strength will have restored in full. I used too much of my energy against the 
shamans. 
Rhyden snickered, despite the pain in his chest, and the woman turned to him. 
What is so funny, man-falcon? she snapped inside of his mind. She closed her 
fingers more tightly, and Rhyden groaned, falling forward, pressing his forehead against 
the ground in agony. 
“It…it is nothing…” he gasped, and made himself laugh again, more loudly. “The 
Oirat are right, that is…that is all.” 
“What are you talking about?” she said. 
Rhyden moved his hand slowly, forcing his fingers to creep again across the 
ground toward the anam’cladh hilt. “We must have separate souls for your mind and 
body―and the body spirit holds all of our vigor. You must miss it sometimes.” 
His fingertips brushed lightly against the pommel of the sword, and he nearly 
burst into tears of desperate relief. It took every measure of restraint he possessed not 
to pounce on the anam’cladh, to snatch it in hand, because he knew if he did, she would 

take it from him. If Trejaeran was right, and any soul in the Bith could wield the flaming 
sword, he did not care to imagine what might happen if it came into the hands of this 
deranged woman-spirit. 
I do not understand your meaning, she said. 
Rhyden looked up at her, meeting her gaze. “I mean you have overextended 
yourself, you stupid bitch,” he hissed between clenched teeth. “Your spirit is not strong 
enough to sustain itself for long on its own. You did too much and you are weak for it 
now. It will take you days to recover―and by then, we will be through the mountains 
and to the dragons’ lair.” 
You will rot first and serve as worm fodder when I am finished with your form! she 
screeched within his head. As she thrust both of her hands toward him, Rhyden sat up, 
jerking the anam’cladh against his palm. The moment his fingers settled about the hilt, 
the blazing shaft of golden fire blazed above the tang, dazzling him, nearly blinding him. 
He drew the sword before him and felt something heavy and strong slam against 
the blade. It struck with enough force to send Rhyden sprawling backwards onto his 
rump. Whatever she had hurtled at him, whatever power the woman-spirit commanded 
against him, it deflected off of the anam’cladh’s blade and back at her. She screamed 
loudly, her voice ending abruptly as she was struck, knocked off of her feet and sent 
crashing into the forests, sailing beyond the nearest perimeter of trees. 
Rhyden blinked, trembling and stunned. He could breathe again, though the 
effort ached him, and he winced, stumbling to his feet. He kept the anam’cladh between 
his fists; a quick glance at the blade revealed no signs of damage or weakening at all. It 
remained as bright and ablaze as the first moment he had touched it. He scanned the 

tree line warily for any signs of movement, of the woman returning as he limped across 
the campsite to Temu’s side. 
He knelt next to the boy. “Temu?” he whispered, reaching down and pressing his 
hand against the boy’s shoulder. Temu moaned softly and stirred, moving his hands. 
“Hoah…” Rhyden gasped in relief. He released the anam’cladh, setting the hilt on 
the ground beside him. He put his arms around Temu, helping the dazed and frightened 
boy sit up. 
“Rhyden?” Temu blinked at him.  
“It is alright,” Rhyden said softly, pressing his lips against Temu’s brow. He drew 
Temu against his shoulder, holding him fiercely. “Hoah, thank the Good Mother you are 
alive. You are alright.” He sat back, cradling Temu’s face between his palms. “You are 
alright, are you not?” he asked, his eyes bright with worry. “Are you hurt?” 
Temu shook his head, tears trailing down his cheeks. “I…I am alright…” he 
gasped, brushing his fingertips gently against Rhyden’s face. “Oh, but…but 
Rhyden…you are hurt…!” 
“It is nothing,” Rhyden said, letting Temu fall against him, trembling. “Hush now. I 
am alright. Do not fret for it.” 
“You…you came for me…”  
“I will always come for you,” Rhyden said. “Always, Temu, by my breath, I swear 
it.” 
Temu looked up at him. “Rhyden, I…” he began, and then his eyes flew wide in 
bright, new terror. “Behind you―!” he cried out shrilly, jerking in panic. 

Rhyden whirled, snatching the anam’cladh in hand. As Temu backpedaled from 
him, and he struggled to get his feet beneath him, he swung the searing blade before 
him, just in time for the woman to impale herself against the shaft of fire. She had come 
flying out of the woods, hurtling through the air like an eagle poised and swooping on an 
unsuspecting rabbit, her hands outstretched, her fingers hooked for Rhyden’s throat.  
The anam’cladh punched through her breast, skewering through her spine and 
out between her shoulder blades. She fell against Rhyden, knocking him clumsily, 
sending him sprawling onto his back. She landed atop him, sinking the blade all of the 
way to the tang in her chest.  
She stared down at him, her black eyes wide with shock, her mouth agape, water 
dribbling in a thin rivulet from her lips and spattering against his face. She was close 
enough that he might have felt her breath against him, had she any to offer. She uttered 
a hoarse, gargled cry, her hands pawing, slapping lightly, feebly against his shoulders 
and then she dissolved into the air, her form fading into a pale, iridescent mist that 
waned and disappeared before his very eyes. 
Rhyden lay against the ground, the sword still clutched in his hands. He 
shuddered uncontrollably, his breath hitching in his throat. “Mathair…Mathair Maith…!” 
“Rhyden!” Temu cried out, scrambling toward him. He fell against Rhyden, 
throwing his arms around his neck and burrowing his forehead against Rhyden’s throat 
as Rhyden let the anam’cladh drop from his trembling fingers.  
“Mathair Maith,” Rhyden whispered, wrapping his arms around Temu. The boy 
was sobbing, his tears punctuated by fervent, breathless mewls, and Rhyden sat up, 
holding him closely.  

“She…she is gone,” he breathed. Temu’s hat had fallen off, and Rhyden stroked 
his hand against his hair. “It is alright, Temu. She is gone now. It…please…please do 
not cry. It is alright.” 
The two of them sat there for a long time, clutching at one another, shivering 
together. At last, Rhyden stood, taking the anam’cladh hilt and tucking it into the bogcu 
pouch on his sash. Temu stood beside him, trembling like a lost, despondent lamb, and 
Rhyden reached for him, brushing his fingertips against Temu’s face. “Come here,” he 
whispered, and he let Temu wrap his arms around his neck. He stooped slightly, and 
lifted the boy in his arms. Temu was probably too old and too heavy to be carried in 
such fashion, but Rhyden did not care. Any maturity had been shocked and stricken 
from the boy; Temu huddled against him like a distraught youngster, and Rhyden 
wrapped his arms around him, balancing him against his hip and ignoring the pain 
Temu’s weight stoked in his injured ribs as the boy hooked his legs about Rhyden’s 
waist. 
When Rhyden had been hurt in the tunnels during the Second War, when 
Trejaeran had died, and he had been left alone in the caves, his father had found him, 
carried him out from beneath the mountains. He and Eisos had not been close over the 
last five years; until this last trip to Belgaeran, in fact, Rhyden had fairly well despised 
his father since learning of Eisos’ part in the hiding of the Book of Shadows from him. 
Even still, Rhyden remembered the sensation of fading in and out of consciousness as 
Eisos carried him from the caves, the comfort he had found from his pain and terror that 
came with realizing he was with his father, that Eisos cradled him in his arms and 
whispered softly, kindly to him. 

“It is alright,” he whispered, pressing his cheek against Temu’s temple just as 
Eisos had done for him. “Ta me libh, Temu. Ni eagleann tu. Ta me anseo.” I am with 
you. Do not be frightened. I am here. 
 

Chapter Three 
 
In the mortal plane, the events within the jabsar occurred in less time than it took 
to draw in a full breath and release it. As Mongoljin attacked Yeb and Temu’s amis and 
Rhyden hurried to their aid, Jelmei and Nakhu, the two Oirat sentries turned to one 
another. Jelmei lifted his chin to speak quietly against Nakhu’s ear as they watched Yeb 
and Temu gaze at the fire. Jelmei’s father was a shaman under Yeb, and he meant to 
tell Nakhu that the two were embarking on a qaraqu journey, a spiritual visit to the 
jabsar.  
As Rhyden fought Mongoljin, as he crumpled onto the ground and clutched at his 
heart, his breath strangled beneath his chest, Aigiarn shifted slightly, sighing in her 
sleep, her fingers tightening unconsciously against Rhyden’s. Nearby, Toghrul stirred, 
his hand moving slowly, feeling the empty space beneath the canopy before him where 
Temu had been sleeping. He groaned softly, rousing, curious about Temu’s absence. 
All at once, Rhyden sat up from beside the fire, jerking his hand away from 
Aigiarn’s, his eyes flown wide. “Temu!” 
At that precise moment, Yeb’s body convulsed, his arms and legs folding 
abruptly toward his chest. He pitched sideways, falling over, and lay against the ground, 
twitching spasmodically, a low, gurgling sound uttering from his throat. 
Temu thrashed, his head jerking toward the sky, his hands darting for his throat. 
His face infused with sudden, bright color as he whooped in a loud, desperate mouthful 
of air, choking. 

The pine bough that Mongoljin had sent crashing down on Rhyden in the jabsar 
toppled in the mortal plane, rushing down from the tree top with a sudden, terrific 
clamor. It slammed against the ground, startling the Oirat awake beneath the lean-tos. 
Aigiarn sat up, frightened and bewildered. When the tree limb hit the ground, she 
jumped, crying out softly, sharply, whipping her head toward the sound. Toghrul awoke 
in full, as well, and was immediately on his feet, his hand darting for his scimitar. He 
stumbled, nearly falling over the other Kelet around him as he rushed from beneath the 
canopy, his eyes wide with alarm, his blade hissing against his scabbard as he drew it 
out. 
“Temu!” Rhyden exclaimed again, drawing himself onto his knees and 
scrambling for the boy.  
“What is it?” Aigiarn cried, frightened. She saw her son, watched him hook his 
fingers against his throat and pant for breath. She panicked, scuttling toward him on her 
knees, her hands outstretched. “What is wrong? Temu―what is wrong?” 
Rhyden lay his hands against Temu’s shoulders, and the boy opened his eyes. 
He blinked at Rhyden, and then at Aigiarn as she snatched hold of his sleeve, drawing 
him against her in a frantic embrace. “Rhyden?” he whispered, his eyes flooding with 
sudden tears. “Mamma…?” 
He pulled away from Aigiarn and fell against Rhyden, throwing his arms around 
the Elf’s neck. He shuddered against Rhyden and began to sob.  
“Hoah, Temu…” Rhyden whispered, enfolding him in his arms, holding him 
tightly. He cupped his hand against the back of Temu’s head and rocked him in his 
arms. “It is alright. It is alright now.” 

“What has happened?” Aigiarn cried, reaching for her son again. She stared at 
Rhyden, wide-eyed and alarmed. “What is it? Is he hurt?” 
“What is going on?” Toghrul demanded, stomping toward the fire, his scimitar still 
poised between his fists. He heard Temu’s weeping and his footsteps faltered, his 
expression growing bewildered and worried. “Temu―ko’un, what is it? What is wrong?” 
He fell onto his knees beside Rhyden, and threw his sword aside, reaching for 
the boy. “Get your hands off of him,” he snapped at Rhyden, drawing Temu away. Temu 
was inconsolable, and crumpled against Toghrul’s chest, his breath hiccupping from his 
tears. Aigiarn folded herself over him, drawing her arms about her son and Toghrul, and 
Toghrul glared at Rhyden, confused and enraged as he wrapped his arms around 
Aigiarn. 
“What have you done?” he said, and Rhyden blinked at him, startled. “What did 
you do to him, Elf?” 
“He did not do anything to him, Toghrul,” Aigiarn said, her brows drawing as she 
looked up at him. “What is the matter with you? Rhyden was sleeping by the fire. He did 
nothing.” 
“Bugu Yub!” Jelmei cried, kneeling beside the fallen shaman. He rolled Yeb onto 
his back and turned to Aigiarn and Toghrul, his eyes wide and frightened. “Something 
has happened to him!” 
“Yeb!” Rhyden gasped, standing, rushing around the edge of the fire.  
“Do not touch him!” Toghrul shouted, angrily at Rhyden, but Rhyden paid him no 
mind. There was no time for Toghrul’s petulance; something had indeed happened to 
Yeb 

She hurt Yeb! She sent him into the qarang’qui! 
and Rhyden did not know if Trejaeran had been able to help him or not. He knelt 
beside Yeb and leaned down, cradling the shaman’s face between his palms. Yeb’s 
eyes were closed and he did not stir at Rhyden’s touch. A thin line of saliva trailed from 
the corner of his mouth, following the contour of his cheek.  
“Yeb,” Rhyden whispered, stroking his hand against Yeb’s face. “Yeb, are you 
alright?” 
Can you hear me, Yeb? he thought. Please, Yeb, please. Can you hear me? I 
am here―I am with you. Come back to me. Come back to Temu. 
“She…she hurt him…” he heard Temu say from behind him. The boy grunted 
softly as he struggled to free himself from his mother’s and Toghrul’s embraces. “Let go 
of me―let me go to Yeb! She hurt him! She sent him into the qarang’qui!” 
“Who?” Aigiarn asked, as Temu shrugged himself away from her. He scrambled 
to his feet, and broke away as Toghrul reached for him, grabbing for the hem of his del. 
He scampered over to Rhyden and Yeb, kneeling beside Rhyden. 
“Is he alright?” Temu looked at Rhyden. 
“I do not know, Temu,” Rhyden said softly. He opened his mind to Yeb, straining 
his sight to sense any semblance of Yeb’s presence, his cognizance within him.  
“Temu, who hurt bugu Yeb?” Aigiarn cried, completely baffled and more than a 
little frightened. She rose to her feet, marching after her son. “Answer me. Who hurt 
bugu Yeb?” 
“What happened here?” Toghrul demanded of Nakhu and Jelmei, both of whom 
blinked at him in stricken confusion. 

“I…I do not know, bahadur,” Jelmei stammered. “They…bugu Yeb and Temu 
knelt by the fire. Bugu Yeb was going to perform qaraqu…they had only begun when 
the…the Elf sat up, crying out just now. Bugu Yeb fell over, and Temu choked. I…I do 
not know what happened.” 
“What?” Rhyden looked at Jelmei, his eyes wide with shock. “What are you 
talking about? There was a woman here―a bloody damn spirit the Khahl sent! She 
attacked Yeb and Temu! She attacked me! We fought her for at least twenty minutes! 
You were sitting right there―the both of you! How could you not have seen us?” 
“It was in the jabsar, Rhyden,” Temu said quietly, draping his hand against 
Rhyden’s wrist. “They could not see it. They did not even know we were gone.” 
“What―?” Aigiarn gasped, staggering. “A spirit attacked you?” 
“What were you doing in the jabsar, ko’un?” Toghrul asked, his brows furrowed. 
“That is a place for shamans―not for little boys.” 
“I have hiimori, too, Toghrul,” Temu said, turning to look over his shoulder. “Yeb 
said I could go. He drew a jaqa line around the camp and gave me my own toli to 
protect me. He did not know the Khahl had summoned a gazriin ezen. He said Ogotai 
asked to meet him there.” 
“A…a gazriin ezen?” Aigiarn said, horrified. She knelt beside her son, trying to 
draw him against her, but he wriggled, shrugging his shoulders against her grasp.  
“I am fine, Mamma―stop it,” he said. “Rhyden and Yeb are hurt, not me. 
They…they saved me. They both saved me.” 
Aigiarn looked at Rhyden, and gasped again, reaching for him. “Rhyden, your 
head…! You are bleeding…!” 

“I am alright,” he told her. Her eyes were wide and filled with anxious worry. It 
had been a long time since a woman had looked at him with such tender emotion 
apparent in her regard, and he remembered what Trejaeran had told him: 
She might hold your heart, if you would let her.  
“I am alright, Aigiarn,” he said again, catching her hand against his face, holding 
it gently, briefly. “Do not fret for it. Yeb is hurt, though. It…the spirit did something to 
him. Let me try to reach him.”  
She nodded, drawing her hand away from his as he turned his attention back to 
the shaman. Yeb, please, he thought. Please, if you can hear me, give answer. Come 
back to us. 
I…I can hear you, Rhyden, Yeb said softly, weakly. Rhyden felt his presence, like 
the hint of dim lamplight against the shadows of nightfall seeping from a distant window. 
Yeb moved, turning his face. His brows lifted, and he groaned. 
“Yeb!” Temu cried. 
Yeb’s eyelids fluttered open and he blinked dazedly at Rhyden. His breath 
escaped him in a feeble sigh, and Rhyden smiled. “Hoah, Yeb, you gave me a fright,” 
he said. “Welcome back.” 
“I…I gave myself a fright,” Yeb whispered. He looked at Rhyden for a long 
moment. “You are bleeding.” 
“It is nothing.” 
“Not…not supposed to bleed…” Yeb said, his brows furrowing slightly as though 
this troubled him. “Not in the jabsar.” 

“Can you sit up?” Rhyden asked. Yeb clasped Rhyden’s hand, curling his fingers 
against his palm. 
“Yes,” he said, nodding. “I…I think so…” 
Rhyden leaned back, settling his other hand against Yeb’s shoulder. Temu 
helped by wrapping his arm around Yeb’s shoulders as he started to move, and 
together, they were able to ease Yeb into a seated posture. 
“Yeb, are you alright?” Aigiarn asked, worried. 
He smiled at her. “Yes. I…I am a little dazed yet, and weak, but I shall survive.” 
He turned to Temu, and his smile broadened as the boy hugged him fiercely, wrapping 
his arms around the shaman’s neck.  
“I…I thought you were gone…!” Temu said, trembling against Yeb as he 
struggled not to cry again. “I thought you were lost in the qarang’qui.” 
“And I might have been,” Yeb said, turning his cheek and kissing Temu’s ear. 
“Had it not been for Rhyden’s endur, Trejaeran Muirel.” Temu blinked at him in wonder, 
and Yeb smiled, turning to Rhyden. “At last, I have had opportunity for proper 
introduction to your friend.” 
“He found you,” Rhyden said. 
Yeb nodded. “And he brought me back from the qarang’qui―the place of eternal 
darkness Mongoljin sent me.” 
“Mongoljin?” Aigiarn flinched as though she had been slapped. 
Yeb looked at her and nodded grimly. “The Khahl have summoned a very 
powerful spirit to use against us―one who can match the strength of Rhyden’s endur; 
one who has a great interest in seeing Temu fail in his quest. Mongoljin Burilgitu, 

Borjigidal’s qatun and Duua’s mother. The mother of the Khahl―the one who murdered 
Ag’iamon.” 
“Tengri have mercy,” Aigiarn whispered, stricken. 
“She has long been said to dwell in Tengriss Lake,” Yeb said. “She has slept 
there for millennia―imprisoned within the waters for Ag’iamon’s death. The Khahl must 
have recited powerful rituals to wake her. They must have channeled her into one of 
their forms to free her.” 
“And you fought her,” Aigiarn said. She stared between Yeb and Rhyden, 
incredulous. “Both of you…you saved Temu from her…you fought a gazriin ezen.” 
“Rhyden defeated it, Mamma!” Temu said, and Aigiarn blinked at Rhyden, her 
eyes widening anew. Toghrul jerked, his mouth falling agape as he stared at Rhyden, 
stunned, and all of the Oirat turned at Temu’s voice, their anxious voices falling silent. 
Temu beamed at Yeb, oblivious to everyone’s startlement. “You should have 
seen it, Yeb!” he said, grinning, his tears forgotten. “Rhyden fought her―he fought her 
with his hands, his feet. He did not even use hiimori or buyu against her!” 
“Temu, do not…” Rhyden began, somewhat abashed, wanting to explain to Yeb 
and Aigiarn that he did not know how to use hiimori or buyu in fighting on any plane of 
existence, mortal or otherwise. 
“She tried to knock a tree down on him,” Temu continued, his words rolling out of 
his mouth in an eager, excited rush. “And he kicked her in the head, and then he called 
her a bitch and drew a flaming sword from the ground. He stabbed her with it and she 
turned into smoke! He defeated her! You should have seen it!” 

“I wish that I had, Temu,” Yeb said quietly, his mouth unfolding as he looked at 
Rhyden in wonder. 
“A flaming sword?” Toghrul stared at Rhyden, his expression caught between 
stunned incredulity and absolute disbelief. “What sort of buyu is this?” 
“Elf buyu,” Temu said, turning to Rhyden, his eyes bright and marveling. “That is 
it, is it not, Rhyden? It was some kind of Elf buyu!” 
“Elf buyu we have never seen before,” Toghrul said, frowning. “Elf buyu he must 
have kept hidden from us, secret and to himself.” 
“It is called an anam’cladh.” Rhyden looked at Toghrul over his shoulder, raising 
his brow. “And you have never seen it before because I did not have it until tonight.” He 
rose to his feet, dipping his hand inside of his bogcu. He half-expected that the sword 
would be gone, that it had disappeared, no more than a vision within his mind and the 
jabsar, but he felt the silver hilt still tucked within the pouch. He hooked it against his 
fingertips, careful not to close his hand about it as he pulled it out. 
“What sort of sword is that?” Toghrul asked, with a dubious snort while Aigiarn, 
Yeb, Temu and the other Oirat all peered curiously, hesitantly at the anam’cladh hilt. 
“There is no flaming blade. It does not have a blade at all.” 
“Because we are not in the jabsar anymore, Toghrul,” Temu said patiently. 
“Maybe you can only see it in the jabsar, like our amis. I saw it there―it was on fire. 
Golden fire.” 
“Maybe piercing the gazriin ezen’s heart broke it somehow,” Jelmei murmured, 
rising onto his tiptoes to look over Rhyden’s shoulder at the hilt. 

Rhyden curled his fingers around the slender grip. As his fingertips met his 
thumb, as his fist closed, the spear of golden fire appeared, a lance of brilliant light 
aglow above the tang. The Oirat all recoiled, uttering frightened yelps. Yeb and Aigiarn 
jumped in start, turning their heads and squinting against the sudden glare while 
Toghral shrank, his hand reaching instinctively for his hip, for the scimitar he had 
dropped in the grass to hold Temu. Only Temu seemed unafraid of the blade; he 
grinned broadly in delight. 
“Tengeriin boshig!” Toghrul cried out, stumbling, his eyes flown wide. “Tere ayu 
magu buyu!” It is evil magic! 
“It is called an anam’cladh,” Rhyden said again. “It means sword of the soul. It is 
an ancient weapon, forged and enchanted by the first race of beings in the Bith―the 
Na’Siogai.” 
“It deflected buyu like a toli, Yeb,” Temu said. 
Rhyden turned to Aigiarn and Yeb. “I have not kept this hidden from you. 
Trejaeran gave it to me in a dream tonight. It belonged to him when he was alive. He 
told me he wanted me to have it, to protect me if he could not. He sensed the gazriin 
ezen coming―he said he had a sense of something unfamiliar and strong all evening, 
just like Ogotai.” He looked at Yeb, his eyes filled with worry. “He left me to go and find 
you. Is he…?” 
“He is alright.” Yeb stood slowly, wincing slightly, and smiled kindly at the Elf. “He 
said you would worry for him, and asked me to tell you not to. It took much of his 
strength to defy the qarang’qui, to draw me from its dark embrace―strength that waned 
already in him, thanks to the Khahl shamans. He said he needed to rest, and recover. 

Ogotai is with him. He will remain with Trejaeran, protect him until his strength has 
returned. Trejaeran said he had given you something that would keep you safe until 
then. I suppose he meant this.” 
Yeb nodded toward the anam’cladh, his eyes round and wondrous on the sword. 
“Would it work for me?” 
“I think so,” Rhyden said. “I…I am not sure. I did not know it would work for me 
until tonight. Would you like to see it, Yeb?” 
Yeb blinked at him, bright hope in his eyes, like a small boy whose father just 
offered to let him hold his blade for the first time. “May I?” 
“Yeb, do not,” Toghrul said. “It might be dangerous.” 
“What is dangerous, bahadur, is your persistent doubt,” Yeb said, with a frown. 
Toghrul faltered in his steps, his brows drawn, his lips pressing together in a thin, surly 
line. Rhyden loosened his grip against the hilt as Yeb curled his hand about it. As it 
passed between their hands, the golden fire winked out, fluttering, to be replaced by 
bright, scarlet fire, a beam of vermillion light. 
“Tengeriin boshig,” Yeb said, smiling, his eyes widening all the more. He glanced 
at Aigiarn and Temu, who had risen to their feet and come to stand nearby, both of 
them breathless with amazement. One by one, the other Oirat forgot their fears and 
crowded around, murmuring quietly to one another in curious fascination. 
“It is red, like your gerel in the jabsar, Yeb,” Temu said. He looked at Rhyden and 
smiled. “And Rhyden’s was golden―just like his gerel.” 
“Gerel is the light of one’s hiimori within them,” Yeb explained to Rhyden. “We 
see it as an aura, surrounding those with the shaman’s gift when our amis gather at the 

jabsar. Perhaps your anam’cladh responds to a soul’s hiimori, casts it as a powerful 
totem, a blade.” 
“Did it destroy the gazriin ezen when you ran it through, Rhyden?” Aigiarn asked. 
“I do not know,” Rhyden said, glancing uncertainly at Yeb. “She grew weak. 
Fighting Yeb must have sapped her strength, and then facing me…Trejaeran said 
without a physical form, his spirit weakens quickly. Hers must have as well. She 
disappeared when the blade went through her, but I do not know if I wielded it at full 
power or not.” 
He knew it took a pure heart to wield the anam’cladh with enough strength to kill 
a Na’Siogai. Qynh had been the one to use it, striking Ciardha’s heart and running her 
through to end the First Shadow War, because Trejaeran had tasted of the duchan; his 
heart had no longer been pure enough to command the anam’cladh to its fullest 
capability. 
And I do not know that mine is, either, Rhyden thought. He doubted any rational 
definition might qualify his heart as pure, no matter what Trejaeran might have offered 
to the contrary. He looked at Yeb, ashamed and abashed. 
“I do not think I destroyed her,” he said. “I think the blade only sent her away, 
back where she came from. She will rest there, like Trejaeran is―and she will return all 
the stronger.” 
“You sent her away, Rhyden,” Yeb told him, as though he could sense Rhyden’s 
disconcertion, his remorse. He pressed the anam’cladh hilt between Rhyden’s hands, 
his fingers pressing gently against Rhyden’s as the blade yielded from scarlet to gold. 

“You saved Temu, and you survived to remain among us. That is all that matters, and 
we are grateful for it.” 
“Yes,” Aigiarn said, drawing Rhyden’s gaze. She smiled at him, blinking against 
tears as she reached up, pressing her palm against his cheek, drawing his own smile. 
“So grateful, Rhyden.” 
*** 
There was no more rest to be found that night at the Oirat encampment. They 
gathered together their supplies, striking the lean-tos and bundling blankets and furs 
together in tight rolls to carry with them back to the boat. The sun was just beginning to 
rise, a soft, rose-colored glow along the horizon, and they were keeping anxious watch 
on the water to see if the Uru’ut arrived safely. 
Yeb had mixed together a blend of dried herbs he carried with him, along with 
bark and lichens he found in the forest around them and had ground into a loose 
powder between two stones. He steeped these in water heated over the fire and 
swallowed a generous cupful of the infusion. He instructed both Temu and Rhyden to 
drink it, as well; the three of them were aching, and the medicine helped assuage their 
pain. 
“Any signs of the Uru’ut?” Rhyden asked, wincing and sucking in a sharp breath 
as Yeb dabbed some sort of ointment on his wounded forehead. Lingqua’ebesun pulp, 
the shaman called it, to help soothe the pain and prevent infection. The Oirat 
understood the basics of injury treatment and their healing methods and medicines 
were strikingly similar to those practiced by traditional Elfin healers, like Rhyden’s 
mother. Unlike the Elves, these healing techniques were not confined to only one sect 

or aicmeach and all of the Oirat, even Temu, seemed familiar with them. Rhyden 
thought the Torachans could learn a thing or two from the Oirat. In the empire, healing 
standards were grossly inadequate, the techniques barbaric and often ignorant. Healers 
were often little more than charlatans peddling ineffective tonics and poultices, or worse, 
barber-surgeons who performed crude surgeries and rudimentary dentistry in squalid 
conditions with little benefit of any semblance of anesthetic. More than anything else, 
this had inspired Rhyden to learn as much as he could about his mother’s Banaltra 
healing methods while he lived in the empire. 
“No,” Yeb said. “But they will call to us if they approach. We have signals, bird 
cries we exchange to know one another from afar.” 
The events of the night had exhausted Temu. He had tried very hard not to droop 
or doze, but he had curled on his side next to Rhyden a short time ago and promptly fell 
fast asleep, the cap of his head resting against Rhyden’s hip. Rhyden glanced down at 
the boy as Yeb dibbed his fingertips again in the ointment. Rhyden brushed the cuff of 
his fingers lightly against Temu’s cheek, smiling softly at the boy. 
Temu had not left his side since awaking from the jabsar. Not even Aigiarn had 
been able to pry him away. She did not seem troubled by this; in fact, on several 
occasions over the last hour, Rhyden had found her regarding him and her son with a 
fond softness in her face, a tender expression lifting her brows, the corners of her mouth 
in a faint smile. If Rhyden would happen to attract her gaze, Aigiarn’s smile would widen 
all the more. 
While the other Oirat had begun to trundle supplies down to the knarr, Toghrul 
had drawn Aigiarn aside. They had stood together in quiet conversation for some time 

now beneath some nearby pine trees, draped in the shadows of the new morning 
beneath the heavy boughs. Rhyden tried not to watch them, and made conscientious 
effort not to overhear, fixing his attention on Yeb, and talking to the shaman. His eyes 
kept wandering, however, trailing over to the trees, to Aigiarn. At first, her posture 
seemed to suggest whatever Toghrul told her aggravated her; she stood stiffly, with her 
arms folded against her bosom, her chin lifted at a stubborn, nearly petulant angle. After 
awhile, her stance loosened, and she and Toghrul drew closer together. When Toghrul 
cupped his hands against her face, speaking to her softly, Rhyden looked away, 
blinking down at his lap, feeling intrusive. 
He did not even notice that Yeb had fallen silent, watching him watch Aigiarn for 
a long moment. When it occurred to him that Yeb had not said anything, he glanced up 
and felt abashed color stoking in his cheeks to find the shaman regarding him quietly, 
his expression kind. 
“Sorry,” Rhyden murmured, lowering his eyes again. “I…what were you saying, 
Yeb?” 
“She is an extraordinary woman,” Yeb said. 
“Aigiarn? Yes, she…she seems that sort.” 
“Toghrul has tried very hard, for many long years to take Yesugei’s place in her 
heart,” Yeb said. “And Aigiarn has tried very hard to let him.” 
Rhyden nodded, studying the inseam of his leggings, the stitching joining the 
panels of hide encircling his right thigh. 
“But there are some things you cannot force upon your heart, no matter how 
much like logic it might seem within your mind,” Yeb remarked, drawing Rhyden’s gaze.  

“She does not speak much of him,” Rhyden said. “Yesugei, I mean.” 
“You do not speak much of Trejaeran, your past with him,” Yeb said in gentle 
observation. “Perhaps some memories are best left private, some pain too poignant, 
even after the passing of time, to speak of.” 
Rhyden blinked at him, and then looked down at his lap again, uncertain what to 
say. 
“Yesugei died shortly after Temu was born,” Yeb said. 
“Yes.” Rhyden nodded. 
“That is a long time to carry that sort of burden on one’s heart,” Yeb said, and 
though he looked toward Aigiarn, Rhyden knew he was speaking about him, as well. He 
had told Yeb in guarded detail of Trejaeran’s death fifteen years earlier. 
“I knew Yesugei Bokeagha,” Yeb said. “We grew up together and he was very 
dear to me. When my father died, when he returned from the quest into the Khar 
Yesugei had sent him on, Yesugei was filled with such sorrow and remorse. It was not 
his fault, what happened to my father, but he felt terrible culpability for it. I think even 
now that we know bugu Inalchuk’s sacrifice was part of destiny’s plan, that he was 
meant to give us the map for you to read, Yesugei would have yet felt responsible, and 
broken for it. 
“Yesugei was a good man,” Yeb said, and he smiled at Rhyden. “One you would 
have liked, I think, as I am sure he would have liked you. He was a lot like you, you 
know.” 
“Me?” Rhyden said. He laughed softly. “Poor man.” 

Yeb smiled again. “He was very brave, and very kind. And very hard on himself 
for circumstances he could never hope to control. He loved Aigiarn, treasured her. He 
told me once that he would sometimes lie awake the whole night through, just to watch 
her sleep beside him, to feel her breath against his face. He could be very hard―his life 
had hardened him, as it has hardened Toghrul, and most among our people. But with 
her, with Aigiarn, Yesugei was always so tender. He could look across the room and 
see her, and it would come upon his face, this gentle softness, as though she held the 
keys to his very soul. As though she set him free.” 
Rhyden looked at Aigiarn as Yeb spoke. Toghrul still held her face between his 
hands; he had turned so that his back was to Rhyden, but he could still see Aigiarn 
beyond Toghrul’s shoulder. She met Rhyden’s gaze and he felt his breath slow beneath 
his chest. When Toghrul leaned forward, turning Aigiarn’s face to meet his, offering a 
kiss, she did not avert his eyes from Rhyden. She canted her head, turning away from 
Toghrul’s kiss; his lips brushed against her cheek and she leaned against his shoulder 
in an embrace, all the while looking at Rhyden. 
“She loved him just as much,” Yeb said. “She was so young when they married, 
and she gave her heart to him fully, without hesitation. You could see it in her eyes, her 
smile, her entire face. He was a part of her, infused within her mind and heart. She was 
so broken when he died. I think if it had not been for Temu, she would have taken her 
own life to be with Yesugei. She was that devastated by his loss. For the longest time, 
she said she did not understand how she could draw breath without him.” 
Rhyden looked at Aigiarn, holding her gaze over Toghrul’s shoulder as Toghrul 
turned his face, speaking against her ear. When Trejaeran had died, Rhyden had been 

crippled with grief. While he had recuperated from his injuries, he had languished in 
bed, immobilized by his broken heart as much as his broken ankle. He had not wanted 
to eat. He had not wanted company. He had been so overwhelmed with sorrow and 
regret that he had simply wanted to die. In the years since, though that mask of initial 
shock had lifted from him, there were many times when Rhyden felt like he just went 
through the motions of his day-to-day life; that whatever joy or pleasure he might have 
once found in things seemed pale to him now, tempered.  
Aigiarn smiled at Rhyden. He smiled back, helpless against her. 
She might hold your heart, if you would let her, Trejaeran had said.  
“Toghrul loves her,” Rhyden said quietly, as Aigiarn stepped away from Toghrul, 
turning her eyes away from Rhyden. Toghrul said something that must have pleased or 
amused her; her smile widened slightly, and she laughed. Toghrul loves her, he told 
himself. She would no more be mine to give my heart to than Qynh. 
“Yes, he does,” Yeb said, drawing Rhyden’s gaze. “But Aigiarn’s heart is not for 
him to decide.” 
He brought a small square of woven wool toward Rhyden’s face, pressing it 
against the wound on his brow. Rhyden flinched, drawing in a sharp breath between his 
teeth. “I am sorry,” Yeb said softly. 
“It is alright,” Rhyden said, glancing at him and smiling. “It will be healed and 
gone in a few days. Do not worry.” 
“This wound should not be here,” Yeb said, his expression troubled. “The pain 
should be, but not wounds. Temu said you bled in the jabsar. That is not supposed to 
happen.” 

Rhyden settled his fingertips against the wool, holding it in place as Yeb drew his 
hand away. “I must just be lucky, I guess.” 
“It took more than good fortune to dispel the gazriin ezen of Mongoljin Burilgitu,” 
Yeb told him.  
“I think she will be back,” Rhyden said. “I am sorry, Yeb. Trejaeran gave me the 
anam’cladh, but I do not understand how to use it, how to call its powers in full. 
Trejaeran knows, but I do not. It is his sword.” 
“He gave it to you, Rhyden,” Yeb reminded. “And you called its powers enough to 
send Mongoljin away. It would seem to me it is your sword now.” 
Rhyden smiled at him.  
“Let her come back.” Yeb patted Rhyden fondly on the shoulder and then stood. 
He moved slowly, his brows lifting as he winced, and he pressed his hand against the 
small of his back. “She caught us by surprise this time. She will not have that advantage 
again.” 
“Bahadur! Bahadur!” one of the Kelet, a young man named Sacha cried, rushing 
through the trees toward the campsite. Yeb and Rhyden turned at his cry, as did 
Toghrul and Aigiarn.  
“Yagun ayu tere, Sacha?” Toghrul asked as he and Aigiarn walked briskly out 
from beneath the trees to meet the Oirat. What is it? 
“Two knarrs approach from the east,” Sacha told him. “We have heard two sharp 
cries of the shria’sibagu from out upon the water, and we have answered.” 
Toghrul turned to Aigiarn, his face bright with sudden hope. “It is Juchin,” he said. 
“The visions must have been wrong―the Uru’ut survive. It Juchin. He has come.” 

“Tengri magtaqu,” Aigiarn said, grinning broadly. Tengri be praised. 
“Keep here with Temu,” Toghrul said, placing his hand on her shoulder. When 
her brows drew together, and she drew in breath to snap, he held up his other palm to 
stay her voice. “Just until they draw near enough to shore to be certain, Aigiarn. They 
know the sibagu signal, but it could yet be a Khahl trick.” 
“You are right,” she said, still frowning as she shrugged his hand away from her. 
“They have played enough tricks on us already. We cannot take such a risk.” 
“I will call to you if it is safe,” Toghrul promised her. He was already moving, 
clapping Sacha on the shoulder as the two of them hurried for the beach. 
*** 
“Juchin! Sain bainuu!” Toghrul called out in greeting as the first of the two Uru’ut 
knarrs ran aground on the shores of Tolui Bay. The thick keel of the boat cleaved a 
deep trench in the soft mud, and the knarr listed to its left, rolling to a gentle stop along 
the broad curve of its portside hull. He could see the Uru’ut noyan, or chieftain, Juchin 
Batuqan standing at the bow of the vessel, one gutal propped upon the slat beam of a 
rowing bench, his gloved hand draped against the pommel of his scimitar. 
“Ba ci, Toghrul,” Juchin called back. And to you. Like others of his tribe, fifty-two-
year old Juchin was a relatively short man, almost a half-head shorter than Toghrul. The 
Uru’ut were a distinctive sub-clan of the Oirat, a breed of stocky, muscular people with 
thick torsos and strong limbs. Juchin had large hands and wide shoulders. His broad, 
long face was weathered like aged, worn hide, marred with a dark, crooked scar that 
wrapped from his left temple down to his chin. 

The Uru’ut were the smallest of the four Oirat tribes, but also the fiercest. They 
preferred to live almost year-round within the foothills of the Khar, unlike the other tribes 
who scattered widely throughout the steppe plains toward Ebesun and Ordos. The 
Uru’ut were seafarers and warriors. While Toghrul’s primary purpose in leading his own 
Kerait tribe, and in serving all of the Oirat, was keeping them alive, seeing them through 
drought and winter, clothed and fed, sheltered from the Khahl, Juchin had always 
served a more single-minded purpose. He was dedicated to Temuchin, and to the 
fulfillment of his destiny as the Negh. Almost from the moment of Temu’s birth, Juchin 
had committed his life―and the lives of his people―to this. He was as fixed upon their 
triumph as Aigiarn, and like Aigiarn, Juchin was willing to take extraordinary risks to see 
Temu succeed. 
Toghrul did not always agree with either of them. As stubborn and unyielding as 
Aigiarn could be, Juchin was even more so. Unlike Aigiarn, Juchin was not afraid to 
sacrifice himself, or his people to see Temu to his destiny. Toghrul found this 
willingness, this unwavering, dogged resolve both admirable and disturbing. 
Juchin hopped nimbly over the side of his knarr, letting his feet settle in the soft 
mud of the beach. He walked toward Toghrul while the second longboat ran aground 
alongside of the first.  
“Tengeriin boshig, you have arrived,” Toghrul said, as the two men clapped each 
other on the shoulders. His relief was apparent enough in his face to spark Juchin’s 
curiosity, and Juchin looked at him, his brow arched.  
“Why would we not?” he asked. “My Khanum sends word for me to leave at 
once, and I leave at once.” 

“We thought something might have happened, that you had met with trouble,” 
Toghrul said. “Yeb had a vision of ravens that troubled him, and we thought―” 
“Yes, my idugan, Baichu has seen them, too,” Juchin said, his brows narrowing. 
“She thinks it is the Khahl, that they are aware of our intentions.” 
“Temu saw them at the aysil at Qoyina,” Aigiarn said from behind Toghrul, 
drawing Juchin’s gaze. He smiled broadly, the leathery scrap of his scar crimping about 
the dimples in his cheek as he watched her approach. 
“Sain bainuu, minu Khanum,” he said.  
“Sain bainuu, bahadur Juchin,” Aigiarn said, exchanging shoulder-claps with 
Juchin as firmly and capably as any man. “We were worried. We thought the Minghan 
had attacked the aysil.” 
“Not before we left,” Juchin said. “And if they tried afterward, we still had more 
than one hundred able to defend it. I have brought forty of my Kelet with me, and sent 
forty more by bergelmir to meet us at the Harw River in four weeks’ time.” 
“Eighty?” Toghrul said, and he glanced at Aigiarn. “Juchin, that is nearly every 
able-bodied man in your tribe.” 
“Over age fifteen, yes, bahadur, it is,” Juchin replied, turning to meet Toghrul’s 
gaze. “The aysil stands defended nonetheless. Do not worry for it.” 
“More than one hundred, yes, you have said―these, your women, children and 
elders,” Toghrul said.  
“They know how to fight,” Juchin said, lifting his chin. “There is not an Uru’ut who 
draws breath who cannot take a scimitar in hand and swing it.” 

“Bugu Yeb and Temu saw hundreds of ravens,” Toghrul said, his expression 
growing stricken. “It could mean hundreds of Khahl, Juchin―” 
“Then at least a hundred of them fell if they attacked my aysil,” Juchin said. “One 
for every woman, child and elder who waited there for them.” 
The other Uru’ut disembarking from their boats had overheard this conversation. 
They listened with interest, and spoke quietly among themselves about it, though none 
of them seemed distraught by the grim tidings. They moved and murmured with a sort 
of detached resignation, as if Toghrul told them nothing they had not already 
anticipated. 
“We have known of this,” Juchin told Toghrul and Aigiarn. “We were not gone 
many hours before we heard the screams echoing from a distance. Sound travels well 
upon the water, and they came to us just after dark.” 
“You did not go back?” Toghrul asked, blinking at him, startled. 
“To what purpose, bahadur?” Juchin asked. “Mine purpose―and that of every 
Oirat―lies here.” 
“You might have saved your people,” Toghrul said. 
Juchin met his gaze evenly. “I saved my people by continuing on. We have 
always understood the sacrifices that might be asked of us to see Temu reclaim the 
dragons. He is the Negh―Dobun’s heir, the chosen son of the Dologhon, the bearer of 
the sacred star marks. His destiny has been promised for five thousand years, his 
greatness whispered in the wind across our land when our great-ancestors were yet 
dreams within their mothers’ wombs.  

“If those at the aysil were slain, they served their destinies as the Tengri saw fit, 
and they live on in the great spirit tree, beseeching buyan―blessings―for us. They 
have found glory, and will know the joy of rebirth into a land that is free―an Oirat 
people who are free, and who have achieved what has been long-promised for them. 
The Tengri suffer not the reward of the faithful to be lost. Those who have left us shall 
be with us in spirit and among us once more when our empire is restored. My people 
find comfort in this faith, bahadur. I hope that you would, as well.” 
An old woman walked toward them, her gutals shuffling slowly in the mud. She 
had been helped from one of the knarrs by a younger woman, and both wore the yellow 
khurims of shamans lashed over their del. They both also bore the dark marks of slave 
catastas wrapped against their left cheeks and brows.  
The older woman walked with her eyes squinted shut, her thin lips pressed 
together as though with great effort, keeping one of her spindly, gnarled hands 
outstretched to guide her. 
“You remember my idugan, bugu Baichu Cherendai and her oyutan student, Nala 
Sahni?” Juchin asked, as the woman drew near.  
“Yes, of course,” Aigiarn nodded. “Sain bainuu, bugu Baichu, and to you, Nala.” 
“Sain bainnuu, minu Khanum,” said the younger woman, Nala, lowering her face 
in polite deference to Aigiarn. She was remarkably beautiful, and not of Ulusian lineage. 
Though her hair was thick and dark, worn in a plait, like an Oirat woman’s, Nala’s skin 
was a darker, nearly bronze complexion. Her dark eyes, though almond-shaped, were 
larger, her nose longer and less wide, her mouth smaller, her lips less full.  

The older woman lifted her chin at the sound of Aigiarn’s voice. She sniffed the 
air, her brows pinching slightly, her eyes yet closed. “Sain bainuu, minu Khanum.” 
“This ground trembles beneath us,” Nala said quietly, looking about uneasily. 
Baichu nodded. “Spirits have passed this way recently, some good and some 
bad,” she said. “Their gerels lingers behind them in the earth.” 
“Yes, bugu Baichu,” Aigiarn said. “We have had some visitors of our own in the 
night.” 
“Bahadur Toghrul, your heart is troubled.” Baichu turned, not opening her eyes. 
“You worry for reasons that are not yours to bear.” 
“Sain bainuu, bugu Baichu,” Toghrul said, pressing her outstretched hand 
between his own, smiling at her. “Nala, it is good to see you both once more.” 
“And you, bahadur,” Nala said, nodding again. 
Juchin looked beyond Aigiarn’s shoulder and he smiled again, broadly. “Here he 
is!” he exclaimed, stepping past Aigiarn and opening his arms. 
“Juchin!” Temu cried, running down the beach. Juchin caught him in his arms, 
hoisting him off his feet, making the boy laugh. “Juchin! You are safe!” Temu said, as 
Juchin deposited him on the ground again. Temu’s smile faltered as he met Juchin’s 
gaze. “I was worried for you.” 
“All is well, and we are with you.” Juchin planted his palm against Temu’s cap, 
making him smile again. “What is this your Mamma tells us of visitors in the night? You 
have started the adventure without me, baga’ere?” he asked, calling Temu little man. 
“A gazriin ezen attacked us,” Temu said. “Me and Yeb, in the jabsar last night.” 
“A gazriin ezen?” Juchin turned in startled surprise to Aigiarn and Toghrul. 

“Yes,” Aigiarn said grimly. “The Khahl have summoned the spirit of Mongoljin 
Burilgitu from Tengriss Lake.” 
At these words, the old woman, Baichu’s hand fluttered to his breast, and she 
clutched at a small, silver toli that dangled about her neck. “Tengri ibegel bide,” she said 
breathlessly. Tengri help us. 
“Rhyden saved us,” Temu said. “You should have seen it, Juchin. He kicked her 
in the head.” 
“Rhyden…?” Juchin asked, raising his brow curiously. He looked toward Rhyden 
and Yeb as they approached from the campsite. “This must be the riddle you wrote to 
us of, Aigiarn.” 
“Juchin, this is Rhyden Fabhcun,” Aigiarn said with a smile. “He is a Gaeilge Elf 
from Tiralainn, a land to the west, across the great sea. Rhyden, this is Juchin Batuqan, 
noyan of the Uru’ut.” 
“Sain bainuu,” Rhyden said to Juchin, turning his gaze to the ground politely. 
Juchin regarded Rhyden for a long moment without offering reply. At last, 
Rhyden glanced up uncertainly, looking between the Uru’ut noyan and Aigiarn. “He is 
tall,” Juchin said at length. “And pale.” 
Aigiarn smiled again. “Yes, Juchin. He is our friend, as I told you in my letter.” 
“Tere ayu managa degere Temuchin,” Baichu said, turning her face to Rhyden. 
“Managa degere Temuchin.”He is a guardian to Temuchin. She shrugged her arm away 
from Nala and trudged forward, her hands outstretched and groping. Juchin stepped 
politely aside, and Rhyden blinked at her, startled, as she patted her palms against his 

chest. “Altan’nachin,” she murmured, smiling. The golden falcon. “Imu gerel―imu 
kucun―ayu masi cinga.” His gerel―his power―is very strong.  
“Teyimu, bugu Baichu,” Yeb said to her. Yes. He noticed Rhyden’s discomfort 
with her attention, and smiled at him in reassurance. “This is bugu Baichu Cherendai,” 
he said. “An idugan―female shaman―of the Uru’ut. She is blind, and using her hiimori, 
her utha suld to see you. She was taken from us many years ago, sold into slavery.” 
“I told my first master he would never have an heir,” Baichu said, reaching up and 
brushing her fingers against Rhyden’s face. “He punished me for my vision. He ordered 
my eyes burned out with branding irons. He thought it would keep me from seeing.” She 
shook her head and chuckled, as though she found this amusing. “He died two weeks 
later, robbed by thieves as he traveled to Galjin. They tied him to his carriage wheels 
and slit him neck to navel. He died childless, just as I promised. Sain bainuu, Yeb. Your 
gerel is weakened today and weary, and your toli is missing.” 
“It was broken, bugu Baichu,” Yeb told her, smiling, lowering his head 
courteously. “And I have entrusted my other to Temu for our journey.” 
Baichu’s hands moved from Rhyden’s face to his shoulders, and then down his 
chest toward his stomach. “That is good,” she said to Yeb. “It seems he will have need 
of it. I have another in Nala’s bogcu, if you would like. It is not as strong as yours, but it 
should serve.” 
“You are kind, bugu Baichu,” Yeb told her, nodding again. 
“Sayigan cirai,” Baichu said, turning her face first toward Yeb, and then over her 
shoulder as if addressing Aigiarn. She patted her hands lightly against Rhyden’s cheeks 

as she spoke, clearly indicating she spoke about him. “Magu’jirug ugei abqu tere. 
Jalagu, cinga beye. Tere cidaqu ogku olan keuked.” 
Aigiarn blinked at this, and as she glanced at Rhyden, she pressed her lips 
together, the corner of her mouth hooking as though she struggled to contain a smile or 
laughter. 
“What?” Rhyden asked quietly, glancing between Yeb and Temu. “What did she 
say?” 
“She said you have a beautiful face, Rhyden, that the bad painting―your 
tattoo―cannot take away,” Temu told him, smiling brightly. “And she said you have a 
young, strong body. She thinks you would give many children.” 
“What?” Rhyden blinked, startled. At his reaction, Aigiarn could not help herself; 
her hand darted to her mouth as she burst out laughing. Juchin chuckled with her, 
shaking his head, while Toghrul glowered at Rhyden, his brows drawing narrow. 
“Hoah,” Rhyden said, feeling color stoke in his cheeks. “Well…I…byarla, bugu 
Baichu.” Thank you. “That…that is kind of you…I think…” 
“Bugu Baichu, you have shamed him,” Nala said quietly, leaning toward the older 
woman’s ear. “His customs are not our own.”  
“What shame?” Baichu asked. “I tell him only what my hiimori shows to me. 
When I was a slave in Ebesun, imperial nobles used to travel for weeks―and spend 
plenty of silver―to learn of such things from me.” 
“Bugu Baichu is an ure’idugan,” Yeb told Rhyden. “Her hiimori is especially 
attuned to the potential of childbearing and siring, and she has attended to more births 
among the Oirat than any other shaman.” 

“I…then I am most honored for her counsel,” Rhyden said. “Sain bainnuu, bugu 
Baichu. Byarla.” 
“This is Nala Sahni, Baichu’s oyutan―her apprentice shaman,” Yeb said of the 
younger woman. “Nala, this is Rhyden Fabhcun.” 
“Sain bainuu, Rhyden,” Nala said, with a cordial nod. 
“Sain bainuu,” he said. He raised his brow at her, recognizing the heritage 
apparent in her countenance, her skin tone. “You are Galjin?” 
“Yes,” Nala said, nodding again, her mouth unfolding in a smile. “From Kolhapur. 
Bugu Baichu and I served the same master for a time in Ebesun. Bahadurs Toghrul and 
Juchin freed us as our master brought us north to Sadiya in Ordos.” 
“Five years ago,” Baichu said, smiling as she clapped one of Nala’s hands 
between her own. “I sensed the hiimori, the strength of her gerel even then. She never 
knew her parents, poor child. She is one of us now―a part of our tribe.” 
“Bugu Yeb,” Nala said, her smile widening as she turned to the shaman. “Sain 
bainuu.” 
“Sain bainuu, Nala,” Yeb said, meeting her gaze, nodding once to her. The 
corner of his mouth lifted slightly, but he kept his eyes politely on the ground. 
“We should leave,” Juchin said to Aigiarn. “If the Khahl were bold enough to 
attack the aysil, I would not be surprised if they did not try to follow us. We heard voices 
across the water last night, shortly after nightfall. They seemed to come from Sube, 
beyond the mouth of Tolui, and they might have come from Enghan…though Enghan 
do not venture much along their southern shores anymore. It might have been 
Minghan.” 

“You are right,” Aigiarn said, her gaze turning out upon the water, her brows 
narrowing. “We will row south, following the shoreline to the Toda River. I want to take 
the boats down the Toda to the Urlug.” 
Juchin blinked at her. “You do not mean to go by foot?” 
“The Deguu Masiff ravine is nearly thirty miles long,” Aigiarn said. “We will make 
better time if we keep to the river.” 
“We will be rowing the length of the Toda against the current,” Juchin said. “And 
from Koke Lake, where the mountain rivers drain, along a treacherous path by the 
Urlug. Those are swift waters and dangerous shores. Bad places to bring boats.” 
“We will take them as far as we can,” she said. “The Khahl know we are moving, 
and they know why, Juchin. They are determined to stop us, and if they are following 
us, we need to move as quickly as we can.” 
“Teyimu, Aigiarn,” Juchin said, nodding his chin in concession. Yes.  
“Do you mean to bring bugu Baichu with us?” Toghrul asked in a low voice, 
catching Aigiarn by the sleeve of her del. He raised his brow at her. “This is no journey 
for a woman of her years, Aigiarn. Let some of my Kelet bring her back to Ulus, to our 
aysil in the Taiga. We can―” 
“She means to go with us, Toghrul,” Juchin said, drawing the younger man’s 
gaze. “She insisted, as a matter of fact.” 
“I pressed my hands against Aigiarn’s belly nine years ago and promised her 
time had come,” Baichu said to Toghrul. “And months after that, I promised her that 
Yesugei’s son grew in her womb―the sacred son of the Dologhon marks, Dobun’s 

heir―the Negh lord. I have seen the beginning of this promised destiny, and I mean to 
be there for its ending.”  
Baichu turned around and shuffled toward her knarr. Nala hurried after her, 
taking her by the arm and guiding her way. “I am blind, not deaf, bahadur,” Baichu said 
to Toghrul, slapping the back of her hand against the flat of Toghrul’s stomach as she 
passed him. “Old, not feeble. And I am coming with you.” 
Juchin turned to call over his shoulder to his men. “You have heard the Khanum. 
We are taking to the water again, westward for Toda. Ta yagaraqu―qamug turgen!” 
Hurry now―everyone! He looked down at Temu and grinned as he clapped his palm 
against the boy’s pate. “We have dragons to find.” 

Chapter Four 
 
You should not have come, Yeb told Nala. His body sat on a narrow bench along 
the portside of one of the Uru’ut knarrs, his eyes upon the water as the Oirat rowed 
along the Lydian coast for the mouth of the Toda River. Yeb’s mind, however, was 
someplace else, out in the jabsar once more, abandoning his form for awhile. 
He could do this on his own for short measures of time without using any trance-
inducing herbs or plants, like qola’nidu berries. He was an accomplished and powerful 
enough shaman to induce a brief journey of qaraqu simply by drawing his breath to a 
slow, steady rhythm beneath his breast, by closing his eyes and letting himself―mind 
and form―become very still and very quiet. 
The jabsar landscape that greeted him was a serene clearing among ancient, 
venerable sequoias. The ground his mind imagined beneath his feet was carpeted with 
a thick layer of golden, dried pine needles. He could see the young oyutan standing 
before him across the clearing, her hands folded together against the small of her back. 
She was smiling, the corners of her mouth unfurled ever-so slightly, her dark hair 
unfettered, lying over her shoulders, framing her face. 
I could not have kept away, she said. This is Temu’s destiny and ours. He is the 
chosen son―He Who Shall Pass, Yeb. There is no place else I would be than here with 
the Negh. 
It is not safe here, he said to Nala. And you are not ready yet for this. 
Would you rather I had remained at the aysil? she asked, raising one brow. 
Waited for the Khahl to come? 

He went to her. He was taller than she was, and Nala lifted her chin to meet his 
gaze. She was still smiling at him in wry, mischievous fashion, and he lifted his hand, 
brushing the cuff of his knuckles against her cheek. 
“No,” he said, cradling her face against his palm. “I would rather you and Baichu 
go with some of the Kelet back to the Taiga, the Kerait aysil where it is safe.” 
“Temuchin needs me,” she told him. “You need me, Yeb.” 
“You are not ready for this.” 
“You stand against the Khahl shaman council of thirteen,” Nala said. “And the 
gazriin ezen of Mongoljin Burilgitu. You need all of the buyu―all of the hiimori―you can 
get.” 
He looked at her for a long moment, into her large, dark, eager eyes. He brushed 
the pad of his thumb against the high, delicate arch of her cheek. “Nala…” he began. 
“You told me I am strong,” she said. “My hiimori is greater than Baichu’s, you 
said.” 
“It is, but you are untrained in it, Nala. You do not know yet how to wield it well or 
wisely.” 
“I wield it well enough,” she told him, her smile widening. She pressed her hands 
against his face and leaned toward him, lifting her chin, her mouth settling against his. 
The tip of her tongue delved between his lips. “I have missed you,” she whispered, 
drawing away, letting her nose brush against his. “And I have worried.” 
“I know,” he said gently, stroking his hand against her hair. 
“If you…if you had fallen into the qarang’qui…” Nala blinked at him, her brows 
lifted. 

“I did not.” 
“But you might have…” 
“But I did not,” he said again, raising his chin and pressing his lips against her 
brow. “I felt my father there, in the qarang’qui. I could feel him with me.” 
His father, Inalchuk’s ami had been banished to the eternal darkness of the 
qarang’qui when he had tried to channel the gazriin ezen of the Abhacan mage. 
Through Inalchuk’s body, the mage had drawn the cryptic map that would lead them to 
the dragons’ lair, and so Inalchuk’s sacrifice had been necessary in Temu’s destiny, but 
the loss of his father, and the realization of Inalchuk’s horrific fate had nearly broken 
Yeb. The Abhacan mage had not meant harm to Inalchuk; like any gazriin ezen spirit, it 
had simply proven too strong for Inalchuk to control once he had harnessed its energy. 
The laws of the Tegsh had applied in unflinching and seemingly cruel fashion; two amis 
could not inhabit the same form at once for any length of time, and whichever proved 
the weaker was the one doomed to the qarang’qui. 
“I could not see him,” Yeb said to Nala. “There was nothing but darkness, but I 
could feel him all around me. His spirit was filled with such despair for me.” 
“Oh, Yeb…” Nala whispered. 
“When Trejaeran Muirel freed me, when he came to me, he used his power to 
free Father,” Yeb said. He looked down toward the toes of his gutal, his eyes swimming 
with sudden, unashamed tears. “He freed my father,” he whispered again. “At great cost 
to himself―great effort and exertion, he freed us both―my ami to return to my form, 
and my father’s to fly to the spirit tree, to find rebirth.” 

“Trejaeran is Rhyden Fabhcun’s utha suld,” Nala said. “The endur that is bound 
to him?” 
Yeb nodded. He looked up at her. “He is the most extraordinary being I have 
ever sensed. His hiimori is so vast, Nala, it pierced the qarang’qui like sunlight. I would 
not have believed such power was possible had I not witnessed it myself.” He smiled at 
her as a tear slipped down his cheek. “He freed my father.” 
“Oh, Yeb,” she whispered again, drawing her arms about his neck, embracing 
him. She turned her face, kissing the shaved plane of his temple, the curve of his 
earlobe. She held him for a long moment as he trembled against her, tangling his hands 
in her hair. When at last he pulled away from her, she caressed her palm against his 
cheek. 
“Is Rhyden Fabhcun that powerful, too?” she asked him softly.  
“I do not know,” Yeb said. “I do not think even Rhyden knows. He defeated 
Mongoljin’s spirit, sent her away. I think there is more strength in his heart, his power 
than he is likely aware.” 
“Toghrul does not trust him,” she said. Yeb’s brows drew slightly, and he huffed a 
soft snort of air through his nose. He turned and walked away, folding his arms across 
the chest of his khurim. 
“I heard him talking with Juchin about it,” Nala said. The two traveled aboard 
separate knarrs; Nala went with Juchin, Baichu and Toghrul in the lead boat while Yeb 
rode with Aigiarn, Rhyden and Temu on another. “He said he thinks that Rhyden 
Fabhcun’s hiimori is as strong as you say it is―that he has cast some sort of buyu to 

trick you, make you believe he is the golden falcon of prophecy. He said the Elf will 
betray Temu, and us all, and deliver the dragons to Targutai and the Khahl.” 
“Toghrul’s reason has abandoned him, then,” Yeb said, frowning.  
“He thinks the Elf has put a spell on Aigiarn to cloud her judgment,” Nala said, 
adding carefully: “And her heart.” 
“Toghrul believes if nearly ten years of effort on his part could not win Aigiarn’s 
heart, then nothing short of buyu could,” Yeb said, snorting again. “There is the reason 
for his mistrust, Nala, and nothing more. He is jealous.” 
“She does seem fond of the Elf,” Nala remarked. She walked slowly behind Yeb, 
kicking her gutal through the pine needles. “It does not take hiimori to sense it about 
her. I saw the way her face came aglow as he drew near on the beach. He brought a 
smile to her, the likes of which I have not seen in the years I have known her.” 
“They are kindred souls,” Yeb said, not turning to look at her. “I have felt it from 
the first. There is something in the air when he draws near to her, like music, as though 
their spirits sing in harmony together. If Aigiarn softens to Rhyden, it is by her choosing, 
not his forcing. Toghrul should have realized and accepted long ago that Aigiarn’s heart 
did not lie with him.” 
Nala stood behind him for a long, quiet moment. “As you have done?” she asked 
at length. 
Yeb turned, his brow raised. “Yes.” 
“If she was to love him,” Nala said. “If Aigiarn was to love Rhyden Fabhcun, it 
would not trouble you? Hurt you? How long have you loved her, Yeb? You told me 
once―from the day she arrived at the Naiman aysil as Yesugei’s promised bride-to-be. 

You have loved her from the first moment you set eyes upon her. You have endured 
these years with Aigiarn as Toghrul’s lover, because you found some respite in the fact 
that she did not give her heart to him. But now…? You have served her loyally, faithfully 
for years. The Elf has known her little more than weeks. If she was to love him…?” 
“If Aigiarn was to love Rhyden, I would rejoice for it, Nala,” he said. “I saw her in 
her years spent with Yesugei, too, not just these past with Toghrul. I saw the joy that 
bloomed in her face―her love for her husband. It is a radiance that was stripped from 
her, stolen by the Khahl, shrouded in grief and sorrow all of these years. It is a light that 
rekindles within her whenever Rhyden is near. For every winter, there must come a 
spring, and I could never love Aigiarn so selfishlessly as to deny her that. Unlike 
Toghrul, I accepted long ago that I could not have her. Just because we love someone, 
Nala―no matter how deeply or truly―it does not mean they must love us in return. We 
cannot always have the love we want simply because we feel entitled to it.” 
He meant these words for her, as well, and she knew it. For two years now, Nala 
had been his lover. She had also tried to be his love, to earn his heart. Nala was dear to 
him, and Yeb cared deeply for her, but he did not love her, not in the way that she 
wanted him to. He had never lied to her about this; he had never made promises to her 
that he could not keep. He had never told her he loved her, because a part of his heart 
would not let him. Here, it was still winter inside of Yeb; he, too, was simply waiting for 
his moment of springtime to come. 
Nala looked at him, her mouth spreading again in a slight smile. “When you make 
love to me, do you think of Aigiarn?” 

He touched her face, smiling at her. “No,” he said softly. “When I am with you, my 
heart and mind are, too, Nala.” 
She hooked her arms around his neck, draping her hands against his braided 
hair. She drew her legs up, wrapping them about his waist, crossing her ankles against 
the small of his back. They were weightless in the jabsar; their feet remained on what 
their eyes perceived as the ground simply because their minds willed it so. He had 
taught her how to float here, to fly, to command the reality of the jabsar by her thoughts, 
her will alone. Nala was strong enough, her hiimori powerful enough to serve her well in 
the spiritual plane. Yeb had offered her guidance, counsel and instruction whenever he 
had been able. He had sensed the strength of her gerel from the moment he had first 
met her, and he had made no secret that he thought her talents as a shaman wasted as 
a simple midwife’s apprentice.  
She was right. He would need her in the days to come, and Yeb was grateful for 
her presence. 
“I am glad you are here,” he told her, cupping his hands against her hips. 
“I love you,” she said, kissing him. 
He smiled as she eased her mouth away from him, holding his bottom lip lightly, 
playfully between her lips. “I know you do,” he whispered. 
She moved, letting her breasts press against him, her hips slide with deliberate, 
gentle friction against his. He had made love to her countless times in the mortal plane, 
long hours spent in her company, but when they were apart, when he was with the 
Kerait, and she with the Uru’ut, they would meet sometimes in the jabsar. Here, their 
spirits would mingle with as much passion and enthusiasm as their forms might have. 

Nala was an exuberant, eager lover, and when Yeb moved her in the jabsar, her gerel 
would blaze like bright, scarlet fire, engulfing them both. 
“Be with me, Yeb,” she said. “Body, mind, heart. Be with me here.” 
He kissed her deeply, feeling her clothing dissipate like smoke beneath his 
palms. In the jabsar, any reality was only a thought away in the mind of a skilled and 
powerful shaman. Yeb willed the illusion of his own clothing, his del and khurim, 
leggings and gutal away, and he drew her hips against him with his hands. She moaned 
against his mouth, and as they moved together in the jabsar, he had no other thought in 
his mind save for her. 
*** 
“I do not trust the Elf,” Toghrul said to Juchin. 
The older man glanced at him, raising his brow. “You do not trust anyone, 
Toghrul,” he said pointedly, making Toghrul smirk.  
The two stood near the helm, at the tapered corner of the knarr’s stern. Toghrul 
glanced over his shoulder at the boat behind them. The three Uru’ut vessels traveled in 
a line, marking a brisk pace across the surface of the bay as they rowed toward the 
mouth of the Toda River. Aigiarn had taken Temu aboard the boat with Rhyden without 
even the courtesy of Toghrul’s counsel. Whatever events had occurred during the night 
had served to cement within Aigiarn’s mind―and Temu’s as well―that the Elf was 
some sort of guardian to the boy, someone whose hiimori would keep Temu safe.  
“You do not think the Elf is as strong as Yeb and Aigiarn believe?” Juchin asked. 
Toghrul frowned. “No, I think he is that strong. And that is what troubles me, 
Juchin. How did the Khahl know where to find your aysil? Yeb has seen them in his 

mind, these images of ravens they are using to disguise themselves, their movements. 
They know we are traveling―and why―but they cannot know where. How could they 
know? Even their strongest yeke shaman, the idugan Khidyr Shriagal is no match for 
Yeb’s buyu. He can keep us shielded from their hiimori, our location secret from them. 
How would they know to strike your aysil―that you would lead them to us if they 
followed you? It does not seem like a simple matter of luck to me. They knew 
somehow.” 
“The gazriin ezen spirit they have found, Mongoljin Burilgitu is strong enough to 
best even bugu Yeb’s spells,” Juchin said. “She could see us, find us.” 
“Mongoljin’s spirit is new to them,” Toghrul said. “She must be. They would have 
unleashed her before now, otherwise. But I think another spirit, one whose powers are 
also stronger than Yeb’s might have told them where we are―where your aysil might be 
found.” 
Juchin blinked at him. He looked over his shoulder toward the second knarr. “You 
think the Elf told them? You think he is with them somehow…with the Khahl or the 
empire?” 
“I had thought the empire at first,” Toghrul said. “But it makes no sense to me 
now. What interest would the empire have in the dragons? They think they are barbaric 
legends, nothing but lore. The Khahl believe, however―as much as we do―and like us, 
they would do whatever they can to claim the dragons for themselves.” 
“I do not believe the Elf could be strong enough to hide such an allegiance from 
Yeb,” Juchin said. 

“He is strong enough to fool Yeb’s hiimori,” Toghrul told him. “I have seen it 
myself. He carries a weapon with him, a sword he uses to conjure a blade of fire. It is 
like nothing I have ever seen. He has power enough for this. I think he has power 
enough to have conjured visions for Yeb and Temu, too―visions of the golden 
falcon―to lure them to him, to trick us into trusting, believing in him. Maybe the Khahl 
learned of our map. It would not be so hard for them. They take so many of our people 
as prisoner or slave. Someone must have told them, and they must have realized the 
Elf could read the map. They mean for him to read it, but not so he can lead Temu to 
the lair―so he can lead Targutai to it.” 
Juchin frowned thoughtfully, propping his hand against the pommel of his 
scimitar.  
“He moves like the hoyin’irgen, Juchin,” Toghrul said, leaning toward the older 
noyan and speaking in a low voice. “I have seen him myself, as though he was raised 
among us, or the Khahl―swift and silent in the trees, his feet sure along the branches. 
No Torachan can move like that.” 
“He is not a Torachan,” Juchin said. “Aigiarn said he is from the west, from―” 
“He is no more from the west than I am,” Toghrul said. “He is a slave with 
deformed ears brought from the southern empire to serve the Khahl. This land he 
claims he comes from, ‘Tiralainn’ is nothing but fable―baga’han lore. Who can prove it 
exists? No one. The Khahl knew this―and they knew we would believe it if it seemed 
good fortune that we should come upon him. Aigiarn believes it. She is desperate to.” 
He placed his hand against Juchin’s shoulder, leaning closer to him. “He is 
leading us into a trap,” he said. “I know it. All of this has been too perfect, too easy. How 

do we know he truly defeated Mongoljin? This great battle supposedly took place in the 
jabsar, with only Temu―a frightened boy―as a witness. What if it was a ruse? What if 
the Elf only seemed to fight Mongoljin, to defeat her, because they are allies against 
us?” 
“Why would the Khahl do all of this?” Juchin asked. “If they mean to see Targutai 
claim the dragons, why do they not just try and kill Temu? Why send a spy among 
us―and why under such an unfamiliar guise?” 
“Because they need Temu,” Toghrul said. “The Elf could read the map for them, 
the inscriptions of the lair’s threshold, but only Temu can call them forth. Targutai 
cannot. I think the Khahl mean to see us through to the lair, to let Temu fulfill his 
destiny, and then the Elf will betray him―betray all of us, Juchin.” 
He tightened his fingers against Juchin’s shoulder. “He is dangerous. He has 
cast some sort of spell upon Aigiarn and Yeb, I know he has. Why else would they trust 
him without question?” 
“Why would he cast buyu upon them and leave the rest of us?” Juchin asked, 
raising his brow. “Why would he not put this same spell on you, Toghrul?” 
“He does not need me to believe him. He only needs Aigiarn and Yeb. They hold 
the power among our people―they are the only ones who need to be convinced to see 
us spurred into action. The Khahl know it, Juchin, and the Elf does, too.” 
“Can you prove this?” Juchin asked. 
Toghrul looked down at his gutal. “No.” He glanced at Juchin, meeting his gaze. 
“But I know it is true. I spoke with Aigiarn this morning about my concerns, and she 
thinks I am being ridiculous. She does not believe me.” 

Juchin raised his brow at Toghrul in surprise. “She has never doubted you 
before.” 
“Not once,” Toghrul agreed. “In all of the years I have known her. The Elf has 
affected her somehow. He has befriended Temu and he has charmed Aigiarn, playing 
on the loneliness she still harbors for Yesugei. He has clouded her heart with his buyu.” 
He turned his head, his brows furrowed as he glared at the knarr behind him. He closed 
his hands into fists. “He cannot be trusted. Even if we could convince Aigiarn, we cannot 
send him away. He has seen the map. He knows where it leads. The Khahl are 
following us, from what you have said, and they would find him. He would lead them 
after us, straight into the mountains.” 
Toghrul smacked the side of his fist against the bulwark. “How I would like to tuck 
my blade beneath his chin and jerk it swiftly, open his throat and be rid of him. We have 
enough of the map translated, and Yeb could decipher his notes. We do not need him.” 
“If you are wrong, Toghrul, killing him would be killing us all,” Juchin told him 
quietly. “If he is the golden falcon Ag’iamon promised, we do need him. No matter what 
you say, the map is not fully translated. There will be no finding the lair without 
it―without him, and no hope or future for the Oirat.” 
Toghrul frowned. “You do not believe me, either.” 
“You are a man of honor, Toghrul, and I believe you are sincere in your 
concerns,” Juchin said. “You are speaking out of love for Temu, and the need to protect 
him. I will not arbitrarily dismiss your suspicions. However, I cannot rashly accept them 
as my own just yet. I am new to the Elf, and his circumstances, his story.”  

He clapped his hand against Toghrul’s shoulder. “I will watch him―I promise you 
this. You have traveled in his company for two weeks now, and no great harm has come 
of it―not even last night. No more can come in two days. Give me this. Let me consider 
it. I will speak with Aigiarn in the meantime, once we have reached the mouth of the 
Toga. I will see if I can persuade her to let Temu ride with us. At least he would be away 
from the Elf, safe with us for the time being.” 
“I am not wrong about this, Juchin,” Toghrul said. 
“Give me time, Toghrul,” Juchin replied. “Give me two days. Let me see for 
myself.” 
*** 
Rhyden sat amidship, beneath the towering mast of the knarr. A small wooden 
box rested in front of him; he had balanced the sheathed blade of his dagger, the knife 
Aigiarn had given to him across a spread of parchment pages to keep them from 
blowing away while he worked on the map. It was all he could think to do, a way to keep 
his mind quiet and distracted. He was worried about Trejaeran, and anxious now that 
they were underway for the Toda River.  
He held the map in one hand. He set aside his small writing quill with the other 
and forked his fingers through his hair. He had no sense of Mongoljin within his mind, 
none of the pervasive uneasiness that had heralded her appearance the night before. 
He had no sense of Trejaeran, either, however, and this troubled him. He had tried to 
concentrate and open his mind to his friend, but had nothing within him. Yeb had told 
him Trejaeran’s spirit needed to rest; he had been weakened already from his 
encounter with the Khahl shamans, and rescuing Yeb from the qarang’qui had stripped 

what precious little strength had remained in him. Yeb had told him not to worry, that 
Ogotai was with Trejaeran, and Rhyden did his best to find some comfort in this. 
He had experienced a strange sensation as he had extended his sight. For a 
fleeting, startling moment, he had thought he felt Aedhir’s presence, heard Aedhir’s 
voice crying out. 
Pryce―please, get to the boat―get out of there! They are taking us to the 
beach. Mother Above―get out of there! They are taking us to the beach! 
Rhyden’s breath had stilled, his eyes growing wide as he had heard this in his 
mind. He had not given much thought to Aedhir over the last week or so, convinced that 
his friend had most likely sailed from Capua to Cneas to send word at once to Tiralainn 
about Rhyden’s disappearance. Aedhir’s voice had sounded so frantic―and so close 
by, as though he was somewhere near―that Rhyden had actually turned his face 
toward the open water, looking for the a’Maorga. 
Aedhir? he had thought. Aedhir, where are you? 
Temu had been sitting with him at the time. When Rhyden had heard Aedhir cry 
out, when he had looked out upon the water, his expression stricken, Temu had noticed 
right away. 
“What is it, Rhyden?” he had asked softly, his eyes widening with trepidation.  
Aedhir, can you hear me? Rhyden had thought.  
“Rhyden?” Temu had placed his hand against Rhyden’s sleeve, drawing his 
gaze. At the bright and apparent fear in the boy’s face, Rhyden’s expression had 
softened. 

“It…it is nothing, Temu,” he had said. He had received no reply from Aedhir, but 
had not expected any. He had stopped trying to call to Aedhir with his mind after about 
two days with the Oirat. Every time he tried to open his mind and reach Aedhir, it had 
felt like he smacked headlong into a stone wall. At first, he had thought it was Yeb 
deliberately stifling him, keeping him from Aedhir. Though he knew this was untrue now, 
he still met with this same impenetrable resistance as he mentally reached out from the 
knarr for his friend, and it puzzled him. 
Rhyden had shaken his head and smiled at Temu. “It is nothing,” he said again. 
“My imagination playing tricks on me, that is all.” 
Temu had left him a short while ago for the helm. One of the Kelet named Jelmei 
had offered to let him man the rudder, and Temu had been excited and pleased for the 
chance. Rhyden had smiled as he watched the boy hurry toward the stern.  
The solace he had hoped to find in his translations did not come. Everything he 
deciphered from Chegney into the common tongue needed a second translation, from 
riddles into landmarks, names and features familiar only in Ulusian terms. Yeb had been 
helping him all along with this, but the shaman seemed distracted now that the boats 
were out on the bay again. He sat across from Rhyden, his gaze distant, as though he 
was in a trance. Rhyden had tried to speak to him a time or two, but given up when his 
attempts elicited no reply.  
With Yeb’s help, Rhyden had thus far managed to plot the first leg of their course 
for them, following the Toda to Koke Lake, and from here, traveling the length of the 
Urlug River, through the imposing Deguu Masiff ravine to the Harw River. The Harw 
drained into the Modun, and they meant to follow this westward.  

From there, he did not know. The Modun forked into four separate rivers that 
branched out in broad, opposing directions. It was as far as Rhyden had been able to 
get, although he had not given up in his efforts. The text instructions were filled with 
distracting, cryptic comments and strange references. Some seemed innocuous, nearly 
mundane ramblings. Others were far more ominous. 
Geyre’eeachlagh, one such line had read, meaning sharp-toothed. Sleih’eeagh, 
said another. Man-eating. At first, Rhyden had dismissed these repeated, peculiar 
references, but the more he read through them, the more disconcerted he became. 
Feill’eeagh, or flesh-eating. Jioogh son fuill, meaning thirsty for blood. 
He had just finished translating several intricate lines of characters, work he had 
started several days before. Eiyr ny inney’roie eear boayl ny clash’trome reuyrey dy 
dowin eddyr ny brollagha ny ben jee’aile kyrloghe, the writing said. Follow the running 
daughter where the hollow gorge delves deep between the breasts of the sleeping fire 
goddess. 
Unlike the other phrases that left him either bewildered or disturbed, this actually 
made a sort of sense to Rhyden. Yeb had drawn a duplicate of the map for him, 
carefully labeling all of the rivers and landforms he was able to identify, and translating 
the Ulusian names for these into common words that Rhyden could recognize. He 
leaned toward this map now, remembering the story Temu had told him the day before, 
as they had sailed into Tolui Bay and stood together, admiring the Khar mountains in 
the distance. 
A long time ago, people called these the Yekegal, or great fire mountains. 
Golomto, the fire Tenger lives there. She fell asleep…she has been asleep ever since. 

So long that Erdene Nur lake formed above her eyelid, and the great mountains Ondur 
Dobu and Mongke grew over her breasts. 
He could see Ondur Dobu and Mongke on the map Yeb had drawn. They were 
the highest peaks in the Khar range. They were divided from one another by a deep, 
wide river gorge called the Qotoyor Berke, a cleft carved by the Okin River. The Okin 
River was fed by the Modun, and the Ulusian word okin meant daughter. 
Follow the running daughter where the hollow gorge delves deep between the 
breasts of the sleeping fire goddess. 
Rhyden lifted his quill in hand and jotted down his second translation: Follow the 
Qotoyor Berke gorge, the Okin River between Ondur Dobu and Mongke. 
He smiled as he looked down at the note. Three days worth of bloody effort for 
that, he thought, shaking his head. At least there is not one reference to ‘blood-sucking,’ 
‘bone-gnashing’ or ‘skull-splintering.’ 
“You look pleased. Are you finished already?” Aigiarn asked, smiling as she sat 
beside him on the bench. 
He turned to her, Trejaeran’s words resounding in his mind again. 
She might hold your heart, if you would let her. 
“One more line, maybe,” he told her with a laugh. “But it is one that makes sense 
to me for a change. I think I am getting better at this.” 
Her smile widened, and his breath nearly stilled. She had taken off her hat, and 
her hair had come loose of her plait in the wind. Dark, wayward strands draped and 
fluttered across her brow, the rounded curves of her cheeks, and she reached up, trying 

to tuck them behind her small ears with her fingertips. Mother Above, you are beautiful, 
he thought.  
“Can I help at all?” she asked, looking at him again. 
“You could keep me company,” he said, and Aigiarn smiled. 
“Alright.” 
She looked down at the spread of parchments before him, the notes he had been 
writing, the instructions he had been transcribing. A silence settled between them, one 
she seemed comfortable enough with, but which left him slightly uncertain. After a 
long―and for Rhyden, awkward―moment, he made a quiet, coughing sound, drawing 
her gaze. 
“Your friends seem nice,” he said. He looked out across the bow, toward the 
distant stern of the knarr in front of them. “The Uru’ut, I mean. Juchin and his people.” 
“Juchin and his tribe have been our allies for a long time,” Aigiarn said, nodding. 
“He is likely one of the bravest men I have ever known…and one of the most selfless.” 
She followed his gaze to the boat carrying Juchin and Toghrul. “The Khahl attacked the 
Uru’ut just as you and Yeb saw―just like Temu’s visions showed him. Juchin told us 
they could hear the screams from a distance out on the water.” 
Rhyden blinked at her, startled and stricken. “He did not go back and help them?” 
Aigiarn shook her head. “There was nothing that could be done except put 
distance between them at the aysil, and prevent the Khahl from following them.” Despite 
her words, there was a sudden and profound sorrow in her face, as though the 
realization of this loss, the deaths of the Uru’ut pained her deeply. 

Rhyden reached for her hand, closing his fingers against hers. “I am sorry, 
Aigiarn.” 
She shook her head, her brows drawing slightly. “We have always known that 
there would be sacrifices asked of us, all of us among the Oirat to see this through. My 
people believe in rebirth, and that the pains we suffer and endure in this lifetime are 
rewarded tenfold in the next. Juchin knew if he did not succeed…if he did not reach 
us…if we did not deliver Temu to the lair, that there would be no such reward for those 
we have lost.” She looked down at the floor of the boat, her eyes forlorn. It was as if she 
offered words to convince herself as much as Rhyden.  
“The dragons mean that much to you?” he asked her. “To your people?” 
“It is not just that,” Aigiarn said. “As much as Ag’iamon’s promise to return, it is 
his promise that Temu would restore our empire that gives Juchin…gives us all hope.” 
She glanced at Rhyden. “There was a time once when all of this land was ours,” she 
said, stretching her hand toward the shore of Lydia. “As far as the eye could see, it was 
Ulusian. Galjin, Ebesun, Ordos, Bagahan, Lydia…all of it and more belonged to my 
people.” She looked momentarily wistful. “I cannot imagine what that must have been 
like, to roam as far as your legs could bear you, for days and days―weeks and months, 
Rhyden, and always be home. Ag’iamon promised that would belong to us again―that 
it would belong to Temu.” 
He nodded wordlessly, averting his gaze toward her hand, her fingers draped 
between his own. 
“You think we are mad to want that,” she said. 

“No.” Rhyden realized for the first time as Aigiarn told him of the Uru’ut 
massacre, and of Juchin’s seeming abandonment of his people to this horrific fate just 
how determined the Oirat were to see Temu fulfill his destiny, and just how special and 
extraordinary Temu was to them. Temu was still so young; he did not realize his import 
among his people, his influence upon them, but Aigiarn did, and Rhyden could sense it 
through her. 
He is a messiah to them, he thought. He is meant to do more than free the 
dragons―he is meant to free the Oirat, as well. 
Temu might have been a messiah to his people, but to Aigiarn, he was still her 
son. He could sense this within her plainly. He could feel her uncertainty, the troubles 
that this brought to her heart. She understood what destiny meant for Temu, and her 
people, but she struggled to reconcile it within her heart. She was brokenhearted to 
know of the Uru’ut murders. He could sense it within her, see it in her face. She did not 
want harm to come to Temu, and she could not bear to think that harm had come to her 
people because of Temu, or her. 
“Juchin would sacrifice himself, and gladly,” she said. “But I am not Juchin. Like I 
told you last night, I would give it all up―the dragons, the promise of the empire―all of 
it. I would not risk my son…or anyone else dear to me.” 
I would not risk you, Rhyden, she thought, brushing her thumb against the backs 
of his fingers. She did not realize he could hear her thoughts, and the candor of her 
mind, the sudden warmth of tender emotion he could sense from her, moved him 
beyond measure. 

Her gaze was drawn to a necklace draped about his neck. He had been wearing 
it tucked beneath the overlapping collars of his khurim and del, but had drawn it out as 
he worked on the map, toying absently with the small hide pouch tethered to the strap of 
sinew with his fingertips. 
“This is Temu’s,” she said, touching the pouch. 
“Yes,” he said. “I found it in the woods before we left this morning. I tried to give it 
to him, but he told me he did not want it.” 
“It is his ongon,” she said quietly, her expression troubled. “It is a talisman. It is 
supposed to keep his utha suld near to him, Yesugei’s spirit.” 
“I know,” he said, nodding. He had discovered the little ongon among the fallen 
pine needles and snow as they had been preparing to leave. He had also found the toli 
mirror Yeb had given to Temu nearby, and he had brought them both to Temu. Toghrul 
had sent word to the campsite about Juchin’s arrival, and Aigiarn, Yeb and the other 
Oirat had already left, making their way toward the beach, leaving Rhyden and Temu 
alone for a moment. 
The boy had taken the toli, drawing it about his neck and hooking his fingers 
about the amulet. He had glanced at the ongon in Rhyden’s hand, and his face had 
grown momentarily forlorn. “I…I do not want that,” he had said, his brows pinching 
together. 
Rhyden had blinked at him in surprise. “But it is yours, Temu,” he said. “It is your 
ongon. I found it in the underbrush there―” 
“She took it from me,” Temu had interrupted, frowning. “She waved her hand and 
it flew away from my neck. I do not want it anymore.” 

“Temu, this is part of your father,” Rhyden had said quietly. He had cradled the 
boy’s hand against his own and pressed the ongon into the basin of Temu’s upturned 
palm. “He is your utha suld, like Trejaeran is for me. This keeps his spirit near to you.” 
“He is not like Trejaeran,” Temu had snapped angrily, drawing away from 
Rhyden and stumbling backwards. “Trejaeran protects you. He loves you and keeps 
you safe. My father does not protect me. He does not love me and he did not come for 
me.” 
“Temu,” Rhyden had said, stricken, reaching for him. “That is not true. He―” 
“It is true!” Temu had cried, recoiling again. He had cocked his arm back and 
hurled the ongon, sending it flying across the campsite as tears spilled down his 
cheeks. “I know it is true! He left me there! He did not come for me in the jabsar―not 
even when I called for him, begged him to help me! He left me there all alone and 
Mongoljin would have sent me to the qarang-qui, too, like she did Yeb, if you…if you 
had not…” He had blinked at Rhyden, the fury draining from his face, leaving only 
despair and bewilderment. “He did not come for me,” Temu had whispered, trembling.  
“Temu…” Rhyden had begun. 
Temu had fallen against him, hugging him fiercely. His arms closed about 
Rhyden’s midriff and he tucked his cheek against Rhyden’s breast. “I…I wish you were 
my father, Rhyden!” 
Startled, Rhyden had stroked his hand against Temu’s braid, and held him 
gently. “Oh, Temu…” 
“Temu told you he did not want it?” Aigiarn asked Rhyden, her face stricken. 

“I think he is angry with Yesugei,” Rhyden said quietly. “He does not understand. 
He told me when Mongoljin attacked him in the jabsar, he thought his father would 
protect him. He called for him, but he did not come.” She looked dismayed as he spoke, 
and he closed his hand gently against hers. “I do not think he could come, Aigiarn. Yeb 
told me Mongoljin was strong enough to drive Ogotai outside of the jaqa and keep him 
away. I am sure Yesugei’s spirit was also forced away, but Temu…he does not 
understand.” 
Aigiarn nodded, her expression still distraught. “Parents are not supposed to fail 
you,” she said. “Or disappoint you.” 
“Sometimes they do anyway,” Rhyden said gently. He thought of his own 
parents, particularly his father. Eisos had never intended to hurt or betray Rhyden; he 
had done what he thought was best by breaking his promise to his son and not 
destroying the Book of Shadows. Eisos had certainly never anticipated how crestfallen 
and anguished Rhyden would be to learn of his deception, or the bitterness it would 
breed toward him within Rhyden’s heart. “Even when they do not mean to.” 
He realized that she might be upset if he kept the ongon, and he drew his hand 
away from hers, ducking his head. “I am sorry,” he said. He pulled the loop of sinew 
from around his neck. “I thought I would hold it until he is ready…until he wants it back. 
But it is not mine to keep.”  
He offered it to her, and she cradled the ongon between her palms, staring down 
at it. “He wants so badly to know Yesugei,” she whispered. “To feel some connection to 
him. Something…anything. I try to tell him about his father, but it…” 
But it hurts me so badly, she thought. 

“…it is hard,” she said aloud. She sighed unhappily and glanced at Rhyden. 
“How do you tell someone about a man they never knew? How can I…how can I ever 
hope to make Temu understand what kind of person Yesugei was? The contents of his 
mind…the caliber of his heart? How can I find the words to describe the sound of his 
laughter…the way it…it rumbled beneath his chest like distant thunder, or they way his 
eyes would glow, his face would fill with joy whenever he would smile…?” 
Her voice faded and she looked down at the ongon again, blinking against tears. 
“How can I tell him about the dreams we shared? The conversations…the way his 
breath felt against my face when he would whisper to me in the dark of our ger at night, 
when I was heavy with Temu. He was so happy, so excited. It did not matter to Yesugei 
that Temu was the Negh. He was his son before anything―before everything.”  
She looked at Rhyden, grief-stricken and helpless. “He loved Temu. He wanted 
Temu so badly. He was so eager to be a father. The joy on his face while I carried 
Temu…and those three days after he was born…I had never seen it within Yesugei 
before. I want Temu to know that. I want to tell him that, make him understand.” 
She pressed her fingertips against her lips. “This is all my fault,” she said softly, 
stricken. 
“Aigiarn, no,” Rhyden said. “No, it is not.” 
“On the night Yesugei died, I had gotten up from our pallet,” she said. “We had 
our own ger at the Naiman aysil, and Temu…he was only three days old. He was 
crying, ready to nurse and I…it was very late, and I did not want his cries to wake 
Yesugei.” She looked at Rhyden. “I took Temu outside of the ger. We kept a communal 
fire in the center of the aysil and I went there. Yeb found me. Something troubled him. 

He told me ‘there is a wolf among us.’ He could see wolves within his mind, but did not 
know what the images meant. We went back together to my ger, and that…that was 
when we found Yesugei. 
“A Minghan assassin had crept into the tent,” she whispered. “He ran his knife 
through Yesugei’s breast. Yesugei did not even rouse. He did not live long enough to 
scream. The furs and blankets were soaked with his blood. I could smell it…even before 
I saw it, before I realized, I could smell it, and I…I think I must have understood. I must 
have known.” 
Rhyden touched her hand again, and her fingers coiled about his tightly, 
clutching at him. Her breath fluttered from her throat. “His killer was still in the ger. Our 
fire had faded into embers, and he was hiding in the shadows. He lunged at me with his 
scimitar―he meant to kill Temu. If it had not been for Yeb…I was in such shock, I…I 
could not even breathe, and Yeb grappled with him, snapped his neck between his 
hands. I can still remember the sound of it…moist and…and crunching, and the way his 
breath, his voice sort of gargled in his throat. 
“Yeb grabbed me. He dragged me to the north side of the ger and took Yesugei’s 
map, his box with the wooden inscription and he dragged me outside with him. I could 
hear something like thunder…the paws or bergelmirs against the ground as the Khahl 
Minghan came upon us. Yeb made me run with him into the woods, and as we fled, I…I 
could hear them…my people…my friends…screaming from the aysil. We did not stop, 
not the night through, not until dawn. I do not remember much of it.” Aigiarn blinked, 
stricken. “All I kept thinking was my Yesugei was gone.” 
“Aigiarn…” Rhyden said softly, pained for her. 

“I did not even get to tell him good-bye,” she whispered, and she closed her 
eyes. Her brows furrowed and she pressed her lips together for a long moment in 
stubborn defiance of her tears. “It is not fair.” 
“I know.” He could feel her inside of him, her mind’s quiet whispers within his, 
unabated. He knew he should rein his sight in, and keep from her mind, but he could not 
help himself. He could feel her sorrow, and it was familiar to him…because it was his 
own. 
“You told me last night that you felt responsible for Trejaeran’s death,” she said 
to him. “That maybe you could have stopped it somehow, done something different, 
prevented it.” She met his gaze. “I have always felt that way, too. I wanted to tell you 
that last night, but I…it is hard for me. For nine years, I have thought if I had only stayed 
in the ger…if I had nursed Temu by our own fire instead of taking him outside, Yesugei 
might have woken up. I might have heard the Minghan slip inside, or seen him…cried 
out, warned Yesugei.” She pressed her fingertips against her brow. “So many thing I 
might have done that might have made a difference.” 
Rhyden thought about what Trejaeran had told him. You could not have stopped 
me. You could not have prevented what happened, no matter how fast you had run, no 
matter what words you might have found to offer had you reached me in time. 
“Aigiarn,” he said softly, squeezing her hand gently to draw her gaze. “It was not 
your fault.” 
She blinked at him, new tears glistening in her eyes. He brushed the cuff of his 
fingers against her cheek. “It was not your fault,” he said again. 

“I have tried so hard to protect Temu,” she said. “All of these years, I…I have 
fought and struggled to keep him safe. I did not keep Yesugei safe, but I have tried for 
my son, with all that I have, all that is within me. And last night, I failed him.” 
“No,” Rhyden said, shaking his head. 
“I failed him,” Aigiarn said again. “He…the Tengri only knows what would have 
happened to him, what Mongoljin would have done if you…if you had not…” 
“Aigiarn, no,” he said. 
“If he had died, it would have all been for nothing,” she whispered. “Yesugei’s 
death…all of these years…all of this suffering…the Uru’ut at the aysil…” Her voice 
faltered, and she lowered her head. “All because I could not protect him.” 
“You could not have known,” he said. “No one could have.” She shook her head, 
and he reached for her, tucking his fingertips beneath her chin, drawing her gaze. “It is 
not your fault,” he told her softly.  
She looked at him, her dark eyes still filled with tears that she refused to let fall. 
She reached for him, pressing her palm against his face. “I am so grateful for you, 
Rhyden,” she said, her mouth unfolding in a gentle smile. 
For the first time in at least a decade, days had gone by, and he had not thought 
of Qynh. He had suffered no more dreams of her since the last at the palace, on the day 
Trejaeran had dispatched the Khahl’s shaman spirits. For the first time in years, the 
absence of her within his mind and heart did not fill his with poignant sorrow and 
longing, and he looked at Aigiarn, realizing that more than anyone or anything, she was 
the reason why. I am so grateful for you, too, Aigiarn, he thought. 
“You tattoo is fading,” she told him softly. 

He blinked at her in surprise. “What?” 
She nodded, brushing her thumb against the arch of his cheek. “I noticed it a few 
days ago. I thought I was imagining things, but no, it is fading. It is much lighter now 
than when we first met.” 
“It must be my healing,” he said. “I had not thought of that, but now that you 
mention it, I have never seen an Elf with a tattoo before. Maybe we cannot keep them 
very long.” 
“Another week, and it might be gone,” she said, leaning toward him to peer 
closely at his catasta mark. Her hair brushed against his face, and Rhyden closed his 
eyes, drawing in the soft fragrance of wood smoke and wind from the wayward strands 
against his nose. She turned to look at him, close enough to his face to still his breath. 
“You will be free without it…no longer mine.” Aigiarn smiled as she said this, but 
her eyes were forlorn. 
Rhyden smiled, the delicate scent of her hair still lingering with him. I do not know 
about that. 

Chapter Five 
 
There were worse fates a man could face than to be killed by the Enghan’s 
arrows, Jobin Dunster had come to realize, and far worse things that lay hidden among 
the mountainsides and pine forests of the northern Torachan empire than the wild men 
of Sube. 
Deaglan Arles had been killed during the second volley of arrows fired by the 
Enghan archers from the shore. Jobin had known Deag for almost ten years; the two 
had been drinking companions, if not friends. Deag had been hunkered down at the 
helm of the longboat, his legs squatted beneath him, the rudder clutched between his 
fists as he had screamed orders to the panicked crew. 
“Row! Put your backs into it, you bastard rots and row, damn you!” he had 
shrieked. A thick length of ash had speared through the side of Deag’s neck, knocking 
him off of his feet and sending him sprawling against the starboard bulwark. Jobin had 
turned, crouched on his knees before his rowing bench as the arrows hissed overhead. 
He had stared at Deag, wide-eyed with shock and horror, watching a sudden, violent 
torrent of blood gush from the man’s pierced jugular, soaking the front of his coat. 
“Well, damn,” Deag had said, and then he had died. No profound final thoughts 
or prolific last words for old Deag. He had died pretty much as he had lived―profane 
and to the point. He had met Jobin’s eyes, and blood had spurted from between his lips. 
He had said this last, his brows drawn as though his demise aggravated him more than 
anything else, and then he had slumped facedown upon the floor. 

His loss was felt immediately among the crew. Most were not grief-stricken, per 
se; Deag had not been the most affable or likeable of characters, but he had been the 
boatswain’s mate, the most capable and experienced among them outside of the senior 
officers. Without Deag to bark orders at them, none of the others seemed to know what 
to do. They were frantic―oars slapped the water with no concerted rhythm; they 
screamed and yelled at one another as more arrows flew. 
The current of the Qoyina channel had caught them, drawing them east. The 
Enghan had followed them, shooting more arrows. Tuathal Millichamp had caught one 
in the side of his head. He had pitched sideways into Prew Brumford, who had promptly 
begun to shriek and thrash against Tuathal’s leaden, lifeless weight like a hysterical 
woman faced with a spider. He had stood up, flapping his hands, turning loose of his 
oar and dancing as Tuathal’s corpse slumped against his legs, and then an arrow had 
slammed into Prew’s temple with enough force to send him pitching sideways, tumbling 
over the side of the boat and into the water. 
This left Jobin alone with Phelim Robilard and Frey Goldron to man the oars, a 
relative impossibility. The longboat had been designed to maneuver with a crew of no 
less than six men. Three were not enough. Three was pathetically lacking. The longboat 
had drifted helplessly in the current while its trio of occupants flattened themselves in 
terror against the deck. No one had thought to serve as a lookout, and when the current 
dragged them too near to a cragged shoal about twenty feet off of the coast of the 
Ulusian Nuqut peninsula, the longboat lurched beneath them. Jobin had heard a low, 
grinding, terrifying sound as the submerged rocks ripped into the wooden hull, rending 
into the keel, splintering the planks. 

“Mother Above!” Phelim had screamed. They had floundered, caught like hares 
in a pen on the shoals. The three of them had abandoned any courtesy of mutual 
counsel, and had reacted instinctively, leaping over the side of the boat and into the 
shallow, frigid water. They had paddled and scrambled for shore, gasping for breath. 
They had scurried together, shuddering and sodden along the steep, muddy beach and 
into the snow-draped, frost-encrusted pine forests beyond.  
They had run without thinking about where they were going. They had been able 
to hear the sounds of the Enghan’s voices, calling out sharply to one another in a 
peculiar, unfamiliar language from the direction of the beach as they drew their longboat 
within wary distance of the shoals. Jobin did not know if they had come ashore to chase 
them or not; he had been too busy putting distance between his body and the bay to 
notice such minor details. He imagined in retrospect that they had not. The rocks that 
had damaged the a’Maorga’s longboat would have kept them from running aground, 
and he doubted the Enghan would wade ashore through the icy water just to hunt down 
and kill three men the elements would likely take care of in their stead by nightfall. 
They had no food, no change of clothes and no water. They were soaking wet 
and shivering, and were hopelessly, helplessly lost in the woods. Jobin did not realize 
that Phelim had been wounded until they stopped to whoop for breath nearly twenty 
minutes into their frantic flight. As they had stood together beneath the venerable, 
towering pines, sequoias and firs, he had seen a dark stain on the back of Phelim’s wet 
coat. He had been shot with an arrow, but managed to snap the long shaft off at the tip, 
leaving the head still buried midway along his back. Phelim had limped about, ashen 
from blood loss, his eyes wide and haunted with shock. He seemed to be incapable of 

saying anything but “Mother Above,” and he said this over and over again as he shuffled 
dazedly through the snow.  
“Mother Above,” Phelim whimpered. A thin trail of blood leaked from his mouth, 
dribbling down his chin. The arrow had apparently skewered a lung, and his breath 
whistled moistly, laboriously from his chest. “Mother Above…Mother Above…” 
“What are we going to do?” Frey asked. “Do you think they followed us, Jobin? 
Do you, Phelim? Do you hear them? Do you? What are we going to do?” 
Frey’s eyes darted all about him, as anxious and panic-stricken as a squirrel 
chased by a hunting pack. Of all of the bloody damn louts aboard the longboat, it figured 
Jobin would be stuck with Frey Goldron―always complaining, ever afraid of his own 
bloody damn shadow and fairly well witless besides. He would have liked to have 
counted Phelim among their numbers, but to his casual observance, old Phelim was 
fading fast. Phelim coughed, moaning as the effort wracked his form, and when he 
doubled over in pain, blood spattered from his lips. 
“Mother Above…” he whispered hoarsely, spitting. 
“Do you hear them?” Frey whined. “Do you? Do you think they followed us? Oh, 
Mother, they are going to kill us. They are going to―” 
“Shut your mouth, Frey,” Jobin snapped. “Just shut your bloody rot damn mouth! 
I do not know if they bloody followed us! How can you hope that we could hear anything 
above your rot damn blithering? Shut up!” 
He had hurried over to Phelim, wrapping his arm about the man. “Phelim, can 
you walk?” he asked. There was no point in asking “are you alright?” Only an idiot could 

not see that Phelim was a far cry from “alright.” Phelim was dying. Jobin knew it, and 
Phelim knew it, too. He blinked at Jobin, frightened and trembling. 
“Mother Above…” he whispered. 
“Can you walk?” Jobin asked again. Phelim might have been dying, but he was 
not dead yet, and Jobin did not want to leave him for the Enghan to find. Phelim nodded 
his head, muttering “Mother Above” several times in a row. “Come on,” Jobin said 
quietly, leading Phelim in tow as he started to move among the trees again. He did not 
extend this instruction to Frey; he held no qualms about abandoning the younger man to 
the Enghan. An arrow through his rot, whining, hollow skull would be a blessing and 
favor to the Bith, in Jobin’s opinion. 
“Where are we going to go?” Frey asked, following along. “Where are we going, 
Jobin? We do not even know where we are.” 
“We are in the empire, that is where we are, you rot,” Jobin said, glowering at 
him. “Where there is empire proper, sooner or later, there is bound to be imperial 
troops.” 
Hopefully more soon than later, he thought grimly to himself. It was freezing cold, 
and his clothes were soaking wet. He shuddered with chill; if they did not find shelter 
and some means of building a fire for warmth sometime soon, he knew they would 
freeze to death. 
Phelim stumbled, leaning heavily against him. He moaned softly, his footsteps 
dragging in the snow. “It is alright,” Jobin said to him. “Come on, Phelim, keep with me 
now. It will be alright.” 

“What do you think has happened to the others?” Frey asked. “Captain Fainne 
and…and Thierley, and Lieutenant Finamur?” 
“They are dead,” Jobin said, frowning. “Shut up and walk.” 
“They…killed them?” Frey asked, breathless with new horror. He turned and 
looked over his shoulder, as though he expected to be able to see the beach they had 
abandoned yet within view. “Hoah…Jobin, they…they killed the Captain? Do you really 
think so?” 
“What did you think became of them?” Jobin asked. “The bloody damn Enghan 
invited them to their country manor estate for biscuits and tea? What is the matter with 
you, Frey? Mother Above, you are a stupid damn rot. Shut up.” 
“They are going to kill us, too,” Frey moaned quietly. “Oh, I just know it. They are 
going to find us, and kill us, too.” 
There were worse fates a man could face than to be killed by the Enghan’s 
arrows, though Jobin had not realized this fully for at least another fifteen minutes. They 
tromped through the snow, weaving among the trees. Phelim still lived, but his gait had 
grown clumsy, his weight insistent against Jobin. His voice had faded into silence, his 
breath into moist, snuffling wheezes. As they moved along, Phelim left a bright, 
smeared blood trail in the snow behind him. Jobin knew if the Enghan had come 
ashore, they would be able to follow it; however, by this point, he had fairly well 
convinced himself that the Enghan had abandoned their pursuit. He had thought they 
were safe. It never occurred to him that the trail of Phelim’s waning life left in the snow 
might attract something other than Enghan…something much, much worse. 

Phelim’s legs failed him, buckling, and he leaned heavily against Jobin as he 
crumpled toward the ground. “Hoah, Phelim―” Jobin said, struggling to keep his arm 
about Phelim, to hoist him roughly up again. “We cannot stop now. Not yet. Just a bit 
further. Come on now.” 
He could see some cragged outcroppings of rocks ahead of them through the 
dense trees, the leading edge of granite foothills approaching the Khar mountains. If he 
looked just right among the trunks and branches, Jobin could see the Khar in the 
distance, ghostlike shadows etched against the backdrop of grey clouds. Jobin hauled 
Phelim upright but Phelim staggered, moaning weakly, his face twisted with pain, his 
mouth and chin smeared with blood. 
“Come on now,” Jobin said again. 
“Is he going to be alright?” Frey asked, staring wide-eyed and stricken at Phelim. 
“He is going to be fine,” Jobin said, grunting as he bore Phelim’s uncomfortable 
weight. “There are some rocks up ahead, some hills. Maybe there is a cave we can use 
for shelter.” 
“That is a good idea,” Frey said as they moved again. “We can rest for awhile, 
Phelim. You will feel better with some rest.” 
Jobin wanted to clamp his palms about Frey’s throat and throttle him until his 
eyes bulged loose of their sockets. He is a bloody damn idiot, he thought. Mother 
Creator, I am stuck in the middle of bloody rot nowhere with the biggest damn fool in the 
entire Bith. No, Phelim will not feel better with some rest, you moron! He is bloody 
dying, for the love of the Good Mother! 

He was so busy glaring at Frey, wondering how the young man could have made 
it through nearly two decades of life―five spent among the crew of the 
a’Maorga―without a lick of wits swimming in his skull, that he did not hear a soft, 
peculiar rustling sound from his right. He caught a sudden blur of moment out of the 
corner of his eye and he jerked his head just as something enormous and heavy 
slammed into him, throwing him off of his feet and sending him sprawling in the snow. 
“Phelim!” Frey screamed. 
Jobin sat up, confused and frightened. He had a half-second to realize that some 
sort of gigantic animal had leapt out from among the trees, and had tackled Phelim with 
enough force to plow Jobin nearly five feet away from where his boot tracks stopped in 
the snow. The animal had Phelim pinned beneath it, its broad forepaws planted on the 
injured man’s shoulders. Jobin had never seen anything like the beast; it was at least 
six feet long, stocky and thick. Its head was broad, its snout short, its mouth wide and 
lined with long, hooked teeth. It had wide-set eyes, and a pointed ears. Its fur was 
dappled auburn and black, with paler markings that formed a mask about its snout and 
eyes. Its tail was at least as big around as Jobin’s thigh; each of its paws larger than 
both of his hands put together.  
He remembered that the midshipman, Wenham Poel had described such an 
animal to the longboat crew; he and Tacita had stumbled upon one dead in the forest on 
one of the first days of their voyage. It was a narsana, Wen had told them.  
Tacita said they are one of the largest predators in the northern Morthir, Wen had 
said. This one was a rogue―a lone male, but she said usually they hunt in packs. 

The narsana stared at Jobin, its black lips wrinkling back from its teeth. It uttered 
a low, throaty cry and then it jerked its paw. It boasted an extra digit on each forelimb, a 
sort of thumb-like projection armed with a massive length of claw. This claw sliced 
through the soft flesh of Phelim’s throat before the man even had time to recover from 
its initial attack, much less hitch in a breath to scream. Blood spewed in a sudden, 
arcing geyser, spraying wide enough to spatter across Jobin’s cheek and temple. 
“Mother Above!” he shrieked, scrambling to his feet. 
More narsana appeared from the forest, slipping out of the shadows, stealing 
slowly toward them and Jobin froze, his breath tangling in his throat. 
She said usually they hunt in packs. 
“Mother Above…!” Jobin whimpered. He felt his bladder loosen in his terror; 
sudden heat spilled down the leg of his trousers.  
Phelim convulsed beneath the first beast, his hands flapping weakly against the 
ground, a strange, gurgling sound emanating from his opened throat, and the other 
narsana―six in all from Jobin’s horrified, stunned count―wiggled their noses, excited 
by the scent of his blood, fresh and strong in the air. They glowered at Jobin and Frey, 
who stumbled away from them, their eyes flown wide in terror. 
“Oh, Mother Above…Mother Above…!” Jobin said again. He whirled about and 
began to run. Phelim was not dead yet, but his chances of survival had just decreased 
abysmally, in Jobin’s opinion. He bolted, pumping his arms furiously, his feet pounding 
against the ground, his boot soles slipping and sliding for panicked purchase against the 
snow and underlying carpet of pine needles.  

He could hear the narsana chasing him. They crashed through the trees, shaking 
the ground beneath their strong legs and massive paws. He could hear young tree limbs 
snapping and slapping as they tore past them, and he gritted his teeth, running with all 
of his might, until his lungs seared with the desperate need for air, and his heart felt as 
though it would burst from beneath his sternum in its frantic, strained measure.  
“Jobin! Jobin! Please!” he heard Frey squealing as he raced along behind Jobin. 
Go bugger yourself, Frey, Jobin thought, grimly, not slowing down in the 
slightest. He saw movement on his left, and he danced sideways, staggering and 
screaming as a narsana pounced at him, swinging those broad, wicked front paws for 
his face. The narsana missed him, and Jobin realized it had meant to. It was trying to 
startle him, to slow his gait enough for the others to catch up to him, so that they might 
all take part in ripping his flesh from bone, a sort of camaraderie among carnivores. 
It is playing with me, he thought. Mother Above, they are all playing with me like 
a bunch of bloody cats with a rot damn field mouse!  
Jobin ducked around a tree, lost his footing along the edge of a slight 
embankment and spilled ass-over-elbows into a streambed below. He rolled, grunting in 
pain as his shoulder, hip and head took turns smacking against the frozen ground. He 
landed in icy water and sat up, sputtering and choking for breath. He wasted no time 
and scrambled to his feet, slipping on the rocky bottom of the stream, nearly falling 
again. Jobin ran, following the streambed, his breath huffing from his flushed cheeks, 
staining the air around his head in a milky, frosted haze. 

He heard a horrifying roar from behind him atop the embankment that made his 
flesh crawl, his buttocks reflexively clench. He heard Frey screaming―first in bright 
terror and then in unimaginable, gruesome agony. 
“Jobin!” he screeched. “Jobin―help me―please―!” His voice dissolved into 
mindless shrieks that only galvanized Jobin into running all the harder. 
After ten minutes of fleeing along the winding path of the stream, the sounds of 
the narsana following him faded into silence. Jobin let at least another ten pass by in his 
estimation without breaking his stride, until he felt some semblance of certainty that the 
animals had grown bored of chasing him and abandoned their hunt to return to the 
quarry they had already claimed―Frey and Phelim. 
Jobin collapsed in a heap along the muddy slope of the stream. He huddled, 
gasping for breath, shuddering from pate to heels. “Mother Above,” he whispered. His 
hands quaked uncontrollably as he drew them toward his face, shoving the heels 
against his brow. His chest ached; he felt as though he had strained ribs running so 
hard for so long. His legs were quivering and sore with exertion. He was exhausted and 
spent and leaned his shoulder against the embankment, whimpering softly as he tried to 
reclaim his breath. 
“Mother Above…” he said, closing his eyes. 
When a hand fell heavily against his shoulder, shoving him around, he screamed 
shrilly in new terror, his empty bladder loosening to no effect. His legs slipped out from 
beneath him and he landed on his rump, sprawled in the mud. He hitched in another 
breath to shriek, and it tangled, catching in his throat as he saw the wink of muted 

sunlight off of steel―a very long sword, with a broad, curved tip rested beneath his chin, 
the hooked point pressing firmly against his flesh. 
A man stood behind him. He had moved so quietly along the side of the stream, 
Jobin had been completely unaware of his approach. The man was tall and muscular, 
with broad shoulders and long legs. He wore some sort of heavy hide overcoat that fell 
below his knees, double-breasted across his torso, with thick sleeve cuffs made of pale 
fur. A scarlet, sleeveless wool vest with a hem that dropped to his groin was fastened 
over this, and heavy panels of leather, like armor, were strapped across his wide chest 
and shoulders. He wore a thick belt lined with numerous pouches and compartments; 
he carried a broad sheath for his sword, and another with a long, fat dagger fettered at 
his hips. He had black hair gathered in a braid down the length of his spine and wore a 
dome-shaped leather helmet with a spray of coarse hair, like a horse’s tail, that had 
been dyed a vibrant shade of red sprouting from the top. A fleece-lined panel of hide 
framed the rim of the helm, covering the man’s ears and neck against the wind. His 
boots were peculiar, broad and rounded through the soles, with toes that canted upward 
in unfamiliar, distinctive points. 
The man had a golden complexion, like dried parchment or old linen. He had 
rounded facial features; broad, high cheekbones, a small but full mouth. His nose was 
short in length and wide, nearly flat at the tip. His eyes were dark, and seemed to cant 
toward his temples, slanted beneath his brows. 
There were twenty other men of similar appearance and garb standing nearby, 
framing the banks of the stream. Their faces looked exactly as Aedhir had described the 

Oirat, and Jobin moaned softly, the contents of his bowels nearly joining those of his 
bladder against the underside of his breeches. 
Mother Above, they are Oirat! Jobin thought, and he whimpered as the man 
before him moved his sword, clamping one large, gloved hand about Jobin’s neck, 
hauling him abruptly, roughly to his feet. 
*** 
They bound his hands in front of him. They shoved a wad of rolled linen in his 
mouth and tied it roughly in place about his head with a length of coarse wool. They 
blindfolded him, wrapping a dark scrap of fabric over his eyes. They did all of this in 
absolute silence. Jobin pleaded with them, tried to reason with them. When his words 
dissolved into garbled, helpless sounds around the gag, he mewled at them, squirming 
against his bonds. They did not speak to each other or to him. They trussed and muffled 
him, and then they dragged him, stumbling and terrified, along the streambed, their 
heavy hands upon him, their blades still drawn, the steel tips pointing into his skin. 
They forced him astride some kind of animal, hauling him onto what felt like a 
broad saddle beneath his hips. At first he thought it was a horse, but then it occurred to 
Jobin that he had never heard a horse that sounded like the animal he sat upon; he had 
never ridden a horse that felt like this between his legs. The animal had snuffled at him 
as he approached, a low, moist huffing sound, like a dog sniffing an unfamiliar scent in 
the wind. It had growled and grumbled as they shoved him astride its saddle, making a 
low, chattering sound in its throat like an irritable weasel. He could smell it, a thick, 
musky odor coming from its fur. Its shoulders felt broader to him than a horse’s, its neck 
shorter and thicker as it drew its head up. One of the men mounted the beast behind 

Jobin, and when he uttered a sharp, clucking sound with his tongue, the animal had 
sprung forward, breaking into a sudden, brisk lope that was definitely not the gait of a 
horse. 
Jobin had yowled as the animal moved, alarmed by its pace, frightened of falling. 
He felt the Oirat man wrap his arm about his midriff, keeping him steady in the saddle 
as they moved. He could not hear the distinctive sounds of hooves cleaving the ground, 
only a heavy, rapid patter, like large paws smacking into the earth. The creature leaped, 
its spine elongating as it bounded up the slope of the streambed and dashed into the 
forest, moving with such astonishing grace and ease that Jobin was stunned. 
Hoah, Mother Above, I am in trouble here, he thought. 
Jobin did not know how long they rode. He had no definite concept of any 
passing time. It felt like forever to him. His legs, already weary and aching from his flight 
in the woods, screamed in fresh, new pain after being bounced and jostled in the saddle 
for so long. His buttocks felt numb, while his poor pair, knocked and rattled against 
some unyielding saddle crest before him throbbed unmercifully, making him feel 
nauseous and woozy. He could hear the sounds of pine limbs snapping past them; he 
could feel needles slapping sharply against his face. When the animal leaped and 
bounded along cragged outcroppings of rocks, climbing nimbly, Jobin could feel it. He 
listed precariously in the saddle, and would squeal in terror as the Oirat man clamped 
his arm firmly against his stomach. 
His mind faded eventually, and he slumped, semi-lucid. By the time the animal 
slowed its manic pace, long hours had passed, the morning waning into afternoon, but 
he did not realize it. He came to his senses slowly, feeling the animal trot to a restless 

halt beneath him. He felt the man loosen his grip, and abandon the saddle behind him; 
Jobin heard the soft rustle of the Oirat’s boots dropping against the ground, crunching in 
snow and pine needles. The man hooked his arm around Jobin’s waist and hauled him 
from the saddle. Jobin stumbled as his feet hit the ground. His exhausted, hurting legs 
refused to support his weight, and he crumpled, his knees buckling beneath him. 
Wherever the Oirat had meant to bring him, they had obviously arrived. As his 
captor seized him roughly by the scruff of his coat and jerked him to his feet, forcing him 
into staggering step with him, Jobin heard voices all around him. They spoke in an 
unfamiliar language, peculiar, high-pitched voices like the chattering of anxious women. 
The voices overlapped into an undecipherable din.  
There must be at least a hundred of them, from the sounds of it, he realized in 
dismay. Hoah, Sweet Mother, I am in trouble here. 
He tried desperately to remember what Captain Fainne had told them about the 
Oirat. All that kept popping into Jobin’s mind were Aedhir’s grim warnings, foreboding 
phrases he had used like ignorant barbarians and violent savages. He and the others 
had spent many long hours in murmured conversation aboard the longboat talking 
about the Oirat, and what they might have done to the Elf, Rhyden Fabhcun. 
“He is a pretty thing,” Duffin Nevyne had said quietly on one such occasion. “You 
have all seen him―a man could do worse than to wake up one morning and look like 
that Elf. There is why they took him―nothing else, no matter what the Captain says. 
They are buggering him for certain. He probably cannot even walk of his own accord 
anymore, as much as they have all had their turns with him.” 

Jobin moaned again, thinking of this. Oh, Mother Above…! his mind whimpered 
helplessly. 
On the other hand, Aedhir had been fairly insistent that the Oirat had intended no 
harm to the Elf. He had told the longboat crew that he believed the Oirat had found 
something in the mountains, an armory of weapons that had once belonged to the 
Dwarves; Aedhir had told them he thought they planned to use these weapons against 
the Torachan empire. The Captain had believed the weapons were sealed somehow by 
the Dwarves, a seal that could be opened when its inscriptions were read. That was 
why the Oirat had taken the Elf. He could read old Dwarf runes, speak the Dwarf-
speech. 
If that is true, Jobin thought with a sudden flutter of hope in his heart. Hoah, if 
that is true, then surely they would not have hurt the Elf. You do not hurt or bugger 
someone you hope will help you―you treat them nicely, kiss their bloody asses. 
His mind was suddenly awhirl. Would the Elf recognize him? Jobin did not 
particularly know or like Rhyden Fabhcun. Aboard the a’Maorga, he had been 
somewhat inclined to agree with Hodder’s point of view on things―that the Elf had 
bewitched them all somehow, cursed the ship and was up to no good. He had frankly 
been relieved to learn the Elf had been taken, sold at a catasta, and dismayed when 
Aedhir had announced his intentions to find him again―and ordered Jobin along for the 
ride.  
He had only met Rhyden in passing, and the closest he had been to the Elf had 
been on the night of his disappearance, when Jobin had been among the crew to row 
Aedhir and the Elf from the a’Maorga to Capua. Aedhir had introduced them in turn to 

the Elf and Jobin remembered Rhyden nodding his chin in cordial enough greeting, his 
eyes meeting Jobin’s briefly. The Elf had seemed distracted and unhappy that night, 
though and Jobin had supposed Hodder and his rumors and innuendos had weighed 
heavily on him, regardless of whether or not they were true.  
Would he remember me? he thought. He has to―he has to recognize me. If they 
are treating him as a friend―if he tells them I am known to him, also a friend―then they 
will not hurt me, either! 
He turned his head over his shoulder, mumbling around his gag. He wanted to 
tell the Oirat man that he knew the Elf, if they would only take him to the Elf, everything 
would be explained.  
He has to remember me, Jobin thought. They will kill me if he does not. I will 
throw my arms around him, kiss his face, call him my bloody damn best friend―as dear 
to me as kin― if it will help. He has to remember me! 
In reply, the Oirat drove his elbow rudely, firmly between Jobin’s shoulders, 
clearly inviting him to shut his mouth and keep his feet moving.  
The Oirat man caught him by the shoulders, drawing him to a rough, unexpected 
halt. Jobin stumbled, startled from his thoughts, his frantic schemes. The Oirat shoved 
against him, and Jobin fell onto his knees, yelping around his gag as he hit the ground 
hard.  
Please! he thought, quaking in terror. Oh, please, do not let them kill me! Do not 
let them do something horrible to me…do not let them―! 
He moaned, flinching as he felt the Oirat’s hands at the back of his head. He felt 
the blindfold loosen about his face, and then the Oirat drew it away. Jobin lowered his 

head, wincing and squinting as sunlight, though muted through grey clouds, stung his 
eyes. He blinked, his eyes smarting with tears, and he risked a bleary, hesitant gaze 
ahead of him. 
There was a boy standing before him, and Jobin blinked again in confusion. The 
kid was no more than twelve, if a day, small and scrawny. He wore an extraordinary 
costume, a long, intricately embroidered red robe, adorned with elaborate gold 
threading. Some sort of magnificent collar draped over his shoulders; a broad, stiff 
panel of hide adorned with silk and embroidering that framed his narrow form with wide, 
peaked corners. He wore panels of heavy, leather armor that had been trimmed in gold 
plates and a dome-shaped, gold helmet with a spray of bright red horse hair sprouting 
from the crest. He had long hair, shaved along his temples beneath the rim of his 
helmet and gathered in a long braid between his shoulders. He had a stern, imposing 
face, and even though he was a child, he stared at Jobin with such intensity and weight, 
that Jobin looked down at the ground, frightened anew. 
Captain Fainne thought there was a child with them, he remembered. Aedhir had 
found some sort of little ball a few days ago along one of the sites where the Oirat had 
brought their longboats ashore. At least, it had looked like a ball to Jobin’s eye, and 
Aedhir’s as well, apparently, because the Captain had been troubled by the discovery. 
They had seen plenty of little footprints among the Oirats’ in the mud and snow along 
their journey, like those made by a child’s boots. Looks like the Captain was right, Jobin 
thought.  
Aedhir had also thought a woman traveled with them. The Achaian whore he had 
bought in Capua had told Aedhir a woman had purchased the Elf at the catasta; Aedhir 

had believed the Oirat came ashore periodically to allow the woman to relieve herself. 
Jobin looked up again, and indeed, there was a woman standing near the boy. She was 
beautiful, her brows drawn above her dark eyes, her large, full mouth turned in a frown 
as she regarded Jobin. She was dressed like the men who had abducted Jobin, except 
instead of scarlet vestments, her own vest was yellow beneath her unadorned leather 
armor. Another Oirat man stood beside her, quite possibly the largest, burliest man 
Jobin had ever seen. The man looked like he would be able to snap Jobin’s neck 
between his forefinger and thumb with relative ease, and Jobin whimpered again, 
cringing. 
The man behind him unfettered Jobin’s gag. As the scrap of wool slipped away 
from his cheeks, the Oirat slapped him roughly against the back of the head, 
encouraging him to spit out the wad of fabric in his mouth. Jobin obliged, smacking his 
lips together. He tongue felt dry and swollen, and he breathed deeply through his 
mouth, grimacing at the stale, nasty flavor the gag left behind. 
“Who are you?” the boy demanded sharply, drawing Jobin’s startled, intimidated 
gaze. The kid bore one of those enormous, hooked swords against his hip, and he 
rested his gloved palm against the pommel, curling his fingertips lightly over the hilt. 
“Did Aulus Tertius send you? Did he think he could have me followed and I would not 
learn of it?” 
Jobin blinked at him. “I…” he said, his voice hoarse and cracked. He had no idea 
who in the bloody wide Bith Aulus Tertius was. “I…please, I…” 

“Speak!” the boy snapped, the furrow between his brows deepening with 
menace. He closed his hand about the hilt of his sword. “Answer me now, or I will open 
your throat myself!” 
Jobin did not doubt him for a moment. Kid or not, here was obviously someone of 
authority among the rot group of barbarians. If his clothes did not give it away in full, or 
the commanding tone in his voice, then the fact that everyone seemed to defer to him, 
to keep a respectful distance from him, their eyes politely averted, certainly did. Jobin 
was not an idiot, and he lowered his face to the ground, holding his bound hands aloft in 
supplication. 
“Please, my lord,” he said. His voice spewed out of him in a desperate, frantic 
rush. “Please, I do not know of whom you speak. My name is Jobin Dunster, my lord, 
and I am from Tiralainn. I am a friend of the Elf, my lord. Please, he knows me―he can 
tell you I speak the truth. Please, let me see the Elf―let him tell you who I am. I am his 
friend―he will know me.” 
The boy was quiet for a long moment, but Jobin could feel the weight of his gaze 
boring into the cap of his skull. “Elf?” he said. The way he said the word was peculiar; it 
was as though it was unfamiliar to his tongue, and he pronounced it very carefully. 
“Yes, my lord,” Jobin said, nodding his head. “I know Rhyden Fabhcun, the Elf. I 
am Jobin Dunster, my lord. I traveled with Lord Fabhcun from Tiralainn. I was part of a 
group searching for him, my lord, concerned for him. Please, he knows me. He will tell 
you who I am, that I am no threat to you, my lord.” 
“I do not need someone to tell me you are no threat to me, you simpering rot,” 
the boy said. Jobin heard the hiss of steel as he drew his sword, and he froze, his eyes 

flying wide, his voice and breath escaping him in a mewl as the curved tip of the blade 
caught him beneath the shelf of his chin.  
“Please…!” he whimpered. 
“He is from Tiralainn, my Kagan,” said the woman suddenly, softly. “Tiralainn.”  
Whatever seemed to intrigue her about Tiralainn piqued the boy’s interest as 
well. He shoved the edge of his sword firmly against Jobin’s throat, forcing another soft 
cry from him. “Tiralainn―across the sea?” he said. “To the west? A realm across the 
sea?” 
“Yes, my lord,” Jobin said, bewildered, quaking. 
“Fahv-coon,” said the enormous man. His voice sounded soprano, sweet and 
trilling, nearly like a woman’s, and completely out of place issuing from his massive 
form. Jobin blinked at him, confused.  
“Fabhcun. What does that mean?” the boy demanded of Jochin. “That word is 
unknown to me. What is fabhcun?” 
“Falcon,” the big man said. “Fahv-coon…sounds like falcon.” 
“Yes, that is what it means―falcon,” Jobin said, nodding his head. “That is his 
name. That is the Elf’s name. Rhyden Fabhcun. It means falcon.” 
Why in the duchan do they not know this already? he thought. They have 
traveled with him for weeks now, and they obviously speak the common tongue. How 
can the Oirat not know his bloody name? 
“A man-falcon,” the woman said, turning to look at the boy. “A man-falcon who is 
not a man at all, but something different, something more.” 

“An Elf,” the boy hissed, and his brows furrowed deeply. He glared at Jobin. 
“What is an Elf?” 
Jobin stared at him, completely confounded. “He is an Elf, my lord,” he replied in 
helpless confusion. “He has not told you of this? He is a Gaeilge Elf. It is why his ears 
are pointed, my lord. He is an Elf. Surely he has told you…” 
“Vachir told me he saw an unfamiliar in the company of the false one,” the 
woman murmured to the boy, words that made absolutely no sense to Jobin. “With ears 
like a wolf. Pointed, my Kagan. The man-falcon.” 
The boy stared at Jobin, the edge of his sword not wavering in the least. “You 
know this Elf?” he asked. “This man-falcon, Fahv-coon. You know him?” 
“Y-Yes,” Jobin whispered, bobbing his head. “I…I know him very well. He is dear 
to me, in fact. Most familiar, and…and fond, my lord.” He was babbling, not to mention 
lying, but he did not care. They were interested in the Elf, even if they seemed 
completely confused as to what an Elf was. 
Maybe he is hurt, Jobin thought. Maybe has been unconscious all of this time, 
cannot speak to them, tell them of himself. Or maybe he is stubborn, and refuses to talk. 
It does not matter―they know of him.  
“He could tell you himself, my lord,” Jobin said. “He would tell you I am his 
friend―a close friend, my lord. Very dear to his heart, as he is to mine, my lord. I…I 
would dare say as a brother, my lord, or at least kin…somewhat…a…a distant cousin, 
perhaps, or…or even―” 

“Shut up,” the boy snapped, shoving the blade more roughly against Jobin’s 
throat. “He cannot tell me himself, you stupid rot, because he is not among us. How well 
could you know him, if you do not know this? He is with the Oirat.” 
Jobin blinked at him, stunned and stricken. “Are…are you not…?” he stammered. 
The boy blinked at him, realizing what Jobin had thought. He glanced toward the 
woman, and then he snickered. “You thought we were Oirat?” he asked. He laughed 
again, his humor shifting suddenly, seamlessly into new, bright wrath. He leaned 
forward without averting his blade and closed his fist in Jobin’s hair, wrenching his head 
backwards. “You are a stupid rot, are you not? You do not know me? You do not know 
who I am?” 
His voice was sharp and loud, and Jobin cowered against his hand, shaking his 
head. “No, my lord,” he said. “Forgive me, my lord, I…I…” 
“I bear the crown of stars―I am the true and sacred son of the seven!” the boy 
shouted, jerking his hand in Jobin’s hair again. “How can you not know me? I am the 
prince of the Dologhon! I am Duua’s heir―the descendent of the Great and Mighty! I am 
the Negh―lord of dragons and men, whose birth and triumph were heralded five 
thousand years ago! I am He Who Shall Pass, the marked one―the great promise! The 
restorer of the empire―the sacred and beloved son of ancient promises born among 
the stars!” 
Jobin stared at him, shaking with fright, completely confused. 
“He is Targutai Bokedei, the Kagan of Ulus,” said the woman to Jobin, her brows 
furrowed as the boy, Targutai released his brutal grip on Jobin’s hair. “And we are of his 
imperial Minghan―his people, the Khahl. We are sworn enemies of the Oirat. You 

grovel before greatness, little man, and you are unworthy to gaze upon our promised 
son. Lower your eyes.” 
The Oirat behind Jobin slapped him on the head again, and Jobin immediately 
dropped his gaze to the ground. His mind was spinning, processing what the woman 
had said. The Khahl. He knew that word, that name. Captain Fainne had mentioned it, 
as well, to the longboat crew. The Khahl were civilized cousins to the Oirat―and as the 
woman said, enemies to them. The Khahl were loyal to the Torachan empire, and they 
helped the Torachans in their efforts to battle and defeat the Oirat, who lived as rebels 
against imperial rule. 
Jobin could think well and quickly on his feet, an inherent characteristic that had 
served him well in his lifetime. He opened his mouth, his mind already unfurling an idea 
to save his ass, and he spoke without lifting his eyes from his knees. 
“Hoah―then praise the Good Mother I have found you, my lord,” he said. “For 
you…you are precisely the reason I am here. My Captain brought me with him from 
Capua in the hopes of begging audience with you, my lord, to plead for your gracious 
intercession and your help. The Oirat have stolen our friend from us, this Elf I spoke of, 
my dear and beloved friend. We were all of us sickened with fright and worry for him, 
my lord, and followed the Oirat, meaning to rescue him, to beg for your help in our 
efforts. My Captain and crew were attacked off of the southern shores of Sube, assailed 
by Enghan, my lord. All were killed, save for me, my lord. I managed to escape, and 
hoah, surely by divine providence alone have I been brought into your wise and 
gracious company, my good lord.” 
“You were looking for me?” Targutai asked him. 

Jobin nodded his head without looking up. “Yes, my lord,” he said. “We knew we 
had no hope of catching the Oirat, of finding them, or our friend, Rhyden Fabhcun, 
without your aid. Your deserved reputation, my lord, for firm and decisive leadership 
precedes you, and my Captain had every confidence that you would be able to 
accomplish in swift measure what we were helpless to see through―the rescue of our 
friend.” 
Targutai looked at him for a long moment, and then he shoved the blade of his 
sword firmly against Jobin’s neck. “You are lying.” 
“No…” Jobin whimpered. “No, please, my lord, I…I swear to you, I…” 
“My Kagan,” said the woman, draping her hand against the boy’s sleeve. “If I may 
beseech you for a moment’s counsel…?” 
Targutai glanced at her, and then glowered at Jobin. He lowered his sword, and 
Jobin heaved a sigh of breathless relief. Targutai walked away from him as the woman 
guided him a few steps, her hand yet upon his arm. She lowered her head and 
murmured to him. Jobin strained his ears to listen, but could not tell what she said. After 
a few moments, Targutai turned and tromped back toward Jobin. 
“You say this Elf, Rhyden Fabhcun is dear to you,” he said. 
“Yes, my lord,” Jobin said, nodding his head, staring at the ground. 
“He knows you, then? He would know your face?” 
“Yes,” Jobin whispered, bobbing his chin.  
“He is leading them to something,” Targutai said. “The Elf is leading the Oirat into 
the mountains to find something.” 

Jobin blinked in sudden realization. They want it, too, he thought. It had not 
occurred to him to wonder what the Khahl were doing so far to the west in Ulus; Aedhir 
had explained that they lived to the east, in a northern territory called the Taiga. The 
Kagan lived in the capital city of Kharhorin, many long miles inland from Qoyina Bay. 
Captain Fainne was right all along. The Oirat have found something in the mountains, 
something only the Elf can claim for them―and the Khahl want it, too. 
Whatever the Oirat had stumbled upon, whatever they hoped Rhyden could open 
for them, it was obviously something more than weapons. The Khahl were allies of the 
empire, but more than this, they did not look to Jobin’s observation like they would find 
any benefit from a hidden cache of ancient Dwarf weapons. The Khahl were well-
equipped, well-armed and sufficiently armored. The Oirat might have been eager to find 
a stockpile of old weapons to wield against the empire, but the Khahl had no need. 
Whatever it is, Jobin thought. It is something very important to them. 
I bear the crown of stars―I am the true and sacred son of the seven, Targutai 
had declared. I am the Negh―lord of dragons and men, whose birth and triumph were 
heralded five thousand years ago! I am He Who Shall Pass, the marked one―the great 
promise! The restorer of the empire! 
Something very important, and very ancient, if they have been waiting five 
thousand years for its discovery, Jobin thought. 
“He is leading them to something,” Targutai told him again. “And it belongs to me. 
I have no intention of letting them find it first.” 
What is it, you little rot bastard? Jobin thought. What do you want so badly? 
“The Elf will come to you,” Targutai said. “Will he not?” 

Whatever it is, they want it, too, Jobin thought, staring at his knees. And as long 
as they think Rhyden can get it―and that I can get Rhyden for them―I will be alright.  
“Of course he will, my lord,” Jobin said. “I told you, Rhyden Fabhcun is like a 
brother to me. He will rush to me from any company, joyously…gratefully, my lord.” 
Targutai shoved his sword back into his sheath. “If you are lying to me, I will cut 
you open from ear to pelvis.” 
“I…I am not lying, my lord,” Jobin said. 
“Good,” Targutai said. “By now the Oirat have reached the mouth of the Toda 
and are well underway. We are leaving shortly to follow them―and you will come with 
us.” 
Jobin looked down at the ground, trembling. “Yes, my lord,” he whispered. 
“Thank…thank you, my lord.” 

Chapter Six 
 
It took four days for the Enghan bergelmir cavalry to cross the Keiliselgr Fjell 
north across Sube and reach the coastal byr, or village of Lith. The village rested on the 
shores of the Holavik Bay, a small cluster of fifty thatched-roof homes, barns and 
simple, one-storied buildings. Two wooden docks thrust out from the land into the bay, 
and were lined with fettered, moored knarrs and smaller fishing vessels. Lith was 
encompassed by a high perimeter wall, a steeply sloping mound of rocks, timbers and 
compressed earth deliberately forming a ring around the village, with only two points of 
passage hollowed in its measure. 
Aedhir could not see Lith as they rode down from the cragged foothills toward the 
water, because his eyes were blindfolded, as they had been since leaving the 
battleground to the south. However, he caught the fragrance of the sea against his face 
in a slight, frigid wind, and lifted his chin, turning his face toward the scent. He could 
smell distant wood smoke mingling with the smell of salt and sea, and heard an excited 
murmur ripple among the riders around him. 
“It is Lith,” Eirik said from behind him. The Enghan Hersir had taken personal 
custody of him, making Aedhir ride before him astride the brawny shoulders of his 
bergelmir. Like his crewmen, Aedhir’s hands were bound before him, along with the 
blindfold wrapped around his face. He had spent the better part of the journey squirming 
restlessly, futilely against his bonds. 

Normally the bitter smell of the sea would have pleased Aedhir and brought to his 
mind a sense of peace he sometimes abandoned while on land. This time, however, he 
felt nothing but dismay.  
We have reached the sea again, he thought. We have made it across Sube to 
the northern coast. There would be no going back now, he realized. Even if any 
evidence remained untouched by the tides to mark the Oirat’s grounding along the 
shore of Tolui Bay, they would be long gone and into the Khar mountains by now. He 
had lost any hope of finding them―or of finding Rhyden. I have failed him, he thought, 
stricken. 
“Why does this man mean so much that you would see such sacrifice and risk to 
rescue him?” Eirik had asked him early in their journey, leaning over Aedhir’s shoulder, 
his voice low against Aedhir’s ear. 
Aedhir had shrugged his shoulder, jerking away from Eirik. Because he saved my 
life, you bastard, he had thought. He had thought of the night the storm had ravaged the 
a’Maorga, of Rhyden tackling him, knocking him from the path of the collapsing main 
mast. Rhyden had used his own body to shield Aedhir from falling debris. He 
remembered Rhyden’s soft, sharp cries against his ear as he had been struck 
repeatedly, injured by collapsing rigging lines and blocks. He had remembered Rhyden 
sitting in the Pauper’s Pyre at Capua, telling Aedhir that he had sent a message by 
courier back to Tiralainn, a letter to the King that stated he had privately commissioned 
the a’Maorga, and the services of its crew. Rhyden had given him twenty thousand 
marks to pay Aedhir’s crew, and had listened to none of Aedhir’s protests.  

Elves could not lie by their natures. The money Rhyden had offered made his 
letter to Kierken somewhat true, but Aedhir had realized all along that this was likely the 
closest Rhyden had ever come in his life to defying what was inherent in his character. 
He lied for me, he had thought. 
Why, Rhyden? Aedhir had asked him in Capua. 
Rhyden had smiled at him again. Because you are my friend, Aedhir, he had 
replied.  
“Rhyden is a good man,” Aedhir had told Eirik quietly, closing his eyes and 
lowering his head. “He is probably the truest friend I have ever known.” 
And I have failed him, he thought again in shame and sorrow as the perfume of 
the sea fluttered in the wind against him.  
“Do you see it, Bjarki?” asked a voice from the left of Eirik’s bergelmir. Eirik’s 
sons rode together alongside their father; his eldest, seventeen-year-old Einar, and his 
youngest, Bjarki, who was eleven. “Do you see it there? It is Lith,” Einar said.  
Einar was a Styrimathr, or leader, among the Enghan Seggr, or younger warrior’s 
sect. Eirik had done his best to explain some about his people to Aedhir during their 
journey, and Aedhir had done his best to listen. As they had traveled northward, a sort 
of mutual respect had developed between Aedhir and Eirik, an understanding of one 
another’s circumstances, though Aedhir would not go so far as to say he liked Eirik―or 
called him a friend. 
As Eirik explained it, each Enghan community, or kyn, was governed by a Hersir, 
or leader, and generally comprised of three to five small, individual byrs, or villages. 
These villages had their own groups of warriors, and all served the leader of Engjold, a 

man named Fjolnir Itreker, whose title of Konung was equivalent to the Pater Patriae in 
Torach, or the King in Tiralainn. The Enghan army, collectively called the Herr, were 
divided by kyn groups and led by Fylkir, or commanders, with smaller internal brigades 
led by Styrimathr―the equivalent of first officers in the Crown Navy. Kyn sub-sects of 
the Herr were made up of Rekkr warriors, those with the most experience, and the 
Seggr―boys and young men of the kyn who were learning the art of warfare. The 
Seggr did not fight generally; they were responsible for the collection of bodies, 
weapons and supplies after battles, the setting up and maintenance of camps, and day-
to-day activities to help the Herr warriors when they traveled far from home and into 
battle. 
Eirik was the Fylkir for his kyn, the Rikr. He was also the leader, or Hersir of the 
Rikr clan now, albeit unwillingly, as he had admitted frankly to Aedhir. He had not 
wanted his father’s position of authority among his people.  
“Kaeti!” Bjarki exclaimed happily, his voice high and eager. The assault against 
the Torachans had been his first taste of battle, although he had remained many miles 
away during the engagement, at the Enghan’s camp with the other Seggr. Einar had 
ridden with his father and the Herr before; Eirik had told Aedhir that this had marked his 
first actual experience fighting among the ranks of the Rekkr, and that the boy had fared 
admirably.  
Eirik had another child, a daughter named Arnora, who was eighteen. Eirik’s wife 
had died while giving birth to Bjarki, and so he had explained it was only Arnora and his 
widowed mother, Halla who awaited their return at the home of Halla’s brother in Lith. 
“Do you think Arnora has supper ready, Einar?” Bjarki asked his brother. 

Aedhir heard Einar laugh. “Let us hope not, Bjarki,” he said. “And that Mothir 
Halla has beaten her to it.” 
Aedhir felt Eirik’s hands against the back of his head, and he flinched reflexively. 
“It is alright,” Eirik said, loosening the knotted scrap of fabric around Aedhir’s eyes. He 
drew the blindfold away from Aedhir’s face, and Aedhir squinted, turning his cheek 
toward his shoulder as sunlight met his eyes for the first time in four days. It was late 
afternoon, nearly evening, but even this dim and dusky glare pained him, and he sucked 
in a hissing breath as his eyes smarted. 
“We are home,” Eirik told him, as Aedhir risked a bleary glance ahead of him. He 
could see the earthen fortifications surrounding the byr as they approached. They 
followed a narrow road, little more than tromped earth and flattened, snow-dusted witch 
grass toward one of the openings in the wall. Through this slim margin, Aedhir caught a 
glimpse of small houses, with faint clouds of smoke wafting above the low-pitched 
peaks of grass roofs. 
“Lith is part of the Berg’kyn,” Eirik said. “My uncle Hamal’s people. You will stay 
with me. My family and I share a house with my mother’s brother. It may be crowded, 
but you should be comfortable enough among us for the night, at least. We will be 
leaving tomorrow for Elbeuf.” 
“I want to see my daughter,” Aedhir said, lowering his head again, the light 
making his eyes water, his head ache. His brows drew together and he craned his 
wrists against the confines of his ropes. “I want to see my son.” 
“You will,” Eirik said. “There are some matters I would discuss with you first, and I 
am sure you will want to bathe, change your clothes.” 

“I want to see my children,” Aedhir said, the furrow between his brows 
deepening. He glanced over his shoulder at Eirik. “I will discuss nothing with you until I 
know they are alright.” 
Eirik smiled at him, clapping his hand against Aedhir’s shoulder. If nothing else, it 
seemed to Aedhir that Eirik empathized with his fierce love and protectiveness of Pryce 
and Aelwen. Eirik was a father himself, and obviously understood. “Alright, then,” he 
said. “I will arrange to have them brought to you.” 
As they neared the earthen wall surrounding Lith, Eirik spurred his heels against 
his bergelmir’s flank, and the weasel loped ahead of Einar and Bjarki, darting gracefully 
to the front of the Herr ranks. Eirik held up his hand, his fingers closed together in a fist, 
and as Aedhir scanned the crest of the wall, he could see at least ten men poised along 
the top, with bows in hand, arrows nocked and aimed toward them. 
“Heilir!” Eirik called out loudly, his mouth spread in a broad grin. “That er oss!” 
At his cry, the men along the fortification lowered their bows and began to cheer.  
“That er Eirik!” Aedhir heard one of them shout out. “That er Hanninn!” 
The Enghan warriors called back to them, whooping loudly, exuberantly and 
thrusting their fists skyward in exuberant greeting. As they passed through the gate, 
following the muddy road toward the broad basin of the Holavik Bay, people began 
emerging from the closely arranged huts and houses. Women with babies tucked 
against their hips, men too old to fight, and children too young for the Seggr came out 
and darted into the street, all of them crying out happily and cheering. 
Aedhir stared around him in amazement. The walls of the Enghan homes were 
made of wood planks and sod, with long buttress beams extending from the roof eaves 

to the ground to support the buildings. The homes had no windows and the roofs were 
thatch, with no chimneys. He could see depressions in the centers of each roof, large 
holes cut into the reeds and lumber to act as vents through which smoke curled 
skyward. 
The Enghan people were dressed in colorful clothes; boys and older men in long, 
wool tunics with broad, open necklines that fell to their knees and were worn belted 
about their waists. They wore lighter undershirts beneath these, and pants that they 
either wore tucked and strapped into their boots, like the Herr warriors, or unfettered 
and uncuffed to their ankles. Young boys wore caps on their heads, panels of colorful 
fabric stitched together, coming to listing points above the crests of their pates. The 
women wore long woolen dresses that fell to their ankles. Some wore these with bright 
sashes about their waists, while others wore them loose. They all wore long-hemmed 
aprons of some sort; twin panels of fabric draped over their torsos, adorned along the 
trim with colorful embroidery, secured at their shoulders with large, gold brooches and 
fastened at their hips by a network of ties. Some wore their heads bare, with their hair 
wound in elaborate plaits bundled close to their necks, while most wore pale scarves 
over their pates, gathered in ties behind their ears. 
They surged around the riders, some of the weeping, all of them crying out and 
beaming, their hands outstretched for husbands, fathers, brothers, friends. Aedhir 
watched one of the riders to his left lean precariously in his saddle to catch a young 
woman about the waist as she leapt for him, crying out his name. She burst into tears 
as he drew her across his lap, then caught his face between her hands and kissed him 
deeply. 

“We have been gone nearly two weeks,” Eirik told Aedhir. “Long enough for them 
to become frightened that something had gone awry―and long enough for word to 
reach them about the coming legions.” 
Just as Thorir had told them at the southern battleground, Eirik had explained 
that three thousand Torachan soldiers had been reported leaving Enthimork to the east, 
advancing across the Merki isthmus and into Sube. The mountains and the winter 
weather would keep them delayed long enough for the Enghan to flee Lith and travel 
deeper among the peaks, to their fortified city of Elbeuf to the west, but the empire was 
coming nonetheless. 
Aedhir could see wagons and carts parked outside of some of the cottages, in 
the small, fenced yards surrounding the humble houses. The carts were packed 
modestly with supplies, all bundled and neatly arranged as families prepared for the 
next day’s exodus. The Enghan were a transitory people accustomed to moving 
frequently; their homes were comfortable, but not made with sturdier materials, such as 
stone for this reason. 
Aedhir looked all around him as from over his shoulder, Eirik called out cheerfully 
to friends and familiar faces, reaching out to clasp hands or brush passing fingertips in 
fleeting but fond greeting. The Enghan peered curiously at Aedhir, their expressions 
wavering between uncertainty and inquisitiveness. Even with Torachan legions 
periodically advancing into their territory, it was likely most of them had never seen a 
Median before, and they stared at him, their eyes wide as they marveled over his dark 
skin. 

Eirik and Einar reined their bergelmirs into a broad yard flanking one of the 
thatched roof houses. The yard was ringed by a split-rail fence that encompassed a 
small barn, a hen house and a square of barren, exposed earth, mulched with dried 
pine needles that obviously served as a vegetable garden in summer months. 
“Bjarki, see to the bergelmirs,” Eirik said to his youngest son. 
“Yes, Fathir,” Bjalki said. 
Einar was a tall young man, lean and russet-haired, like his father. He swung one 
of his long legs around the left shoulder of his bergelmir and dropped easily to the 
ground. He reached up with both hands, helping his brother down, and then paused for 
a moment, hooking his fingers behind the bergelmir’s ear and scratching. The weasel 
made a low, contented rumbling sound in its throat, canting its head to encourage Einar 
in his efforts. 
The rear door of the house opened as Eirik dismounted from his saddle, and a 
young woman ran outside. “Fathir!” she cried, dashing toward Eirik, her eyes wide and 
bright, her mouth open in a smile. “Einar! Bjarki! You have returned!” 
“Yes, Arnora,” Eirik told her, laughing as he caught her in his arms. She threw 
her arms about his neck and he hoisted her feet from the ground in a hug. The girl 
squealed as he spun her about.  
“I have worried!” she said as he set her on the ground once more. Einar strode 
toward her, grinning broadly, his brow arched. The girl, Arnora, scurried behind her 
father, laughing at his approach. “Keep back―you smell like dung!” she cried. “Filthy as 
a wretch, stinking like rot! Do not touch me, Einar!” 

“You missed me, you wench,” he said, ducking around Eirik and grabbing her by 
the wrist. She pretended to struggle as he pulled her toward him, hugging her, planting 
a loud, wet kiss against her cheek. “And you worried for me, too―tell me you did.” 
“I will not!” Arnora cried, squirming and laughing as he kissed her again. “You are 
disgusting, Einar―let me go!” 
She caught sight of Aedhir, and froze, her eyes widening in sudden trepidation. 
She clasped her brother by the hand and looked at her father, anxiously. 
“We have guests,” Eirik said. He reached up, helping Aedhir dismount from the 
bergelmir. “Arnora, this is Captain Aedhir Fainne. He is a visitor to Engjold from the 
west, across the sea. Captain, this is my daughter, Arnora.” 
“My lady,” Aedhir said, nodding once politely. 
Arnora blinked at him, realizing that his hands were bound. “Heill,” she offered in 
greeting after a hesitant moment, turning her eyes down toward her shoes. 
“He is from Alfheim, Arnora,” Bjarki told her, eagerly, and Arnora blinked at Eirik 
again, startled. 
“He will be staying with us tonight,” Eirik said, as he began to unload bundled 
blankets and waterskins from his saddle. “And he will be coming with us to Elbeuf in the 
morning.” He slung a heavy pouch over his shoulder, cradling the rest of his supplies in 
the crook of his left elbow. He took Aedhir by the arm and started walking toward the 
house. “Come,” he said. 
“I want to see my children,” Aedhir said, shrugging his shoulder and pulling loose 
of Eirik’s grasp. Eirik paused and turned to him, meeting his gaze. Aedhir frowned at 
him, his hands folding into fists. “Aelwen and Pryce. I want to see them now.” 

“I told you that you could,” Eirik said. “I am a man of my word. Einar, find Blakinn 
and Ottarr. Tell them to bring their wards with them, to come at once.” 
“Ja, Fathir,” Einar said, nodding his head. He offered his sister’s hand a 
reassuring squeeze and then broke into a wide-gaited sprint, running around the side of 
the house toward the street. 
“Arnora, help your brother with the bergelmirs,” Eirik said, nodding toward Bjarki, 
who had taken the pair of weasels by the reins and was attempting to lead the large 
animals to the barn. “Where is Mothir Halla?” 
“She is inside with uncle Beinir, Fathir,” Arnora said. “Seeing to supper.” 
“Kaeti,” Bjarki said. Given the frequency the boy uttered this word, it seemed to 
Aedhir to be the Enghan equivalent of good or splendid. He grinned mischievously at 
his sister. “Einar will be pleased then.” 
*** 
The interior of the house was dimly lit and cozy, a long, solitary room broken only 
by a partial wall toward the rear of the chamber that protruded halfway across the width 
of the building to designate a small, almost separate chamber. 
The floor was dirt, covered with a loose spread of thin, dried reeds. In the center 
of the room, a long, stone hearth had been built. A heavy iron kettle hung from a length 
of chain, suspended from the ceiling above one end of the hearth, with the rest open, a 
bed of glowing coals stoked and tended within to fill the house with warmth. Long 
wooden crates framed the room, serving as both benches and storage space. To the 
right of the door, a large loom stood propped against the wall, a panel of unfinished 
wool fabric drawn taut between the beams of the wooden frame. Damp clothes had 

been hung to dry along a line of hemp strung between the ceiling rafters; waterskins, 
nets filled with root vegetables and hide pouches of assorted sizes also dangled down. 
The walls had been decorated with only a pair of shields, the sort carried by the Enghan 
Herr―twin circles of wood painted bright red, capped with iron. Two metal lamp stands 
stood at each end of the main chamber, cradling small oil lamps that offered faint but 
cheery glow to the room. 
An old man sat on one of the benches along the left wall, darning a stocking. An 
older woman stood in the middle of the chamber before the hearth. She leaned over, 
lifting the lid on an iron skilled to inspect the progress of something cooking on a metal 
grill above the coals as Eirik and Aedhir walked inside. She turned at the sound of their 
footsteps. 
“Eirik!” she exclaimed, shuffling toward him, her hands outstretched. “Praise Tyr, 
you have returned!” She clapped her palms against Eirik’s cheeks. He stood a good 
head taller than her, and lowered his face so that she could kiss his mouth. Tears 
gleamed in her eyes. “You are well, then?” she asked. “Unharmed? Einar and Bjarki?” 
“We are all fine, M’ma,” Eirik said. He looked over his shoulder toward the old 
man. “Heill, Beinir,” he called out in a loud voice.  
The old man blinked up at him, as if noticing him for the first time. His hands 
paused in his sewing, and he grinned broadly. Aedhir could see he was missing all but 
two of his front teeth. “Eirik!” the man, Beinir, said. He set aside the stocking and rose 
slowly to his feet, as though the creeping pace as his joints unfurled was the best he 
could manage. “Heill, sveinn.” 

Eirik clasped hands with the old man and smiled fondly at him. “How did the boy 
fare?” Beinir asked. 
“Einar did well, Beinir,” Eirik said. “You would be proud of him. He handled his ax 
like a man twice his years.” 
“More Torachans are coming,” Beinir told him, his expression grim. “Three 
thousand strong crossing Merki from the east into the fjell. Word reached us three days 
ago.” 
“I know,” Eirik said, nodding. “Thorir’s scouts from the east saw them in 
Enthimork moving west. We will leave with the new dawn for Elbeuf. The Torachans to 
the south will not bother us again. Vidar blessed our efforts. None remain.” 
“Praises be,” Halla said, lifting her fist and shaking it toward the ceiling. She 
looked at Aedhir, noticing his bound hands and her brows pinched together beneath the 
edge of her head scarf. Her thin lips turned down in a frown. “What is this you have 
brought with you?” 
“This is Captain Aedhir Fainne, M’ma,” Eirik said. “He will be staying with us 
tonight. Have you made enough supper for guests?” 
“No one goes hungry in this house,” Halla replied. “We will make do.” She 
frowned again at Aedhir. “Hann er brunskinn.” Aedhir did not need to be familiar or 
fluent in the Enghan tongue to decipher what she said: He is brown-skinned. 
“Hann er mjoksiglandi,” Eirik told her, placing his hand against her shoulder. “Far-
traveling, M’ma, from the west.” 
“He is Torachan,” Halla said. 
“No, M’ma,” Eirik replied. “He says he is from Alfheim.” 

Halla and Beinir both blinked at Aedhir, visibly startled. “Hann velar,” Halla said. 
“That er vel.” 
“It is not a trick, M’ma,” Eirik said patiently. He walked over to a bench and 
dropped his gear.  
“He is dark-skinned with soot,” Halla said. She hooked her forefingers in the air at 
Aedhir in a peculiar, warding gesture. “From the fires of the Vanaheim forges. He is Lopt 
in disguise, come to trick us.” 
Eirik took Aedhir’s elbow and led him across the room. “He is not Lopt in 
disguise, M’ma,” he said, shaking his head and sighing wearily. “He is dark-skinned 
from birth―a man, the same as I.” 
“Lopt wears the cloak of a man’s form to walk among us,” Halla insisted. “He is 
the mischief god meant to lead us astray and to our deaths.” 
“There will be no more of such talk,” Eirik said, his voice growing sharp. He 
paused in mid-stride and turned to his mother. “And you will not repeat such things 
beyond these walls. While he is among us, he is my guest, and under my protection.” 
Halla blinked at him but said no more. She pressed her lips together and turned, 
shuffling back toward the fire, muttering to herself, flapping her forked fingers in the air 
repeatedly. 
“She is superstitious,” Eirik said to Aedhir, looking sheepish. “Pay her no mind.” 
He motioned with his hand toward a bench and Aedhir sat against it. Eirik looked 
at him for a long moment and then drew his dagger from a sheath against his belt. He 
slipped the edge of the blade against Aedhir’s ropes and began to saw through them. 

When the bindings snapped free, Aedhir grasped his wrists lightly, each in turn, rubbing 
them with his hands. 
“Thank you,” he said quietly. 
Eirik nodded. 
“I will not hurt your family,” Aedhir told him. “I will not run.” 
“I know you will not,” Eirik said. “I suspect you would as soon run yourself 
through with this blade as risk harm to your children, your friends, or abandon them.” 
Aedhir met his gaze, trying to decide if Eirik offered thinly veiled threat or not. “I 
would, yes.” 
“Mothir Halla!” Bjarki cried happily, racing across the threshold from the yard. He 
ran toward his grandmother, hugging her fiercely. 
“Heill, child,” Halla said. She cupped her hands against his ears and kissed his 
pate.  
“We stopped the Torachans. Did Fathir tell you?” Bjarki asked, squirming and 
ducking away from her. “Einar got to fight, too. He rode out with the Rekkr.” 
“Yes, I have heard,” Halla said. 
“Did you stable the bergelmirs?” Eirik asked his son. He walked away from 
Aedhir toward the hearth, unbuckling his belt, loosening it from around his waist. 
“Ja, Fathir,” Bjarki said. 
“You gave them food and water?” Eirik asked, glancing over his shoulder, his 
brow raised. “Unsaddled them and removed their bridles?” 
“Yes,” Bjarki said, nodding. 
“Brushed their coats down, checked their paws?” 

Bjarki blinked, looking down at his boots, and Eirik frowned slightly. “Bjarki, they 
can get burrs and stones between their pads. It hurts them. Kindly check their paws and 
brush them down good―get their underbellies.” 
“Ja, Fathir,” Bjarki said, his shoulders hunching as he sighed, put-upon. 
“Where is your sister?” Eirik asked, walking toward the small room at the rear of 
the house, holding his belt in his hand. “I told her to help you.” 
“She started talking instead out in the yard by the fence,” Bjarki said. “Thorkatla, 
Aesa and Veny have come.” He looked up at his grandmother. “They are talking about 
the Elves.” 
“They are not Elves, Bjarki,” Eirik said, disappearing behind the half-wall. 
“Elves?” Halla asked. 
“They are not Elves, M’ma,” Eirik said. “They are men. All of them―men. Do not 
go telling people they are Elves, Bjarki.” 
“All of them,” Halla repeated, frowning at Aedhir. 
“Thorir caught ten of them,” Bjarki said. “And there were more besides, Mothir 
Halla, but they got away on their boat.” 
“You brought ten strangers to our byr?” Halla asked, turning to call to Eirik. “They 
could be Torachan spies. They could be imps of Lopt, come to deceive us.” 
“They are strangers, yes,” Eirik said. He stepped out from behind the wall 
momentarily. He had stripped off his tunics and was in the processing of washing up. 
“But they are not Torachan spies or imps.” 
“Thorir says they are Torachans,” Bjarki said. 

“Thorir is mistaken, then,” Eirik told him. “And I believe I said for you to go to the 
barn, Bjarki, and tend to those bergelmirs.” 
Bjarki sighed again, woefully. “Ja,” he muttered, turning for the door. 
Two large men stepped through the doorway, and Bjarki drew back, momentarily 
startled. The two Enghan led Pryce and Aelwen stumbling along with them. Aedhir 
stood when he saw the pair and watched the frightened confusion in their faces shift to 
relief as they caught sight of him. 
“Father!” Aelwen cried, shrugging her shoulders mightily to loosen her captor’s 
hands. He released her and she bolted forward. Her hands were still bound, but she 
hooked her arms over Aedhir’s head, hugging him. He felt her cheek press against his, 
her breath shudder against his ear, and he held her, lifting her feet from the ground. 
“Aelwen,” he whispered, stroking his hand against her tumbled hair. She looked 
weary and disheveled, but unharmed. He canted his face and kissed her cheek. “Are 
you alright? Did they hurt you? By my breath, if any of them touched you…” 
“I am alright,” she said. “I have worried for you, but I am alright.” 
Pryce came to him, and Aedhir wrapped his arm around his neck, drawing Pryce 
against his left shoulder. He hugged them both, with Wen huddled against his right, and 
he draped his hand against Pryce’s hair, kissing the young man’s ear.  
“Are you alright?” Pryce asked. 
“Yes,” Aedhir said. Hoah, at this moment, I could not fare much better, he 
thought, closing his eyes against grateful tears. He cupped his hand against Pryce’s 
cheek and studied the wound on his temple, frowning. It had closed; the Enghan had 

put some kind of herbal salve on it, but it remained discolored and bruised, painful in the 
appearance. Pryce was pale and haggard, his face draped in exhausted shadows. 
“Pryce…” Aedhir said softly, anguished. 
“It is alright,” Pryce said. He drew near to Aedhir, lifting his chin to whisper. “We 
have reached Holavik Bay.” 
“I know,” Aedhir nodded. 
“They mean to bring us west, I think,” Pryce said. “To the Chagan Sea.” 
“A city called Elbeuf,” Aedhir said. “I know.” 
“They say the empire is coming to the south, Father,” Wen breathed. “Across the 
isthmus from Enthimork.” 
“If we could reach them, they might help us,” Pryce said. He glanced at Wen, 
meeting her gaze. “I loosened Wen’s knots yesterday―I could get them undone with a 
little more time, I know I could, and she could untie mine. We could leave, turn back 
toward Qoyina and―” 
“No,” Aedhir whispered. “It is too dangerous.” 
“We could make it, Aedhir,” Pryce insisted. “I know it. We could―” 
“No,” Aedhir said again, firmly. “I will deal with this, Pryce. Do not do anything.” 
“But, Father―” Wen began. 
“That is an order―both of you,” Aedhir said. He looked between them both 
gravely, his voice soft but stern. “Do not do anything. Eirik is their leader and he is 
beginning to trust me. I can reason with him. If you try to escape, it will only ruin that. 
Give me time, let me talk to him. I can convince him to release us.” 
Pryce looked at him doubtfully. 

“These are not bad men or savages,” Aedhir said. “They are frightened and 
desperate, but not without their senses. I can reason with them. I know I can, Pryce.” 
Pryce blinked at him, his brows drawing together, his mouth set in an unhappy 
line. He nodded his head reluctantly. “Alright, Aedhir,” he whispered. 
Aedhir was allowed to visit with Aelwen and Pryce only a few more brief 
moments, and then the Enghan who had escorted them into Eirik’s home seized hold of 
them once more, drawing them away.  
“No,” Pryce said, squirming against his captor. “No―!” 
“No―!” Aedhir cried, stricken, reaching for Aelwen’s outstretched hands as she 
was pulled backward. 
“Father!” she cried, her eyes round and alarmed. 
“Let them go,” Aedhir said, closing his hands into fists and striding toward the 
pair of Enghan. He turned to look over his shoulder as Eirik emerged from the back 
room, washed and changed into a fresh pair of tunics and trousers. “Let them stay with 
me.” 
“They will be nearby,” Eirik said. “And safe, Captain Fainne. I give you my word.” 
Aedhir met his gaze. He could argue with Eirik, protest with all of the fierce 
vehemence that had seized his heart, but he knew if he did, it would damage whatever 
fledgling regard had been established between the two. Eirik was offering his word; he 
was asking Aedhir to trust him, and if Aedhir refused, he might lose any hope he had of 
convincing the Enghan Hersir to free them. Aedhir loosened his hands, unfolding his 
fingers, forcing his brows to unknit. 
“It is alright,” he said to Pryce and Wen. “Do not fight them.” 

“Aedhir…” Pryce said, shrugging his shoulders against the Enghan’s grasp. 
Aedhir turned to him. “That is an order, Lieutenant,” he said as Pryce stared at 
him helplessly. It will be alright, Pryce. I will get us out of this. By my breath, lad, I will. 
Pryce blinked at him. “Yes, sir,” he said, falling still. 
Eirik led Aedhir into the small rear room as his mother finished supper 
preparations. There was a single bed in the narrow chamber, a square wooden frame 
against the wall filled with dried, aromatic heather, with woolen blankets and furs draped 
over it. There was a small crate on the floor that served as a washbasin. Eirik had 
placed a large bowl atop it, along with some neatly folded linens. A waterskin sat on the 
floor beside the crate, and Aedhir noticed a clean set of tunics and a pair of pants laid 
out on the bed. 
“You may bathe, if you would like,” Eirik said, nodding at the basin. “Some fresh 
clothes, if you would change.” 
“Thank you,” Aedhir said. Eirik turned and walked away, granting him the 
modicum of privacy the short length of wall offered. “And thank you for letting me see 
them,” Aedhir added, giving the man pause. 
Eirik nodded again. “You are welcome, Captain Fainne,” he said, walking away 
and leaving Aedhir alone. 
Aedhir shouldered his way out of the Enghan overcoat he wore. Eirik had called it 
a kyrtill; it was made of heavy, furlined hide. He stripped over the tunics beneath it, and 
knelt before the wash basin. He poured water from the pouch into the bowl, cupped his 
hands together and splashed water on his face. 

“Did you finish with the bergelmirs?” he heard Eirik ask as the door squeaked on 
its hinges, and Bjarki’s small, hurried footsteps pattered against the floor. 
“Yes, sir,” Bjarki replied. “Einar helped me. He said he would brush them if I 
cleaned their paws.” 
“Where is Arnora?” Eirik asked.  
“Still talking at the fence,” Bjarki said. 
“There is supper to tend to,” Eirik said, sounding displeased. “She should be 
inside.” 
“She should be married by now, a girl her age,” Halla said. “Then she could talk 
at her own fence, neglect her own family’s supper.” 
Aedhir dunked one of the linens into the washbasin and began to scrub at his 
bare torso with it, rubbing it beneath his arms, along the muscled plain of his stomach. 
“Fathir, why does the Captain call the one man his son?” Bjarki asked. Aedhir 
paused in his cleansing, the linen in his hand. “His skin is dark. His hair is not fair. He 
calls him his son, but Thorir said he did not know his own daughter―and she looks like 
him. Did Lopt play a trick on him, do you think?” 
“No, Bjarki, Lopt did not play a trick on him,” Eirik said quietly. He had asked 
Aedhir about this as they had made their way north from Sube, and Aedhir had 
explained to him. “The young man’s parents died when he was young, your age. He 
was all alone, and the Captain has taken care of him. His own daughter was kept from 
him, and he did not get to see her for a very long time.” 
“That is sad,” Bjarki said after a long, thoughtful moment. Aedhir could not help 
but to smile and the boy’s earnest naiveté.  

“Yes, Bjarki, it is,” Eirik said, gently. “But he loves them both, like I love you and 
Einar and Arnora. We will be respectful to them, courteous while they are among us, as 
we would hope they might treat us were we to visit their home.” 
“How long will they be among us?” Bjarki asked. 
“I…I do not know, Bjarki,” Eirik said, sounding uncomfortable. “Why do you not 
go outside and find your brother and sister? It is time for supper.” 
Aedhir heard the sound of the front door opening on its hinges again, followed by 
a flutter of voices from the far end of the house. 
“Where is Captain Fainne?” he head Odhran ask, his voice sharp and 
bewildered. “You said you were taking us to him!” 
“Odhran…” Aedhir breathed, his eyes flying wide. 
“Hvar er varr felagi?” he heard Tacita say. “Varr vinn?” 
“Tacita―!” Aedhir dropped the washrag and sprang to his feet. It had been four 
days since he had last seen Tacita. The Enghan had gone to great lengths to keep all of 
his crewmen separated from one another during their journey. He had one fleeting 
moment to speak with her before leaving the battleground, before the Enghan had split 
them up and delivered them among the cavalry ranks for transport. His hands had been 
bound before him, but he had reached up, cradling her face between his palms. She 
had draped her hands against his and met his gaze, her blue eyes wide and filled with 
anxiety. 
“Do not be frightened,” he had whispered, pressing his forehead against hers. “I 
will not let them hurt you, Tacita.” 

“I do not think they mean to hurt us,” she had told him softly, her breath brushing 
against his mouth. “I…I do not know what they want, but if they meant harm to us, they 
would have done it by now.” 
Tacita had lifted her chin, letting her lips dance lightly against his. Aedhir had 
drawn her against him and kissed her; it had not been impulsive longing on his part, but 
rather something that felt natural to him, right within his heart and mind. It had been so 
long―not since his youth, when he had first fallen in love with Iona―that he had felt 
such a close and comforting bond with a woman, and he had wanted to kiss Tacita, had 
meant to for many long days now. When Tacita pressed her mouth against his, her 
voice soft in her throat as he had brushed the tip of his tongue against hers, he had 
known that she felt the same. 
“I will not let them hurt you, Tacita,” he had whispered again.  
He rushed around the corner of the wall and saw her. Tacita and Odhran had 
been brought in the company two Rekkr soldiers, as well as Thorir and Kolbrun. The 
Enghan man who had escorted Tacita into the house had made her sit on one of the 
benches. He kept his hand against her shoulder to hold her in place. When she saw 
Aedhir, her eyes widened, and she jumped up, jerking away from the Enghan. 
“Aedhir!” she cried. She moved to run for him, but the Enghan clamped his hand 
against her elbow. Tacita struggled against him, her hands bound, her brows furrowed. 
“Let go of me!” she snapped. 
“Let her go,” Aedhir said, striding briskly across the room. He glanced at Eirik. 
“Tell him to let her go.” 

“Thu leysar hana, Viparr,” Eirik said, and the Enghan man, Viparr, turned loose of 
Tacita.  
She ran toward Aedhir, and he caught her in his arms as she hooked her bound 
hands about his neck. He held her fiercely, feeling her tremble against him. “Tacita…” 
he whispered. 
“You are alright,” she said, kissing his ear, her hands splayed in his short-
cropped hair. “I…I was so worried for you…you are alright…!” 
“I am fine,” he said softly, and when he let his mouth settle gently against hers, 
Tacita raised her chin to meet him, kissing him deeply. “Are you alright?” he whispered, 
cupping her face in his hands. She nodded, her eyes glistening with tears. 
“I am better now,” she told him, managing a smile. Aedhir smiled at her, kissed 
her again, and then held her, drawing her against his shoulder.  
“Hoah, as am I,” he breathed, stroking her hair. He looked beyond Tacita’s 
shoulder toward Odhran. “You are alright, lad?” 
Odhran nodded, shrugging his way loose of his captor’s hands. “Yes…yes, 
Captain,” he said, nodding. He looked around the room, his eyes meeting Eirik’s briefly, 
uncertainly, and then he turned to Aedhir again. “Is Wen alright, sir? Have you seen 
her? Is she…?” 
“She is fine, Odhran,” Aedhir assured him. “Eirik let me see her only a little while 
ago. She is nearby for the moment, and he has promised me she will be safe.” 
Odhran nodded again, his expression still disconcerted and worried. From behind 
him, Eirik’s children, Einar and Arnora appeared in the doorway. The siblings paused on 

the threshold, their eyes wide as they blinked between Odhran and Tacita, and Odhran 
stared at them in return―or more specifically, at Arnora. 
“Arnora, Einar, supper is ready,” Eirik said to them. “Wash your faces and hands 
and come help your Mothir Halla serve our guests.” 
Arnora met Odhran’s gaze breathlessly, her blue eyes large and round. After a 
long moment, she nodded her head, letting Einar take her hand and draw her into the 
house. “Ja…ja, Fathir,” she said quietly, averting her eyes to the long hem of her dress. 
“Ja, Fathir,” Einar said. 
Eirik motioned to Thorir. “Leysar hana,” he said. “Cut them loose, Thorir. Free 
them.” 
Thorir offered Eirik a fleeting scowl, but did not voice the disapproval he 
obviously felt. He drew his dagger from his belt and set to work cutting loose Odhran 
and Tacita’s bonds. 
“What is going on, Eirik?” Aedhir asked. “Why have you brought us here? What 
do you want?” 
Eirik smiled at him. “At the moment? Some supper,” he said. He gestured with 
his hands toward the benches, inviting Aedhir, Tacita and Odhran to sit. “Please, join 
us. Thorir, Kolbrun, both of you, as well―please. I would meet with the all of you in 
counsel afterward.” 
Tacita and Odhran glanced at one another, clearly perplexed. Aedhir did not turn 
his gaze from Eirik’s. “Alright,” he said, nodding his chin once, and Eirik’s smile 
broadened. 
“Kaeti,” he said. Splendid.  

Chapter Seven 
 
As Halla set about filling wooden bowls with steaming portions of a thick, creamy 
fish stew, Odhran and Tacita were each led in turn into the back of the house and 
allowed to wash their faces, change their clothes. 
Odhran knelt on the floor in only a fresh pair of trousers, rubbing a wet linen 
across his face, the scruff of his beard. He had not found much sleep lately, and nearly 
trembled with exhaustion. He was filthy, disheveled, distinctly malodorous and grateful 
for the opportunity to scrub at least some of the sweat and grime from his body. 
For the last four days, he had been caught in a confusing mixture of 
emotions―he was thrilled and wondrous as a small child at his simple, fascinating 
proximity to the Enghan, and at the same time, he was desperately alarmed and 
frightened. No one had told them what the Enghan wanted with them. It was obvious 
they did not mean to kill the crew from the a’Maorga, or they would have likely done so 
already―Odhran harbored no doubts about that. But their intentions remained a 
mystery, and though they seemed cordial enough now that they had reached their byr, 
he was troubled nonetheless. 
The village of Lith had astounded him. He had read accounts in Abhacan 
histories of the Morthir describing such places, the sorts of architecture and fortifications 
he saw firsthand in Lith. While most other menfolk in the Morthir and Tiralainn had 
moved past such rudimentary, archaic styles of structure, opting for towering, multi-
leveled buildings with intricate glasswork, roofing and architectural beauty, the Enghan 
remained poised and unaltered throughout time. Their homes and villages remained 

exactly as they had for millennia. Their clothes remained the same. Their weapons, 
hairstyles, food―all of it just as he had learned. He was surrounded by living history; a 
way of life long forgotten to other races of Men. The fact that they had never felt the 
need for more than this, that they had survived and flourished by the observation of 
these ancient, familiar customs and practices left him breathless with awe and 
admiration. 
A soft sound attracted his gaze, drawing him from his thoughts. Eirik’s daughter, 
Arnora, had stepped around the edge of the wall, using the distraction of so much 
company in the home, and the conversations among her family and friends to steal 
unnoticed into the back room. She stared at Odhran for a long moment, as if she shared 
for him the fascination he felt for her people. 
He looked back at her, feeling color stoke in his cheeks. Arnora was beautiful. 
She had auburn hair, like her father, streaked with blond in places from the sun. Her 
face was oval-shaped, with high, distinctive cheekbones and a narrow chin that framed 
and accentuated her large, full mouth. She had enormous blue eyes, a piercing 
attentiveness and curiosity to her gaze that he found striking and nearly mesmerizing.  
“Hullo,” he said after a long moment pinned by those eyes, that unwavering 
stare. His voice came out a feeble croak, and he cleared his throat, blinking down at the 
basin of water. 
“They say you are a bjorn,” Arnora said. “A bear. They say you are a bear Lopt 
has disguised as a man.” 
He blinked at her, puzzled. “Who said that?” 

“The others in the byr,” Arnora said. “They said you fought twenty of Thorir’s 
strongest Rekkr and saw them fall by your fists. They say you are Bjorn’sterkr, a bear 
enchanted by Lopt, given the cloak of a man’s form that you might walk among us.” 
“I…I am not a bear,” Odhran said. Twenty of the Rekkr? he thought, perplexed 
but pleased. He had fought with perhaps four or five of them at the most on the beach; 
he had been seized with such rage when Thorir had clapped his hand between Wen’s 
thighs, he had lost his reason. Twenty Rekkr, he thought again, his pleasure growing. 
Hoah, well, now. “I am a man,” he told Arnora. “That is all.” 
He wiped his hand against his pant leg to dry his fingers, and then offered his 
palm in greeting to her. “My name is Odhran Frankley.” 
“What does that mean?” she asked, studying his outstretched hand without 
moving to accept the shake. 
“Frankley?” Odhran lowered his hand slowly, awkwardly from the air. “It…it 
means a free man, I believe. ‘One who holds title to land, but is not of noble birth,’ I 
think I have read.” He added swiftly: “Although I am of noble birth. My family is listed in 
the Noble Registry, has been for many generations. In Belgaeran, I should say―in 
Tiralainn, to the west. I suppose at some point we must have acquired enough land to 
satisfy noble requirements, or at least to some extent…enough so that we…” He fell 
silent, more color stoking in his cheeks as he realized he was babbling. He tucked his 
tongue between his back teeth to stifle his voice. Shut up, for the love of the Good 
Mother, before she thinks you are bloody daft! 
Arnora looked at him wordlessly, her brow lifted in curiosity. 

“Arnora was one of the seven daughters of Gullskeggr, was she not?” he asked 
her, and she blinked at him, startled. “I…I have read that,” he said. “One of the first 
princesses of men. Her name meant golden one. Her beauty was so great, the god, 
Grimnir himself fell in love with her, stole her from her father’s home and brought her to 
Vanaheim. He had the walls of the great eternal hall plated with gold to please her.” 
The corner of her mouth fluttered in what might have been a smile. “Yes,” she 
said, nodding. 
“She was as strong as she was beautiful,” Odhran said, remembering the stories 
now, the old Enghan mythology as recorded by the Abhacan. “In the midbith―our 
world―she refused to marry any man lest he could beat her wrestling. Many tried, but 
none could. She made a deal with Grimnir that she would stay with him in Vanaheim if 
he could best her. If he lost, she got to return to her home.” 
“But Lopt tricked her,” Arnora said quietly. 
Odhran nodded. “Grimnir asked him to, because he wanted Arnora to stay. Lopt 
dropped honey on the floor of Vanaheim. When Arnora went to wrestle Grimnir, she 
stepped in the honey, and her heel got stuck. Grimnir was able to overpower her.” 
“Yes,” Arnora said again. She held his gaze for another long moment and then 
turned to leave. She glanced at him over her shoulder, her hand draped against the 
wall, and then she ducked back into the main chamber, leaving him without another 
word. 
He blinked after her, feeling somewhat lightheaded in the wake of her gaze, 
those sharp, inquisitive eyes. “Hoah…” he whispered, brushing his fingertips against his 

bearded chin. He had never had a woman look at him that way before, with such 
unflinching―but not unkind―scrutiny. 
They say you are a bjorn, Arnora had told him. A bear. They say you are a bear 
Lopt has disguised as a man. They said you fought twenty of Thorir’s strongest Rekkr 
and saw them fall by your fists. 
“Twenty men,” he murmured, and he shook his head slightly, as if rousing from a 
trance. He chuckled, still looking toward the empty space where Arnora had stood only 
moments ago. “Hoah, there is something, I should think.” 
*** 
After supper, Eirik sent his family away, dispatching Halla, Arnora and Bjarki to a 
neighbor’s house. He allowed Beinir to remain; it was the old man’s house, and Aedhir 
assumed it would be impolite to ask him to leave. Eirik also allowed his oldest son, 
Einar to remain behind, and Aedhir thought he understood this, as well.  
The death of Eirik’s father had apparently caught the man off guard. He had 
shouldered the responsibility for his father’s people, for the three villages of his clan, as 
was his duty and birthright, and though he was quite capable of handling such 
responsibility, to Aedhir’s observance, Eirik had not been particularly eager for it. 
“My father was young enough yet in his years, and wise,” Eirik had told him 
during their trek to Lith. His voice had been quiet as he spoke, filled with sorrow. “I know 
that he rejoices now in the great hall of Vanaheim, but it still seems more dream than 
truth to me that he is gone. There was surely so much more that he still might have 
done.” 

Aedhir suspected this was why Eirik allowed Einar to remain. He had told Pryce 
that the Enghan were frightened and desperate; this much, Aedhir knew was true. They 
had endured the relentless threat of Torachan assault for ten years, but what was upon 
them now was more than this.  
Something is getting ready to happen, Aedhir thought. The attack against the 
southern Torachan encampment had only been the beginning. Whatever the Enghan 
had planned, Eirik thought it was dangerous enough to warrant initiating his son into 
battle, to invite him to join in his council.  
He thinks something might happen to him in the days to come, Aedhir thought, 
looking at Einar. He was a handsome young man, with the lean, muscled form of an 
adult, and the relative innocence of youth still within his face. He had large eyes, like his 
sister’s, dark brown like his father. He had no beard, as he was still too young to grow 
one in full. He seemed immensely pleased that his father had not dismissed him with 
the women and Bjarki. If Eirik falls, it will be Einar’s clan to lead, and Eirik wants him to 
be ready. 
Thorir and Kolbrun remained, and the eight of them sat along the benches. 
Aedhir, Tacita and Odhran sat together in silence, watching as the Enghan men packed 
long, slender pipes with dried snuff and lit them. Thin, aromatic smoke wafted about the 
room as they puffed on the pipe stems to stoke the fire cradled within the bowls. 
Eirik had called Aedhir to their meeting because he was the leader of his people. 
Odhran and Tacita had established enough familiarity with Enghan history, customs and 
language that Eirik obviously regarded them as influential counsel to Aedhir; people 

who might be able to sway Aedhir’s understanding, his opinion to Eirik’s desired point-
of-view. 
Whatever that may be, Aedhir thought, perplexed and troubled. They do not want 
to harm us. So what do they want from us? 
Einar leaned toward his father’s shoulder, lifting his chin and speaking quietly 
against Eirik’s ear. He cut his eyes briefly at Odhran as he spoke, and Eirik raised his 
brows, following his son’s gaze. 
“You know the tale of Arnora?” Eirik asked Odhran. “Einar tells me you recounted 
it to his sister.” 
Odhran blinked at Aedhir uncertainly, and then turned to Eirik. “Yes, I…I know of 
it,” he said, nodding. 
“You know a lot about us, our people, Bjorn’sterkr,” Thorir said, folding his arms 
across his chest, holding the basin of his pipe lightly in his fingertips. “And your woman 
knows our tongue.” He nodded his chin sharply at Tacita. “How do you know so much?” 
“I learned it in school,” Odhran said. “At the university, in Belgaeran. It is the 
capital city of Tiralainn. I was studying history there, the laureate program.” 
He fell silent, realizing he had lost them at the word school. Einar leaned toward 
him, his dark eyes round and fascinated. “Where is…school?” he asked, pronouncing 
the word carefully, annunciating it as though it was a place-name. 
Odhran glanced at Aedhir and Tacita. “It…it is a place you go to learn,” he said 
after an uncertain moment. “Where they teach you things. Reading, writing when you 
are young, and then other things when you get older, like history…how to build 
things…medicine and healing…stories and poetry, that sort.” 

Einar looked puzzled. “Why does your family not teach you?” he asked. “My 
father taught me to hunt and fish, to sail on the sea, to build fires and houses. He told 
me of our history and stories, as did Uncle Beinir. Our gothi tends to our healing, and 
our sjona―our seer―is the only one with need to read or inscribe the runes.” 
He was being curious, not combative, and Odhran did not know what to say. He 
and Einar blinked at one another, mutually stupefied. 
“It is a Torachan place―a Torachan thing, this school,” said Thorir, with a frown. 
“We are not Torachans,” Aedhir said, meeting Thorir’s gaze evenly. 
“You came to us in Torachan clothing,” Thorir said. “You speak to us of Torachan 
things. You have the dark skin of the southern empire and bring a Torachan slave 
among us. We know what the mark on your woman’s face means.” He turned to Eirik. 
“We waste time with them. They are Torachans, Eirik, nothing more.” 
“Our culture has been influenced by Torach, yes,” Aedhir said. “Because men 
from Torach and the empire have made homes in Tiralainn. But we are not part of the 
empire, and we do not owe our loyalty to them. I met my lady Tacita in Capua, and I 
freed her from slavery. She traveled throughout much of this part of the Morthir as a 
vitori to the imperial temple. She has met Enghan tribes before, and that is how she 
speaks your language. She was born in Achaia, yes, but that does not make her your 
enemy.” 
Thorir snorted and shook his head. Eirik looked at Aedhir, his brow raised, and 
Aedhir knew without Eirik saying a word that he believed Aedhir spoke the truth. 
“How do you know of our history?” Einar asked Odhran.  

“Because Abhacans live in part of Tiralainn, a state called Tirurnua,” Odhran told 
him. “They used to live here, in the Morthir, what you called Nidavellir. They knew your 
ancestors. Your ancestors told them about Alfheim―Tiralainn―and when they 
abandoned Nidavellir to menfolk, they used boats your people had taught them to 
make, and they sailed west to our land. They kept what they knew of your history, your 
legends because of this―because your people were friends to them.” 
“Ah-vah-cans,” Einar said slowly. “From Nidavellir? You mean dvergar?” He held 
his hand up over the floor, his palm turned down as though indicating a diminutive 
height. When Odhran nodded, Einar’s mouth spread in a bright, eager smile and he 
turned to his father, wide-eyed. “Dvergar, Fathir!” he exclaimed. He looked at Odhran. 
“We have many, many stories of the dvergar. Our mountains are filled with tunnels―the 
ruins of their ancient cities all throughout here in Sube, and in Enthimork, even. They 
have left such wondrous things for us to find―great structures built into the bellies of 
the mountains, ancient blades with edges that are yet sharp and keen, metal armor that 
fire and ax cannot warp or scar, words inscribed in stone and wood―runes our sjonar 
cannot read or understand.” 
“Einar…” Eirik began, holding up his hand. 
“Can you read their runes?” Einar asked Odhran, excited. “Can you tell us what 
they say? How they made such―” 
“Einar, enough,” Eirik said, placing his hand against his son’s shoulder. 
“But, Fathir―” Einar began. 
“Enough, Einar,” Eirik told him again, meeting his gaze. “You can speak with him 
later about it, if it pleases you. For now, there are other things we should discuss.” 

Einar blinked at Odhran, visibly disappointed. “Ja, Fathir,” he said quietly, leaning 
back, hunching his shoulders slightly. 
Eirik kept his gaze, his attention on Aedhir. “I sent a group of men south by knarr 
to the Ulusian Nuqut before we left the battleground,” he said, surprising Aedhir. “There 
is a tribe of Oirat, the Uru’ut, who make their winter camp along the shores of Qoyina 
Bay. If your friend had been taken by the Oirat, the Uru’ut would know of it, and why.” 
Aedhir looked at Tacita. He had been holding her hand, keeping his fingers 
twined lightly through hers, and he tightened his grasp slightly, in sudden, eager hope. 
“Did you find them?” he asked Eirik. “Did they tell you anything? Where they have taken 
Rhyden?” 
Eirik raised his brows, his expression growing sympathetic, and Aedhir realized 
even before he spoke. He felt his stomach twist in dismay. “Someone reached them 
before we could,” Eirik said. “None of them remained. Their camp had been destroyed, 
their bodies heaped together and set afire. There was nothing but charred bone and 
blackened flesh by the time we arrived.” 
“Aedhir…” Tacita whispered, anguished for him. 
“It cannot be,” Aedhir gasped, stricken. “Who would do such a thing?” 
“We found the remnants of arrows among the ruins and debris,” Eirik said. “The 
arrowheads were fashioned out of metal, formed like those the Torachan legions use. It 
might have been the Khahl―they are sworn enemies of the Oirat, and loyal to the 
empire―but it seems unlikely to me they would be so far west of their Taiga territory, 
their city of Kharhorin. With the imperial troops that followed us so close by in Sube, it 
seems to me that the Torachans dispatched of them, murdered them.” 

Aedhir blinked down at his lap, stunned. He shook his head after a long, silent 
moment, and his brows furrowed, his free hand closing into a fist. “No,” he said, looking 
up at Eirik. “The Uru’ut may have been killed, but Rhyden was not among them. You 
told me your men had seen an Oirat longboat enter Tolui Bay. They did not go to the 
Nuqut, or to Qoyina.” 
Eirik’s gentle expression did not waver. “We cannot know that the vessel we saw 
was Oirat,” he said. “Not with certainty. The Forks of Sube are broad, and even our 
scopes do not let us see with clarity across its waters. My men told me only what they 
think they saw―it might have been drift wood caught in the tidal currents, large enough 
to resemble a knarr from their distance.” 
“They saw us plainly enough,” Aedhir said. 
“You came ashore in Sube,” Eirik told him. “Near enough to the land for them to 
see. If the Oirat came ahead of you by many hours, as you have described to me, my 
men might not have been in place to keep a look out. They might have sailed past them, 
heading down Qoyina Bay, and we would not have realized.” 
“He was not there,” Aedhir said, his fingers tightening against his palm. 
“Captain, you have told me all along you thought these Oirat meant to meet 
others of their people in the Nuqut,” Eirik said. “The Uru’ut are the only ones they might 
have met along Qoyina Bay. The Morcir peninsula dividing Ulus and Lydia is part of the 
Nuqut―and the Khar mountains are here.” 
“Rhyden is not dead,” Aedhir said. “He was not there. He is not dead.” 
“My men searched the bodies. Some still smoldered, but there were none left to 
identify, no faces untouched enough to discern even man from woman…much less your 

friend from among the Oirat.” Eirik stood and walked toward Aedhir. He genuflected in 
front of the bench, holding Aedhir’s gaze, his eyes soft and kind. “I am sorry,” he said. 
“It cannot be true,” Aedhir whispered. Had I felt despair just to think Rhyden was 
alone among them, out in the Khar mountains somewhere? he thought, anguished. 
Hoah, Sweet Mother Above, it cannot be true. It cannot. Rhyden cannot be dead. 
Eirik reached out, laying his hand against Aedhir’s. “I am not telling you this to be 
cruel,” he said.  
“Then why are you?” Tacita asked him, her voice sharp. “You have broken his 
heart―there is cruelty enough, I think.” 
“The empire did this,” Eirik told them, looking between the three of them gravely. 
“Captain, you told me you had approached an official in their city of Capua for aid in 
finding your friend, but they refused. Capua is a short enough distance for word to have 
reached their encampment in southern Sube. What if they had notified their soldiers? 
What if the legions thought the same as I did―that if Oirat had taken this friend of 
yours, the Uru’ut would know of it?” 
Aedhir looked at him in sudden, pained realization. The propraetor of Capua, 
Quintas Vitus had doubted his account of Rhyden’s abduction, but he had told Aedhir 
he would notify Cneas of the incident. Aedhir had promised him in a fit of anger that he 
would see to his own king’s notification, and he wondered now if those furious words 
had intimidated Vitus enough to take some action. Vitus might have feared reprimand 
from Cneas if Kierken contacted them, infuriated by their delay in offering help. Vitus 
could have sent word to the imperial forces in Sube, simply so that he could argue in his 
own defense that he had done something to help find the missing ambassador. The 

legions’ commanding officer might have dispatched some men to the Nuqut territory to 
investigate Aedhir’s allegations, as it was so close at hand. It would have taken time for 
such events to unfold, for word to arrive at the Torachan camp from Capua and for 
soldiers to be dispatched to sail down Qoyina Bay. The same amount of time, perhaps, 
it had taken the Oirat to sail north to the Forks of Sube―and Aedhir behind them. 
“He might have been killed by accident,” Eirik told Aedhir gently. “Or the Oirat 
might have been panicked by the soldiers and killed him themselves.” 
“They would not have killed him,” Aedhir said, his brows drawn. “They believed 
they needed him for something. They went to great lengths not to hurt him. They would 
not have killed him.” 
“Then that leaves only the empire,” Eirik said, and Aedhir realized to his dismay 
that he was right. “If he was killed by mistake by one of their arrows or blades, they 
likely sent word to your Capuan official that the Oirat dispatched him. They burned the 
bodies so no one would ever know otherwise. Matter resolved.” 
“Captain Fainne…” Odhran said quietly, and Aedhir knew Eirik’s words made as 
much sense to his mind as Aedhir’s. He felt the young man touch his shoulder, and he 
looked at him, pained.  
“Do you believe it?” he asked Odhran, though he knew the answer. “Do 
you…Odhran, do you think it is true?” 
“I do, sir,” Odhran whispered. “It sounds logical, sir. I am sorry.” 
Aedhir smiled at him. “It…hoah, it is not your fault, lad,” he said. “It sounds logical 
to me, too.” 

He stood, drawing away from them, walking toward the threshold. He closed his 
eyes against the sting of tears. I failed you, he thought to Rhyden. Oh, Mother Above, 
This is all my fault. All my fault―you are dead because of my failings, Rhyden―my 
failure. 
He uttered a sharp, furious cry, drew his arm back and let it fly, slamming the 
heel of his hand with all of his might into the wooden doorframe. He felt the beam 
crunch beneath the force of the blow and dull, tingling pain shimmied up his wrist toward 
his shoulder. 
Forgive me, he thought desperately, as his tears spilled. He shoved his palms 
against his eyes and shook his head. Oh, Rhyden, please forgive me. I…I am so sorry. I 
will never forgive myself for this. Never. 
“Aedhir…” Tacita said, coming to him. He felt her arms encircle his waist, and 
she pressed her cheek between his shoulders.  
“He was my friend,” Aedhir whispered, shuddering. “He was my friend, Tacita.” 
“I know,” she said, holding him. 
“I will never forgive myself,” he breathed, dragging in a ragged gasp of air. “I…I 
will never forgive myself for this.” 
“It is not your fault,” she whispered. 
But it is, he thought, despondent. Oh, Tacita, it has been my fault all along. 
* 
Eirik let Aedhir pace restlessly around the chamber, struggling to compose 
himself. While they waited, the Enghan men smoked their pipes and spoke quietly 
together. When a group of four Rekkr warriors entered the house, their arms laden with 

large wooden crates, Aedhir turned and blinked at them, startled. He recognized the 
boxes, as did Odhran, to judge by the look of surprise that crossed the young man’s 
face. They were the crates of firearms―an’dagan pistols and isnechan rifles―that had 
been stowed on their longboat. Although they had not distributed all of the weapons, 
Aedhir had brought enough so that every crewman―all sixteen aboard―could have 
been issued one if need be. 
Aedhir looked at Eirik, his brows drawn. “Where did you get those?” he asked 
sharply, striding toward the boxes. “Those belong to me and my crew.” 
“I know,” Eirik replied. “Thorir’s men found them. Your crew ran their knarr onto 
some shoals off of the Nuqut coast. They abandoned the boat for the shore, 
disappeared into the woods. Thorir’s men did not follow them. We do not know what 
became of them.” 
“You said they would burn the boat if they found it,” Aedhir said. 
“After they searched it, they did,” Eirik said. “They found two of your men aboard 
dead.” His face softened with remorse. “I am sorry. They did not know, Captain Fainne. 
They thought you were Torachans.” 
Aedhir lowered his face toward the floor, pained anew. Two of his crew dead, 
and the others more than likely so alone in the harsh winter of the Nuqut woods.  
“These weapons of yours,” Eirik said, drawing his gaze. “In the crates, and those 
you carried with you…they were made by the dvergar, were they not? These Abhacan 
you spoke of?” 
Aedhir blinked, surprised again. He glanced at Odhran, who was equally startled. 
“How did you know this?” Aedhir asked Eirik. 

Eirik walked over to one of the crates and pried back the lid. There were small 
boxes inside, each filled with the prepared load cartridges the crew had readied as they 
had approached Sube. He took one of the paper-wrapped loads in hand and walked 
toward the hearth, turning it absently between his fingertips. 
“Do the Torachans possess these weapons?” he asked Aedhir. “Have you 
shared with them?” 
“No,” Aedhir replied. The explosive power of the firearms―the black powder 
contained in the cartridges―was relatively new to the men and Elves of Tiralainn, 
although it was Aedhir’s understanding that the Abhacan had been making and using it 
for thousands of years. They had lived in secret for millennia in Tiralainn, and had 
hoarded the recipe for black powder with them. It was not until the establishment of the 
independent Abhacan state of Tirurnua following the First Shadow War that the 
Abhacan had begun to share such things with their neighboring races. 
“But they want you to?” Eirik asked. “The empire knows you have these 
weapons―and they want you to share them.” 
“It is not the weapons the empire wants exactly,” Odhran offered. “It is what 
makes them work―black powder. The Abhacan know how to make this, and they share 
it with us, the weapons, too. The Abhacan King, Neisrod, does not approve of sharing 
the formula for black powder with the empire, and our king respects his wishes on the 
matter. It belonged to the Abhacan first. They have only graciously shared with us.” 
“They make larger ones than these?” Eirik asked, glancing toward the crates.  
“Larger guns?” Aedhir asked. 
Eirik nodded. He met Aedhir’s gaze. “Very large.” 

“You mean cannons?” Aedhir wondered how in the bloody wide Bith the Enghan 
would know what a cannon was. Tiralainnian fortresses, cities and even ships in the 
Crown Navy were fortified with cannons designed and built by the Abhacans, like the 
an’dagan and isneachan, but it seemed unlikely the Enghan would have ever seen such 
a device. “We have cannons, yes.” How do you know what that is, Eirik? 
“Have you ever wondered, Captain Fainne, why Torach has not tried to conquer 
Tiralainn?” Eirik asked him. “Your land is only across a brief measure of sea from the 
center of the empire―where their forces, their fleet is strongest. They have not attacked 
you―and yet, they are fixed upon claiming Engjold―far to their north, and away from 
the strongest measure of their might.” He pinched the rolled paper between his hands, 
slowly, deliberately tearing open the load, working the little ball loose of the packing and 
wrapping, dropping it against his palm. “Have you wondered why, Captain?” he asked 
again. “The reasons are the same, you know.” 
What in the bloody duchan is he talking about? Aedhir thought. His eyes flew 
wide as he saw Eirik toss the remainder of the load―the black powder, packing and 
paper―into the coals.  
“Eirik, no―!” he cried, springing forward. There was a loud pop, and a bright 
burst of sparks and flames as the black powder ignited. A thick cloud of smoke belched 
out of the coals and rolled toward the opening in the ceiling above. 
“We both have gersimi,” Eirik said to Aedhir as the smoke waned. He turned his 
head, cupping the back of his hand lightly against his mouth as he coughed. “Black 
powder, you called it,” he said, his voice hoarse. He glanced at Odhran. “You are right, 
Bjorn’sterkr. It did belong to the dvergar first. They have shared it, it seems, with both of 

our peoples. The empire has tried to take it by force from us, but they do not dare―your 
weapons would destroy them. So they have tried in other ways.”  
“What do you mean?” Aedhir asked, frowning. 
“They take your ships, do they not?” Eirik said. “Attack you on the sea? Steal 
them―and your cannons?” 
“The empire does not. Pirates do.” Aedhir’s frown deepened as he spoke. It had 
been one bloody damn such encounter that had damaged the a’Maorga’s main top 
mast. A pirate’s poorly aimed cannon, along with Aedhir’s impulsive fist flying into 
Vaughn Ultan’s face were the primary reasons they were in the circumstances they now 
faced to begin with.  
“They attack our ships deliberately?” he asked, feeling anger stoke inside of him. 
He had known several fellow officers in the Crown Navy―men he had sailed with and 
called his friends for many long years―who had been killed during pirate raids in 
Torachan waters. “The empire pays them to attack our ships?”  
“They cannot attack you on their own, in ships under their own banners,” Eirik 
said. He walked toward Aedhir. “So yes, they have invented the pretense of pirates to 
do it for them. They can take your gersimi, your black powder, but they cannot duplicate 
it. They have tried; their imperial alchemists in Cneas have studied it, trying to learn 
what it is made of, but they cannot. When they run out of that they have taken from your 
ships, the cannons they have stolen from your people are no more than iron 
deadweights to them. 
“They will not challenge your people in battle, but they think mine simple and 
savage,” he said, standing before Aedhir, meeting his gaze. “They spread rumors and 

lies about us throughout the empire so that those villages and tribes we once traded 
with fear us now. They tried to get us to join their empire ten years ago―they thought 
we were ignorant, gullible; they wooed and plied us well. Our Konung refused them, and 
so they attack us. They attack my people because we know how to make gersimi, and if 
we will not share it with them, they mean to take it by force from us.  
“The dvergar taught us about gersimi thousands of years ago, before they 
disappeared from Nidavellir. The empire is fixed upon claiming Engjold―stealing the 
secrets of gersimi from us. The soldiers in the south―and those coming from the 
east―are only the beginning. They send more from the southern imperial states 
through Ulus with every passing day. They do not dare follow us too deeply into our 
mountains during winter months, but they will keep to the plains of Eng, their numbers 
increasing. By spring, our lands will be overflowing with legions. They will surge through 
our mountains and they will destroy us. We cannot hope to keep them from it―there are 
too many of them, and my people are weary, weakened by so many years of desperate 
flight and fighting. 
“If they conquer us―if Torach learns how to make gersimi for themselves―if 
they can claim enough of it to build weapons such as cannons, and these weapons you 
have brought with you, then no land will be a match for them, Captain Fainne,” Eirik 
said. “They will turn next upon your Tiralainn and they will conquer you. They will 
conquer the known world.” 
“What do you want from me?” Aedhir asked him, closing his hands into fists. “My 
people have not given black powder to the empire―and we will not, as long as Kierken 
holds the throne. Why have you told me these things? What do you expect me to do?” 

“Help us,” Eirik said. “Send word to your king. Tell him what has happened, what 
you have learned. Ask him to help us.” 
Aedhir realized Eirik’s despair, his hopelessness. “Eirik,” he said softly. “This is 
your battle, your war with the empire. I am sorry. Kierken has worked many long years 
to establish trade with Torach. My friend Rhyden worked as Kierken’s ambassador to 
establish this. Kierken will not throw that away arbitrarily. He would not choose sides.” 
“Whatever pretenses they offered your friend and your king for trading with your 
people were lies,” Eirik said. “They have only ever wanted this…” He motioned with his 
fingertips toward the last fading smoke of the black powder. “Gersimi. And when they 
have it, they will take your realm by force. Your people will be the ones who run, as 
mine do―who cannot sleep a night through without fear of legions coming upon us in 
the darkness. They will hunt you down and they will defeat you. They will enslave your 
people―just as they have the rest of their empire.” 
Aedhir met Eirik’s gaze. “I cannot help you,” he said. “Even if I agreed to try, I 
could not convince Kierken. I have nothing but your word that these are Torach’s 
intentions, that they are an enemy to our people.”  
“I have had nothing but your word as to your intentions, Captain―and I have 
trusted you at this,” Eirik told him, visibly wounded. 
“Against the counsel of your fellows,” Thorir muttered, his brows drawn as he 
glowered at Aedhir. 
“And I have trusted you at yours, Eirik,” Aedhir said, ignoring Thorir. “But my king 
will not make decisions that could affect all of my people based on your word alone, 
Eirik―or mine, for that matter. He would want proof―proof I cannot give to him.” 

“The empire murdered your friend!” Eirik cried, closing his hands into frustrated 
fists. “They cut him down and then burned him. They will blame an innocent tribe for his 
death! What more proof than this do you need for their treachery?” 
His words sliced into Aedhir’s heart like a sharpened edge of steel. He could not 
hope to explain to Eirik that though he was devastated by the realization of Rhyden’s 
murder, and enraged enough to seek vengeance for it, there was nothing he could do. 
Aedhir knew when Kierken learned of it, he would be anguished and infuriated as well; 
more than an ambassador to the Crown, Rhyden had been one of the King’s most 
trusted counsels―and his friend. But no matter their pain or anger, there were simply 
protocols in place among civilized realms. Such incidences would be investigated, 
mediated between Torachan and Tiralainnian liaisons; meetings would be held, official 
apologies would be offered and accepted in the effort to preserve good will. Kierken 
understood this, as did Aedhir. The king would not commit his people to war simply to 
assuage his own grief―not even for Rhyden. 
“Here is the benefit you hoped to gain from keeping these men among us?” 
Thorir asked Eirik, rising to his feet. He was clearly exasperated by the entire line of 
conversation. His brows were drawn, his hands closed into fists. “This is the 
intercession you hoped they would provide? You would grovel like a whipped and 
cowed dog before them, begging for their aid? Your eyes are wide open, Eirik, but you 
do not see.” He shoved his forefinger at Aedhir. “He is Torachan! Every one among 
them―servants of the empire! They were part of the encampment we defeated who 
somehow escaped the carnage or fled from it, maybe, like cowards among the trees. 
How do we know they were not part of the detachment sent to massacre the Uru’ut?” 

Thorir glared at Aedhir. “They are imperial spies. By all I have, Eirik, they are. 
They have been sent to trick us as surely as if Lopt himself sent them. They are using 
woeful stories and lies to deceive us―to deceive you into trusting them. The empire’s 
alchemists have taken the precious little gersimi they have stolen and made these 
weapons―tools they would use once they learn to make it for themselves. If the empire 
cannot take it by force from us, they will lure it from us in the guise of friendship.” 
“That is enough, Thorir,” Eirik said. 
“Yes, it is,” Thorir snapped back. “More than plenty. I have had enough of this. 
Are you so soft―so without the benefit of your senses, Eirik―that you would believe 
this man’s word over mine?” 
“I said enough, Thorir!” Eirik shouted, turning to him, his hands folding into fists.  
“Your father would rise from his pyre to see such as this,” Thorir shouted back. 
“With every breath that this man draws, with every lie that flutters from his forked 
tongue―” He pointed to Aedhir again. “―you lead your people closer to certain defeat 
and death, Eirik!” 
“Do not speak to my father so,” Einar said, rising to his feet. He stood nearly toe-
to-toe with Thorir, his brows drawn, his dark eyes flashing. His hand curled against the 
hilt of his dagger. “You have no right, Thorir―you and your people live only because of 
him. You would not have lasted this far into the winter without our homes to share, our 
food stores.” 
Thorir looked at the younger man, and the corner of his mouth raised in tandem 
with his brow. He glanced at Eirik. “Your son is brave, and fierce of heart,” he said. 
“Perhaps he should be the one to lead your clan.” 

“I should only hope that if that mantle comes to me, I might be half the man my 
father is to bear it,” Einar retorted sharply. 
“Einar, sit down,” Eirik said. He had regained his composure somewhat, and his 
hands unfurled, his fists loosening. Einar looked at him in angry implore, and Eirik’s face 
softened as he shook his head. “Please,” he said, holding up his hand. “Sit down.” 
Einar spared one more menacing look at Thorir and then stepped away, obeying 
his father.  
“Thorir, your arguments are not lost upon me,” Eirik said, drawing his gaze. “But 
you are wrong. I would not lead my people blindly to death. If anything, death follows 
us―it pursues us without mercy, no matter how far we run or where we go, and I am 
tired of it. Please…” He placed his hand against Thorir’s shoulders. “We have known 
each other all of our lives. You are as dear to me as a brother―you know this, Thorir.” 
“Then I am asking you as a brother to believe in me,” Thorir said. “To trust me.” 
Eirik looked at him, his face filled with sorrow. “I must trust what is within my 
heart first,” he said, making Thorir frown. “And my heart tells me these men are not 
enemies to us.” 
“You would bring him to Elbeuf, seek his counsel again, beg him some more 
upon your knees?” Thorir asked. He shrugged his shoulder, dislodging Eirik’s hand. He 
snorted dismissively. “Fine―do it, then. We shall see what the Konung says of it. He will 
agree with me, I promise you this.” 
He turned on his boot heel and stomped away. He threw the door open wide and 
took his leave, slamming it with enough force behind him to send loose chaff fluttering 
down from the ceiling.  

A heavy silence fell upon the room in Thorir’s wake. At last, Eirik sighed and 
forked his fingers through his hair. He turned to Aedhir. “You might have made this 
easier for me, Captain,” he said wearily. 
“I am sorry, Eirik,” Aedhir said. “With all of my heart, I am sorry for what the 
empire has done to your people―what is does even now. But I cannot help you. What 
you are asking of me is not within my power to give. I could tell you I would write my 
king―I could beg him on my knees with all of the things you have told me, but it would 
not make a difference. Not because he would not care or would not sympathize with 
your people and your plight, but because he would be as helpless as I am. There are 
simply ways that things are done, and he cannot change that. Neither can I.” 
Eirik looked at him for a long moment. “I will see that you are given a small knarr 
and supplies in Elbeuf. Their harbor is near the mouth of Holavik, on the Chagan Sea. 
You and your men can sail west from there.” 
Aedhir blinked at him, surprised.  
“I would do that, were I you,” Eirik told him. “Sail for the west. Return to your 
home, Captain Fainne. Your friend is dead, and these lands will be no place to be 
before the month’s end.” 
“You are going to war,” Aedhir said. He had suspected this, but now realized it 
with certainty as he saw the grave determination in Eirik’s eyes. “You and your people, 
you mean to take the empire on headlong.” 
“We have been at war, Captain,” Eirik replied. “What we mean to do is end it, one 
way or the other, once and for all.” He clapped his hand against Aedhir’s shoulder and 
offered him a faint, weary smile before he walked away, heading for the back room of 

the house. “Do not look so sad for us, Captain,” he said. “It is your turn next. War will 
find you, too, whether you want it or not. The empire will see to that.” 
* 
Aedhir lay awake long into the night. Eirik and his family had retired to the back 
room. Arnora, Bjarki and Halla shared the heather-laden bed, while Eirik, Einar and 
Beinir curled onto pallets against the floor nearby. Odhran and Tacita had been allowed 
to remain. Odhran slept nearby. The lamps had been snuffed; the coals from the hearth 
had dimmed to a soft, waning amber glow, and Aedhir could hear the sounds of the 
young man’s breaths, deep and slow as his mind faded with exhaustion. 
Aedhir lay on his side on a spread of wool blankets, a pair of lined furs draped 
over him against the chill. Tacita lay next to him, spooned against his body. He could 
feel her forehead resting between his shoulders, her hand against his hip beneath the 
blankets, and he found such comfort in her presence, her touch, he thought he might 
weep. 
His heart would not let him sleep. He kept thinking of Eirik’s words, Eirik’s face 
twisted with desperate implore. 
Help us. 
Have you ever wondered why Torach has not tried to conquer Tiralainn? Your 
land is only across a brief measure of sea from the center of the empire―where their 
forces, their fleet is strongest. They have not attacked you―and yet, they are fixed upon 
claiming Engjold―far to their north, and away from the strongest measure of their 
might. 
Help us. 

They have only ever wanted this…gersimi. And when they have it, they will take 
your realm by force. Your people will be the ones who run, as mine do―who cannot 
sleep a night through without fear of legions coming upon us in the darkness. They will 
hunt you down and they will defeat you.  
There is nothing I can do, Eirik, Aedhir thought helplessly. I am not even 
supposed to be here―I am supposed to yet be in bloody Cuan’darach in Tiralainn, two 
weeks yet from setting sail again. There is nothing I can do. 
The empire murdered your friend! Eirik cried within his mind. They cut him down 
and then burned him. They will blame an innocent tribe for his death! What more proof 
than this do you need for their treachery? 
Aedhir closed his eyes and saw Rhyden. His mind brought him back to that 
terrible night in Capua, to the bar at the Pauper’s Pyre. He would see Rhyden turn to 
him, his tired, troubled expression softening into a gentle smile, and he would hear 
Rhyden’s voice. 
You are my friend, Aedhir. 
What am I going to do, Rhyden? he thought, anguished. I have failed you. I have 
failed us all. What am I going to do? 
He drew in a soft, ragged breath, closing his eyes. 
“It is alright,” he heard Tacita whisper as she snuggled closer to him. He had 
thought she was sleeping, and he turned at the soft sound of her voice. He rolled onto 
his back, and she shifted her weight as he hooked his arm around her.  
“I am sorry,” he whispered. “I did not mean to wake you.” 

“You did not,” she told him, laying her cheek against his heart, her hand against 
his stomach. She lifted her face, brushing her lips against his chin. “It is not your fault, 
Aedhir. None of this is your fault.” 
“Yes,” he said softly. “It is.” 
Tacita sat up, propping her weight on her arm as she looked down at him. Her 
lovely face was draped in shadows, her blond hair spilling over her shoulders, brushing 
lightly against his face and neck. “It is not your fault,” she said again, cupping her hand 
against his face. “I know what it is like to long to change the past. I know what burden it 
is to think that circumstances beyond our control might have been somehow if only we 
had chosen differently―a different path, a different word, some other course of action. I 
know your pain, Aedhir, and I promise you―what has happened is not your fault.” 
He reached up, brushing his fingertips against her face. He had always known 
there was some deep, inherent sorrow within her; her tears at their encampment in 
Sube had not been the first hint of this. As she spoke to him, whispered to him in the 
dark, he realized she knew his pain because it was her own. She, too, carried the 
burden of some great and terrible culpability. 
Tell me of it. He raised his head from the blankets, his shoulders. He took her 
face between his hands and kissed her. Please, Tacita. Tell me why you are hurting. 
She smiled at him, stroked his cheek. “It is not your fault,” she said again. 
“I wish I could believe that.” 
“Believe it,” she breathed, kissing him deeply, drawing his voice from his throat in 
a low murmur. “Believe me.”  

He sat up, holding her in his arms, leaning her backwards. Halla had given her a 
long linen shift dress to wear, and Aedhir felt the thin fabric drape around her waist as 
she drew her legs about him, pressing her thighs against him. He reached between 
them, unfettering the waistcords of his pants. He shifted his weight, and she helped him, 
her hands easing his breeches away from his hips. He kissed her throat again, and 
when he lowered himself slowly into her, Tacita arched her back to greet him, moaning 
softly against his ear.  
“I love you,” he breathed as she moved with him. 
“Believe in that, too,” she told him. “If nothing else, Aedhir, believe in that, too.” 
For the moment, his sorrow and despair lifted from him as she gave him blessed 
reprieve and with all of his heart, all of his mind, Aedhir did. He believed. 
 

Chapter Eight 
 
Pryce lay on his side, layers of wool blankets tucked about him against the cold. 
The Enghan house he and Wen had been brought to was next door to Eirik’s. It had 
seemed unoccupied upon their arrival; it was Blakinn’s home, and he had left it 
untended while he rode south with the Herr. Whether the house belonged rightfully to 
Blakinn, or it was only one he used while his people stayed among the residents of Lith, 
Pryce did not know. He did not know much at all about Blakinn, because the Rekkr 
warrior did not speak Torachan. He spoke Enghan, though, and a lot of it. He had 
chattered nearly nonstop at Pryce during their journey together from the battlefield. It did 
not seem to bother Blakinn in the slightest that Pryce had seldom―if any―idea what he 
was talking about. 
Blakinn was an enormous, burly hulk of a man, more than a foot taller than 
Pryce, and outweighing even Thierley by a good thirty pounds of muscle and brawn. 
Despite his imposing appearance, he had been very kind to Pryce, and seemed 
genuinely fond of him for some reason. Pryce had come to believe that Blakinn had 
once had a family of his own, a son perhaps, and that whatever might have happened 
to them, he reminded Blakinn in some poignant way of his boy. 
While Wen had retreated to the back room of the little house to wash her face 
and change her clothes upon their return from seeing Aedhir, Blakinn genuflected on 
the dirt floor beside Pryce. He had stoked a fire in the small, square, stone hearth in the 
center of the room, but the blaze had not had time yet to cut the chill in the air. Blakinn 
had drawn Pryce’s blankets about his shoulder. “Er thu kaldr, litt’einn?” he had asked. 

Enghan sometimes sounded similar enough to the common language that Pryce 
could figure out what Blakinn was saying. Here was one such instance. Blakinn had 
said, Are you cold, little one? 
Pryce had smiled at him. “No, Blakinn,” he had lied, shaking his head. “I am fine.” 
He had found one fleeting hope of escape while they had traveled to Lith. During 
one of the Enghan’s first, infrequent stops, Blakinn had lowered Pryce’s blindfold from 
his face and allowed him to relieve himself. This fleeting opportunity had been all that 
Pryce needed to study the ropes about his wrists without drawing suspicion. The 
fashioning of the knots were unfamiliar to him, but he had spent half of his life on the 
sea, and tying knots of varying degrees of intricacy and tautness was fairly second-
nature. He had memorized the design of the interlocking twine, and as they rode along 
after that, Blakinn’s voice yammering in undecipherable but friendly conversation in his 
ear, Pryce had thought about the knots, pondered over them. 
He had been unable to crane his wrists, cant his hands enough to reach his own. 
That much he determined right away. He could hook his fingers over his wrist and paw 
at the knots, fumble against them, but he could not move with enough dexterity to even 
loosen them, much less unfetter them.  
But if I could get close enough to one of the others, he had realized. I could untie 
theirs, loosen them enough that they could wriggle free. 
Opportunity had presented itself two days later. The Enghan had stopped again. 
Pryce had expected to be brought somewhere to relieve himself again; he had been 
caught off-guard when instead, Blakinn led him a short distance away from his 

bergelmir, halted and put his hands against Pryce’s shoulders, easing him onto his 
knees. 
They had been in a forest again. Pryce had been able to smell pine sap in the air 
since early afternoon, and he had feel pine needles beneath his knees, crunching softly 
beneath his weight. 
Pryce had heard someone calling out in friendly fashion to Blakinn; one of his 
friends from among the ranks had found him. Blakinn had laughed and called back in 
greeting, and then Pryce had heard him walk away. The sound of the other Enghan’s 
voice boomed again, and he had heard them talking together, laughing nearby. 
He had heard more footsteps approaching him. An Enghan man barked 
something sharply, and then someone had uttered a soft, breathless grunt as they fell 
against the pine needles beside him. Pryce had felt a sudden excitement. It was 
someone from the longboat crew, someone else shoved to the ground next to him. 
“Who is that?” he had whispered, turning his head, listening to the Enghan who 
had snapped stomp away from them. “Who is there?” 
“Pryce?” he had heard a small voice whimper, and his heart had suddenly 
seized, wracked with dismay.  
Oh, Mother Above/ Of all of the bloody people, all of the bloody times, not 
now…not bloody now…! 
It had been Wen―likely the last person in the world Pryce had wanted anything 
to do with at that point. She had fallen against him, trembling, her fingers clutching at 
the front of his coat. The Enghan made no move to separate them, and Pryce had 
realized this was the best way, better even than one of the men, the only way. The 

Enghan had seen only a hysterical girl turning to her friend for comfort. They had not 
suspected anything otherwise. If they let us keep this close, I can untie her, he had 
thought. 
“Aelwen,” he had whispered, lowering his face toward hers, letting his lips brush 
against her ear as he spoke softly, deliberately. “Aelwen, listen to me.” 
“I am sorry,” she had said to him. “Please, I…I am so sorry. I did not mean to hurt 
you. I…I did not mean to lie…” She had moved her hands, touching his face with her 
fingers. “I did not mean it. I…please, I wanted to tell you…so…so badly, Pryce…please 
do not be angry with me.” 
“Aelwen,” he had said again in a hush. He had not wanted to think about her; he 
had not wanted to remember that sudden, stricken moment of horrified realization on 
the beach, when the Enghan, Thorir had thrust his hand between her thighs. Pryce had 
known it then; it had struck him with all of the force of a catapulted stone in the gut. He 
had not needed to hear Odhran’s furious screams to know with certainty; he had not 
needed Aedhir to say it aloud to realize to whom he had been entrusting his friendship, 
his heart to all of those weeks. 
This is Aelwen…my daughter. 
Aelwen. He had replayed every conversation he had held with Wen over and 
over again in his mind to his dismay, realizing every last intimate secret and thought he 
had shared. He had told her everything. He had been so grateful for a friend, someone 
to confide in that his sense had abandoned him, the restraint that was typical for him 
waning recklessly and in full.  

“Please,” Wen had whispered to him in the forest, touching his face. “Please, 
Pryce, do not be angry.” 
He had wanted to seize her by the shoulders and shake her furiously, helplessly. 
I thought you were my friend! he had wanted to shout at her. The best I have ever 
known―I trusted you! I told you everything! Everything about me―and I thought you 
shared in return, but it was all lies! I thought you were my friend. My best friend, 
Wen―you were my bloody damn best friend. 
“Aelwen,” he had said, drawing any semblance of friendliness from his voice, 
hissing in her ear. “Shut up.” 
She had gasped, falling silent, her breath stilling against his skin. 
“I do not care how sorry you are,” he had breathed at her. “There are more 
pressing matters at the moment than any pathetic need for absolution you might feel.” 
“Pryce…I…” Wen had whimpered, realizing his anger, his pain.  
“I am going to untie you,” he had hissed. “I cannot reach my own knots, but I can 
loosen yours. Get your hands off of my face and bring them toward my lap. Move your 
hips toward me and try to hide me while I do it.” 
She had not said anything. He had felt her breath flutter against him as her 
hands moved away from his face, and he jerked her wrists roughly against his thigh. He 
kept his cheek pressed against hers, his lips near her ear as his fingers danced across 
her bindings, setting to work on the knots.  
“Listen to me,” he had said. “We are in a forest again. We must be north of the 
mountains now, toward the Holavik Bay. I am going to untie you. Go south, go back to 
the battlefield and wait for the Torachans. That Enghan man, Thorir, said legions of 

them were crossing the isthmus from Enthimork and coming into Sube. We have been 
moving for two days. They must be nearly to the battlefield by now. Wait for 
them―meet them there. Tell them what has happened. They can help us. Can you do 
that, Aelwen? Can you run away and hide? Can you find your way to the south again?” 
She had nodded, wordlessly, trembling against him, and he had heard her hitch 
in a quiet breath as she began to cry. 
Oh…please…do not do that, he had thought in dismay, feeling sudden remorse 
at his harsh tone, his sharp words. Oh, Mother Above, I…do not cry, Wen.  
Nothing broke him more than a woman’s tears. Nothing stripped him of anger or 
reason, nothing crippled his heart more swiftly or thoroughly. He hated for a woman to 
cry. His mother had cried so much, and he had always felt so helpless against her tears, 
so culpable for them. Had he told Wen this? Did she know, and was just using it against 
him? He could not remember. He had told her so much, there was no telling, no 
conceiving of what―if anything―had remained unsaid between them. 
She had uttered a soft, hurting sound, a fragile, breathless mewl, and Pryce had 
closed his eyes, his hands falling still against her bindings. Please do not do this to me, 
he had thought. 
“Wen…” he had whispered. She had turned her cheek against his and he had felt 
her tears against his skin, seeping out from beneath the edge of her blindfold. “Wen, 
come on now…please…please do not…” 
“I…I am sorry.” He had felt her hands move beneath his, her fingers slip between 
his own. “Please, Pryce…I am so sorry…” 

“Wen, there is not much time,” he had said. “Please…” Do not do this to me, 
Wen. 
“I did not mean to hurt you,” she had whispered, lifting her face, her breath warm 
against his ear. “Please, Pryce, I did not mean for this…any of it. Not like this.” 
And then she had whispered something to him that had left him stunned and 
reeling even now, a full day later. It had stripped the anger from him in full, leaving him 
helpless and confused. 
“I love you,” she had breathed to him, stilling his breath, his heart.  
“Wh-what…?” he had gasped, drawing away from her, startled. 
Blakinn had hooked his hands beneath Pryce’s arms at this precise moment, and 
pulled him up and away from Wen. Pryce had felt his fingers dance one last moment 
against hers, and then they brushed against only the empty air between them. 
He had been back in the saddle with Blakinn, the bergelmir moving beneath them 
again before it even occurred to Pryce that he had not unfettered Wen’s bonds. The 
moment was gone; his plan was ruined. Somehow, he had not cared about this. In fact, 
it had been the furthest thought from his mind.  
I love you. 
Why did you say that? he thought as he lay upon the floor of Blakinn’s house. He 
could hear Wen in the small room at the rear of the house; her footsteps rustled against 
the chaff-strewn floor. He could hear the water splash softly as she dipped her hands or 
a linen into the wash basin. 
Why did you say that, Wen? He still felt dazed with shock. No woman had ever 
said those words to him before. He had never offered them either, except for clumsy 

attempts in the last letter he had ever written to Mena―little more than wasted ink set to 
parchment. He had hoped Mena might love him, but he had always known on some 
level that had been too painful for him to acknowledge that she did not and never would. 
I love you. 
It had never occurred to Pryce as he had despaired over all of the secrets he had 
shared and confided with Wen that she might have been sincere in her attention, her 
friendship. It had all seemed blown into the wind to him when he realized she was a girl. 
He had been dismayed most of all to think that more than her identity, her friendship to 
him had been a cruel and calculated lie.  
He had never considered that as he had spoke to her, as he had opened his 
heart and mind to her so freely and unguarded that she might have fallen in love with 
him. It simply did not seem possible. Pryce had always felt like Mena had judged him 
fairly and accurately; she had not found anything of merit in his mind or heart, and Pryce 
had convinced himself that her assessment would likely be shared by any woman he 
ever fancied. 
Mother Above, he thought. Why did you say that, Wen?  
He heard her footsteps again and realized she was coming. He closed his eyes 
and pretended to be asleep, listening to the whisper of her feet against the floor. He 
heard Blakinn speak to her, directing her toward the pallet he had made for her next to 
Pryce, and she mumbled something in hesitant thanks. 
Pryce listened to the rustling of blankets as Wen lowered herself to the floor. 
Blakinn had not unfettered their hands, but Pryce knew it was a moot point now to even 

bother untying Wen’s bonds. Aedhir had asked them not to; he had instructed them not 
to do anything, and Pryce had agreed to this, albeit reluctantly. 
“Gothr draumar, litt einnar,” Blakinn said to them, as his footsteps faded. Good 
dreams, little ones. He walked into the back room, to his bed for the night. 
Pryce and Wen lay alone, with only the dancing glow of the fire, the crackling of 
flames against dry wood for company. After a long, silent moment, he heard Wen 
wriggle and felt her fingertips brush against the back of his shoulder. 
“Pryce?” she whispered. 
He did not answer. He did not know what to say to her.  
“Pryce, are you…are you sleeping?” she asked, her voice soft, little more than a 
breath. 
When he still did not reply, she moved again. He felt her draw against him, her 
body spooned near to his. She touched his back gently with her hands, and tucked her 
forehead between his shoulders. “Please,” she whispered. 
He opened his eyes and watched the amber glow of flames fluttering against the 
wall. 
“Please talk to me,” Wen begged softly, her voice tremulous, her fingertips 
clutching lightly at his blankets. When she lifted her chin, he could feel the warmth of 
her breath against the nape of his neck, the back of his ear. 
“I told you about my mother,” he said quietly, his brows drawing together.  
“I…I know,” she whispered. 
Most of Pryce’s memories of his mother were shameful things he had kept 
fiercely hidden, locked away within his heart. He never spoke with anyone about her, 

not even Aedhir. More than anything else he had told Wen, the fact that he had shared 
these memories with her shamed him the most. Inire Finamur had been mad, and Pryce 
had always felt an agonizing culpability for her madness. Even though in his mind, he 
knew there was nothing he could have done to prevent it, in his heart, he still thought if 
he had only tried harder, he might have kept her from her grief and isolation, saved her 
somehow. 
She had gone to bed one night and opened her wrists with a folding razor. Pryce 
had found her the next morning, laying in her bed, blood on the sheets in a broad stain, 
blood upon her gown. He had been twelve years old. He had not understood; he still did 
not understand. He still thought it was his fault. 
“I told you about my mother, Wen,” he whispered again, shrugging his shoulder 
away from her hands.  
“I know,” she said softly, her fingertips finding his back again, tentatively.  
“I thought you were my friend,” he said. He drew his bound hands toward his 
face. “My best friend, Wen.” 
“I am sorry, Pryce,” she whimpered, her voice trembling. “I…please, I am your 
friend.” 
He managed a soft, bitter laugh. He flapped his arm again to dislodge her hands. 
“You do not lie to friends, Aelwen,” he said. “You do not pretend to be someone you are 
not, and then make up whatever stories you bloody damn well please to make them like 
you.” 

“I did not make up stories,” she whispered, making him laugh again, shaking his 
head. “I did not, Pryce. I might have told you men were women…changed that, but I did 
not make them up.” 
“So your Dwarf lover was real?” he asked, his voice sharp and mean. “Only it 
was a Dwarf man, not a Dwarf woman―and you loved him, or so you thought.” 
“Yes,” Wen said softly. “Yes, his name was Nichas, and he was real. I thought I 
loved him.” 
Pryce fell silent, caught off-guard by this frank admission. 
“My mother wanted me to marry a dreadful man,” Wen said. “That was not a lie, 
either. She really did something to send Nichas away and meant to make me marry this 
awful nobleman. I did not want to, but I might have…no matter how angry or hurt I was if 
I had not…”  
She was quiet for a long moment, and she touched him again. “I found my 
father’s letters,” she whispered. “I did not tell you that. I could not―I knew that you 
would know if I told you. You would know who I am.” 
“I had the right to know,” he said. 
She nodded, her nose brushing against him. “Yes, you did,” she said softly, 
anguished.  
“I would not have told you things if I had known.” 
“I know,” she whispered, caressing her hand against his shoulder. “Forgive me. 
Please, I am begging, Pryce. Please forgive me.” 
He closed his eyes and said nothing, tucking his forehead against his hands. 
“I love you,” she said. 

“Do not say that,” he whispered, stricken. 
“But I do,” she said, and she gasped softly, weeping again, cleaving his heart. 
She pressed her brow against his shoulder and trembled against him. 
“Please, Wen,” he breathed. “Please, just go to sleep. Do not do this to me.” 
“I love you, Pryce.” 
He forked his fingers in his hair and pressed the heels of his palms against his 
brow. “Please, Wen,” he begged. “Please, I…I cannot…please, just leave me alone. Go 
to sleep.” 
She whimpered quietly, her tears spilling.  
“Please do not cry,” he whispered. “You will break me, Wen…” 
“I am sorry,” she gasped. She was quiet after this, her tears fading into quiet, 
tremulous hiccups. He lay awake, listening to the soft, fluttering sound of her breath. 
She fell asleep next to him, her body curled against his, her forehead against his back. 
He could feel her knees tucked against the back of his thighs, her hands against the 
middle of his back. She was warm; he could feel the heat of her body seeping through 
her blankets, through his.  
He fell asleep at last, nearly an hour later, his exhausted mind marveling over 
how warm she was; how it did not feel so bad to have her tucked against him. It felt nice 
to him, he realized dimly as he faded off to sleep; it felt almost right somehow. 
* 
When Pryce awoke the next morning, he could not remember where he was at 
first, and he stared in bewildered fright at the unfamiliar room before him. He sat up, but 

when he tried to move his hands, he realized they were bound together, and he 
remembered. 
“Hoah…” he whispered, shuddering. He was at Blakinn’s home, in the Enghan 
village of Lith. He ran his fingers through his disheveled hair and blinked dazedly about. 
New, faint sunlight spilled through the opening in the ceiling above the square hearth; 
the fire had long since died, and the room was very cold. His breath hung in the air 
before him. 
Wen murmured from beside him, and he looked down at her. She did not rouse; 
she moved her hands as if reaching for him, her fingertips brushing lightly against his 
hip. The Enghan had given her a dress to change into the night before, a simple, long-
sleeved frock dyed a light shade of blue. Her eyes were closed, her expression soft as 
she slept. As Wenham Poel, she had worn her shoulder-length hair caught back in a tail 
against the nape of her neck, as was fashionable for noblemen. She wore it unfettered 
now, and in her sleep, it had tumbled about her face in wayward curls and tendrils. For 
the first time, Pryce saw her―really saw her―as a young woman, and he stared at her, 
breathless to realize how beautiful she really was. 
He wanted to believe her, he realized as he looked down at her. He had grown 
accustomed to her, fond of her in the guise of Wen Poel, and he had missed her. He 
missed her still, and he wanted to believe her because he did not want to lose her. No 
matter what had happened, he remained fond of her in his heart, and he missed her 
friendship, her company, her comfort. 
He touched her, brushing his thumb lightly against her cheek, and he smiled 
softly as her brows drew together. He had tickled her; it had aggravated her, and she 

turned her face away. “Stop…damn it…” she murmured, flapping her hands lightly 
against his. 
It was something his friend Wen would say; not a man or a woman, but his friend, 
someone dear to him. My best friend, he thought. 
“Alright, Wen,” he whispered. 
He drew his hand away from and crawled out from beneath his blankets. He 
stumbled about for an uncertain moment. The fire had died, and he did not see any 
wood near the hearth to rekindle it. He remembered that Blakinn had brought wood 
inside with him the night before, and Pryce wondered if there was a pile out in the yard 
somewhere, maybe stacked alongside the house. He went to the door and opened it, 
wincing as it groaned on its hinges. He turned and looked over his shoulder; he could 
hear Blakinn snoring quietly from the back room, undisturbed by the sound. Pryce 
slipped across the threshold and out into the yard, blinking against the dim, pale glow of 
the newly risen sun. 
It was very cold; the ground was crusted with a thin layer of old snow and new 
frost. Pryce saw a piled heap of split firewood across the yard, beneath the eaves of a 
small barn, and he tromped through the snow toward it. Collecting firewood had seemed 
a relatively simple task in the undertaking, but he realized it was a bit more trouble than 
he had anticipated with his hands bound together. His gloves were inside the house, 
and his hands were quickly numb with cold as he struggled to ease logs from the pile 
against the crooks of his elbows. He managed to get four or five pieces in place. When 
he turned to trundle them inside, he felt them shift and slip in his grip, and he danced 

backwards, his eyes wide with start as they dropped to the ground. One of the logs 
smacked against the top of his boot and he yelped. 
“Damn it,” he muttered, shaking his foot, wincing as he stepped gingerly on it. 
Nothing broken, but bruised for certain. “Bloody well rot it all…” 
“Let me help you,” he heard a voice say behind him, and he turned in surprise to 
find Odhran ducking between the fence rails separating Eirik’s adjacent yard and 
Blakinn’s. Odhran walked toward him, his hands unbound and outstretched. 
“Are you alright, Lieutenant?” Odhran asked him, reaching for Pryce’s bound 
wrists. 
“Yes, I just…a piece fell on my foot,” Pryce said. “I will live.” He blinked at 
Odhran’s hands as he started to work at unfettering Pryce’s bonds. “Your hands are 
untied.” 
“They cut them loose last night,” Odhran said, frowning, puzzled by the knots. 
“Pull the short end through,” Pryce told him, nodding at his hands in directive. He 
raised his palms toward his face and bit the side of one looped coil with his teeth. 
“Through here,” he said, lisping around the rope.  
“Oh,” Odhran said, following his instruction. 
“And around again,” Pryce said. “See…? It loops around again.” 
“I see,” Odhran nodded. He glanced up at Pryce and smiled. “You could have 
done this yourself, I suspect.” 
“Could not reach it myself,” Pryce said, and Odhran laughed. Pryce looked at him 
for a long moment. “You are with Aedhir?” he asked. 

“Yes,” Odhran nodded. “They brought me and Tacita to him last night, because 
we both…we know more about the Enghan than the others.” 
Pryce nodded. 
Odhran met his gaze, his hands pausing against the ropes. “Rhyden Fabhcun is 
dead,” he said softly. Pryce gasped, startled. “Eirik sent men to an Oirat village along 
Qoyina Bay, a tribe called the Uru’ut. He said they are the only ones who make their 
camp there, the only ones they might have brought Lord Fabhcun to. The village had 
been destroyed. The empire reached them first. Eirik thinks the propraetor from Capua, 
the one Captain Fainne talked to might have sent word to the legion camp south of 
here, even though he told the Captain he would not help. He thinks they went to the 
Uru’ut camp to look for Lord Fabhcun, and he was killed somehow. They burned all of 
the bodies beyond recognition.” 
“Mother Above,” Pryce whispered, stricken. He looked toward Eirik’s house. 
“Aedhir…is…is he…?” 
“He is devastated,” Odhran said. “But there is more than this.” 
“More?”  
“The Enghan have black powder. They say that is why the empire wants Engjold 
so badly. Thousands of years ago, the Abhacan taught them how to make it.” 
“Black powder,” Pryce repeated, puzzled. 
Odhran nodded grimly. He set to work loosening Pryce’s bonds again. “Eirik said 
that is what the empire wants―black powder, and the weapons the Abhacan have 
designed to use with it. Cannons, an’dagan, isneachan…they want to use them to 

conquer the known Bith.” He glanced at Pryce. “He says they pay pirates to attack our 
ships, steal our black powder and our cannons so they can try to learn how to make it.” 
“What…?” Pryce gasped again, stricken.  
“They will not attack Tiralainn outright―not yet anyway―because we have 
enough weapons to stop them. They are attacking the Enghan because they think they 
can get it easier that way―the formula for Abhacan black powder. If they get it, they will 
come for us, he says. And the rest of the Morthir, too. The Enghan are going to try and 
stop them.” 
“Stop them?” Pryce said. “How?” 
“By going to war with them,” Odhran said. “He asked Captain Fainne to write to 
Kierken and ask for his help, his aid.” 
“Kierken will not do that,” Pryce said. “He would never declare open war on 
Torach, not without some sort of proof.” 
“Captain Fainne tried to tell Eirik that,” Odhran said.  
“And what did Eirik say?” 
Odhran pulled the last of the knotted ropes loose, and they slipped free from 
Pryce’s arms, dropping before his feet in the snow. “He told the Captain he would have 
a boat prepared for us when we reach Sube,” he said. “He will let us go home.” 
Pryce looked at him in surprise as he rubbed his wrists gingerly with his hands. 
“Do you believe him, Odhran?” 
“I do not know,” Odhran said. “They are desperate, Lieutenant. And frightened. I 
can see that plainly. Whatever they mean to do to start this war of theirs, they are fixed 
upon it, and terrified of it, all at the same time.” 

“We are off the quarterdeck, Odhran,” Pryce told him gently, drawing his gaze. 
“You can call me Pryce, if you would like.” 
He smiled, and Odhran smiled back. “Is Wen with you, Pryce?” he asked. 
“Yes,” Pryce said. “She is inside, still asleep.” He looked down at the toes of his 
boots for a moment, kicking the length of rope absently. “You…you knew,” he said, a 
statement, not an inquisition.  
Odhran glanced at him. “Yes.” 
“Even in Tiralainn, you knew.”  
Odhran nodded. “I have known Wen since we were kids. It was important to her, 
meeting her father. She thought he was dead…her mother told her…” 
“I know,” Pryce said quietly. 
“When she found his letters, she was so desperate to find him, to meet him. She 
begged me to help her, to come with her. I could not tell her no.” A soft, wistful sort of 
cast had come across Odhran’s face, and Pryce realized for the first time. 
“You are in love with her,” he whispered. 
Odhran looked down at the ground and shrugged his shoulders.  
“You are in love with her, Odhran,” Pryce said again.  
“She does not love me, not like that,” Odhran said. “She never has, and there 
was a time once when I could not accept that. But I guess I do now.” He glanced at 
Pryce and managed a crooked smile. “A lot has happened since leaving Tiralainn.” 
“Odhran…” Pryce began. 
“She is in love with you, Pryce,” Odhran said. “I have known it all along, though 
she tried very hard to pretend otherwise. I know her pretty well. I know when such 

things hit her.” He met Pryce’s gaze. “She was so frightened to tell you the truth. More 
so than telling Captain Fainne, I think. She was afraid you would be angry with her.” 
Pryce glanced over his shoulder at Blakinn’s house. 
“I told her you would understand,” Odhran said softly. “I hope that you do, Pryce.” 
Pryce turned to him. He did not know what to say. 
“She cares about you,” Odhran said. “Like she has never cared for anyone 
before. I know that she does. I can see it in her eyes, her face when you are near her. I 
knew it from the first.” 
He genuflected and began to gather the fallen firewood, tucking it against his 
elbow. “And you care about her, too,” he said, stacking wood against his arm. He 
glanced up at Pryce. “I can see it in your face right now.” 
“Odhran, I…” Pryce began, abashed. “You are my friend. I…I would not…” 
“If you would not, then you are a bloody fool,” Odhran told him with a smile. He 
stood, offering the wood to Pryce.  
Pryce stared at him as he took the firewood between his arms. “Thank you, 
Odhran,” he whispered. 
Odhran smiled at him again. “You are welcome, Pryce,” he said. 
* 
Pryce went back into the house and rebuilt the fire, kneeling beside the stone 
hearth and arranging the logs carefully. He found a small bucket in a nearby corner 
filled with scraps of kindling, and he added this to the woodpile, striking flints Blakinn 
had left against the hearth’s edge and blowing gently against the smoldering kindling 
until flames licked around the logs, igniting in full. 

He walked over to the pallets where Wen still lay sleeping. He knelt on the floor 
and gazed down at her for a long time, listening to the soft rhythm of her breath.  
She cares about you, Odhran had told him. Like she has never cared for anyone 
before. I know that she does. I can see it in her eyes, her face when you are near her. I 
knew it from the first. 
Pryce reached down and brushed his fingertips lightly against Wen’s brow, 
drawing her hair back from her face. And you care about her, too. I can see it in your 
face right now. 
“Wen,” he said softly. She stirred as his touch, his quiet voice, turning her face 
and murmuring. He smiled at her. “Wen.” 
“What…?” she breathed, her eyelids fluttering open. She blinked at him, dazed 
and groggy. She realized who had roused her, and the corners of her mouth lifted. 
“Hoah…Pryce…”  
“Hullo,” he told her. She blinked at him again, the sleepy disorientation waning in 
her mind. She was confused; he could see it. She had fallen asleep with him angry with 
her. She did not understand. 
“What…what is it?” she asked. She sat up, scooting her hips back. She tucked 
her hair behind her ears, trying to smooth the disheveled curls. “What is wrong?” 
“Nothing,” he said. “Nothing is wrong.” 
“Are you alright?” she asked. 
He nodded, lowering his face and closing his eyes. “Wen, I am sorry,” he 
whispered. 

She blinked at him, and then she brushed her thumb lightly against his cheek. 
“Pryce, no,” she said, shaking her head. “No, I…I am the one who―” 
“It does not matter,” he whispered, drawing her voice to silence. “I miss you, 
Wen. I miss talking to you. I miss listening to you. I miss the way you make things seem 
like sense to me. How you can make my nightmares…just dreams again, and how I can 
be myself with you. Not a Lieutenant in the Crown Navy, First Officer of a royal frigate, 
but me…Pryce Finamur. Just some plebeian yob from the backwoods of Strathsbey 
County.” 
“You are not a plebeian yob, Pryce,” she said with a soft smile. 
He looked at her, his eyes filled with implore. “You are my best friend, Wen. Can 
we…please, can we not just pretend that I knew all along? Can we both just start again, 
like we both have always known?” 
She brushed her fingertips against his cheek, through his hair. “I would like that, 
Pryce,” she said, nodding, her eyes shimmering with sudden tears. “I…I would like that 
very much.”

 
Chapter Nine 
 
It would take the Enghan another four days to travel through the Keiliselgr Fjell 
mountains from Lith to the city of Elbeuf. The little village had been filled beyond 
capacity with residents, as people from both Eirik’s kyn and Thorir’s had made their 
homes here along with Lith’s native clans. While many families loaded their belongings 
and kin aboard the knarrs lining Lith’s docks, there were not enough boats to bear them 
all safely. It had been decided that those who did not traverse Holavik Bay for the 
fortifications of Elbeuf would travel by land under the protection of the Herr warriors. 
The people loaded their wagons and carts with clothing and food, abandoning 
anything they could survive without. While the cavalry rode astride their bergelmirs, 
residents rode on stocky, short-legged horses, and hitched their wagons to teams of 
burly oxen with long, curved horns and shaggy, woolen hides. By the time the sun had 
risen above the edge of the horizon in full, the village had been vacated, its knarrs upon 
the open waters of the Holavik, its caravan of nearly forty wagons and one hundred 
riders marking a slow but steady pace toward the cragged foothills of the Keiliselgr, and 
the steep, imposing mountain peaks beyond. 
For two days, the weather held in their favor. The skies remained clear and 
bright, with hint of neither clouds nor snow. The passage through the mountains would 
likely prove difficult enough without such obstacles or hindrances. The Enghan followed 
the Mani River among the towering granite slopes.  

On the morning of the third day, Odhran stirred as the sun emerged from beyond 
the crests and peaks, coaxing the mountains from the darkness of night like reluctant, 
dusky shadows. He rode with Pryce, Wen, Einar and Arnora in the open back of a 
narrow cart packed with the few meager belongings Eirik’s family and Blakinn had 
brought with them from the village. Young Bjarki and Eirik’s elderly mother and uncle, 
Halla and Beinir, had left Lith by knarr for Elbeuf. Eirik, Aedhir and Tacita rode slightly 
ahead of them in the caravan astride a pair of the Enghan bergelmirs.  
Odhran sat up in the back of the wagon, drawing his blankets snugly around him 
against the cold. He forked his fingers through his hair and scratched at his beard. 
Arnora and Einar slept beside him, curled together like young pups in a litter. Even 
though they teased one another with a sort of relentless enthusiasm that bordered on 
merciless, it was obvious that brother and sister were very close and dear to one 
another. They had both taken quite fondly to their new-found friends, as well, and to 
Odhran, it seemed, in particular. They both vied for his attention eagerly.  
Einar never tired of listening to Odhran tell them about Tiralainn. He was an 
exceptionally bright young man, and would sit for hours if allowed, wide-eyed with 
attentive fascination as Odhran described even the most mundane aspects of 
Belgaeran society to him, his own daily―and boring―routine of university classes, 
homework, library research, and nightly pub visits. Arnora seemed to enjoy listening to 
him, too. She deliberately kept in close proximity to Odhran, sometimes sitting so near 
to him that her knee or arm would brush against his. Those encounters would often 
leave Odhran feeling dizzy and breathless―not to mention embarrassed. He had never 
had a woman as beautiful as Arnora pay him the least bit of heed. The fact that she 

seemed genuinely interested in his words, and liked being near to him left him 
befuddled and sometimes almost nauseous. 
He looked down at her as she slept, her auburn hair swept about her face, 
draped across her cheek and brow. She seemed very delicate to him in form and 
visage, her beauty striking but fragile, like the first unfurled blossoms of springtime. 
Simply looking at Arnora stoked something within his heart, something warm and fond 
that left him dazed with wonder. Mother Above, he thought, and not for the first time 
since settling his gaze upon her in Lith. You are extraordinary, Arnora. 
Odhran drew himself onto his knees and looked out over the driver’s bench, 
beyond Blakinn’s shoulder. He could see Aedhir and Tacita ahead of them as they rode 
together by bergelmir alongside of Arnora’s father, Eirik. 
Something sweet and tender had developed between Captain Fainne and the 
young Achaian woman, Tacita. Odhran had not needed to hear the soft sounds of their 
lovemaking the night before leaving Lith to realize this; it had been apparent on both of 
their faces for more than a week now. He had not told Wen about hearing them. He had 
felt nearly too mortified and intrusive to admit it even to himself. He had tried to force 
himself back to sleep that night, but he had heard Aedhir whisper softly to Tacita, telling 
her that he loved her, and he had heard Tacita whisper these same words to him in 
reply. 
Blakinn glanced over his shoulder at Odhran and smiled broadly. The burly 
Enghan seemed to have no need whatsoever for sleep, and any lack of it never resulted 
in dampening his cheerful spirits. “Heil, bjorn’sterkr,” he greeted. Arnora had explained 

to Odhran that bjorn’sterkr meant strong bear; it was the nickname the Enghan had 
decided on for him, and only Arnora and Einar referred to him by his given name. 
“Heil, Blakinn,” Odhran said, returning the man’s smile. Einar and Arnora had 
been teaching him the Enghan language, and it was similar enough to the common 
tongue that Odhran had picked up rather readily on simple phrases and words. 
He glanced to his right. Pryce and Wen slept in the corner of the wagon here, 
tucked beside the crates of isneachan and an’dagan from the longboat. Something 
sweet and tender had been developing between them, too, since leaving Lith, and 
though the realization of this pained a part of Odhran’s heart, it mostly made him feel 
happy for them both. He had been wrong about Pryce aboard the a’Maorga; his own 
foolish, immature pride had been wounded without cause by Wen’s affection and 
fondness for the young lieutenant. Pryce was a good man, and he was good to 
Wen―good for her. On their first day leaving Lith, it had simply seemed like the strong 
friendship between the two had rekindled, but as the days had passed, Pryce had been 
tentatively, but surely softening in more tender regard toward Wen. Odhran had 
watched him reach for her, curling his fingers lightly through hers as they rode along, 
and he had not missed the radiant joy that would come upon Wen on these occasions. 
They had not kissed as far as Odhran had observed, but they had started holding hands 
a lot, and sat near to one another all of the time. As they had aboard the longboat, they 
would sometimes seem oblivious to anyone else around them, or any other 
conversations but those quietly shared between them. They would talk together for 
hours, laughing; Pryce would hook his arms around Wen’s neck and draw her against 
him in brief but fond embraces, and her smile would infuse her entire face with delight. 

Last night, Odhran had watched Pryce touch Wen’s face with a gentleness, a warmth 
that might have broken Odhran’s heart once upon a time. It did not now. Pryce was 
falling in love with her, he realized, and for the most part, this pleased Odhran. 
Wen slept with her cheek against Pryce’s shoulder, her hand draped atop his 
blankets, across his stomach. Pryce’s arm rested around her shoulders, his face turned 
down toward hers, his cheek against her brow. His free hand rested atop hers beneath 
his sternum, and when she stirred, wriggling slightly, he moved without waking, drawing 
her closer to him, as though it was reflexive to him, instinctive to hold her near. 
“Bjorn’sterkr,” Blakinn said in quiet beckon, turning over his shoulder again. “Thu 
alitr. Alitr at hinn.” Look at this. 
Odhran turned again, and his breath caught in his throat in a sudden, wondrous 
gasp. “Hoah…” 
Blakinn grinned. “Thu ser?” he asked, pointing, although Odhran’s gaze needed 
no such guidance. “Thu ser, bjorn’sterkr?” Do you see? 
“Ek se,” Odhran breathed, wide-eyed, leaning forward. I see.  
They had reached a place where stone and snow yielded to the broad basin of a 
magnificent valley. Here, the Keiliselgr mountains brushed against the lowlands in 
plummeting drapes of granite and the river spilled over the edge of the mountain, 
tumbling in a frothy spray of white thunder toward the earth below. Sunlight seeped 
through mountain peaks, spreading in gentle, creeping fingertips across an expanse of 
thick pine forests and crumbled foothills, infusing across a horizon that led their eyes 
inexorably westward toward the sea, toward the meadowlands and open plains that 
were yet more than a day’s long journey from where their feet had delivered them. The 

sun danced across distant river currents, setting the winding channels aglow. It pooled 
in lakes they would not reach before dusk; it shimmered in the frigid air, in fragile mists 
and low-lying clouds that drifted down on wayward wind drafts toward the valley.  
“Hvat er hinn?” Odhran whispered softly. What is this? 
“It is the Ve’dal,” Einar said, rising onto his knees at Odhran’s left, propping his 
elbows against the back of the driver’s bench and crossing his forearms. Odhran 
glanced at him in surprise; he had not even heard the young man stir. Einar looked at 
Odhran and smiled. “It means the blessed place. The god Grimnir made this valley for 
his son Ull, the god of the hunt. It is said Ull rides the new morning’s sunbeams down 
from Asbith into the valley with his bow to hunt hav’elga.” 
“Hav’elga?” Odhran asked. 
Einar nodded. Like the other men of the Herr, he was dressed in heavy, lined 
leather plate armor, his sword, dagger, and a small-handled, broad-bladed ax fettered to 
his belt. The Herr warriors, both Rekkr and Seggr alike traveled nowhere distant from 
their homes without being battle-ready. “Very large elk―taller than Blakinn even at the 
shoulder. Their antlers are very broad…” He gestured with his hands, spreading his 
arms out wide. “The lengths of two men combined at least. We use them sometimes to 
make shelters.” 
“That is a big elk,” Odhran remarked. He looked down upon the valley again in 
amazement.  
“You only find hav’elga here,” Einar said. “They cannot cross the mountains. We 
come here to hunt them sometimes, though they like to stay deep in the forests, where 

they are hard to track and find. One buck might keep a family with meat nearly the 
winter through.” 
The sounds of their voices roused the others. Arnora stirred, squirming beneath 
her blankets and moaning softly. Wen sat up, tucking her hair behind her ears, blinking 
owlishly at the new sunlight. “What…what is it?” she croaked, looking blearily at 
Odhran. 
He motioned with his hand, smiling at her. “Look at this, Wen.” 
She rose onto her knees and leaned over Pryce. Odhran heard the sharp, 
awestruck intake of her breath as her eyes widened. “Hoah…” she whispered. She 
reached down, poking Pryce in the shoulder. “Pryce,” she said. His eyelids fluttered 
open, and he looked up at her, blinking dazedly. 
“Pryce, look at this,” she told him, smiling broadly, eagerly. He forked his fingers 
through his hair, shoving it back from his face and drew himself onto his knees. 
“What is it?” he asked, turning to follow her gaze ahead of the wagon. “Hoah…” 
he gasped softly in wonder. He looked between Odhran and Einar, bewildered and 
amazed. “What is this place?” he asked. “Where are we?” 
“Ve’dal, litt’harfagri,” Blakinn told Pryce. Litt’harfagri was Pryce’s nickname, at 
least for Blakinn. It meant little fair-haired one. 
“It is the Ve’dal,” Einar said again. “The blessed valley. It means we have 
reached the end of the mountains.” 
“I have not been here for many years,” Arnora said. She had risen to her feet, her 
blankets wrapped about her, and stood behind Odhran. She blinked sleepily at the vista 

before her. “Fathir would take us sometimes when we were children, when we would go 
to Elbeuf. Do you remember, Einar?” 
“Yes,” Einar said quietly, his expression growing forlorn. He turned away from the 
view of the valley, sitting against the floor of the wagon. “That was when Mothir was still 
alive.” 
As the wagon rolled along in line with the caravan, they began to make their way 
along the steep slopes of the mountains toward the valley. The road had been chiseled 
and hewn out of solid granite, and the further they descended, the more the stone 
seemed to rise on either side of them, reaching skyward, obscuring their view. Most of 
the wagons traveled together through this narrow cleft in a straggled line, with no more 
than two dozen Rekkr riders scattered among them. The rest of the Herr rode either at 
the front of the caravan, or guarded its rear. 
Odhran, Einar, Arnora, Pryce and Wen all sat together in a semi-circle facing one 
another along the walls of their wagon. The five had enjoyed their time spent relatively 
alone and unencumbered by adult intervention during the journey. Arnora and Einar had 
taught them Enghan board and dice games like kvatra, halatafl and taflkast to help pass 
the time, and they had spent the last days laughing and talking together. 
Einar drew a sack against his lap and rifled through it, pulling out a bundle of 
food wrapped in a square of cloth. He unwrapped it to discover pan-fried, sweetened 
flatbreads that he passed around to the others for breakfast. 
“We are making excellent time if we have already reached the edge of the 
mountains,” he said. “We might make it to Elbeuf before dark tomorrow at this rate. It is 
the largest city I have ever seen. I have never been to Vornirtindr, though I hear it is 

larger still. Elbeuf is five times larger than Lith―at least, if not more. They have ten 
docks on their harbor, and Fathir’s uncle, Halla, lives within the great fortress keep of 
Fyrkat upon their hill. You could cross through its gates, walk all day through its streets 
and still not reach the far side by nightfall.” 
He was wide-eyed and excited as he spoke. Odhran wondered what the young 
Enghan’s reaction to Belgaeran would be; with its populace nearing more than half a 
million, a man might enter the royal city’s gates and walk for a week in full without 
reaching the other side. 
“Father even says that they…” Einar began. He had bitten into his bread, 
chewing as he spoke, and his voice faded all at once. He glanced at his sister, his 
eyebrow arched. “Did you make this?” 
Arnora blinked at him. “Yes, I did,” she said. 
Einar managed to swallow. He winced for show and nodded once. “Yes,” he said. 
“I thought as much.” 
“What is wrong with it?” Arnora asked, slapping Einar’s arm and making him 
laugh. “It is Mothir Halla’s recipe!” 
“Do not let her hear you say that,” Einar told her. “She might draw offense.” 
“You are awful, Einar,” Arnora said with a frown. 
He laughed again. “Your food is awful―I am truthful.” 
“You will never be konung with such a mean mouth, Einar,” Arnora said, 
glowering, and at this, Odhran, Pryce and Wen all blinked in simultaneous surprise. 
“Konung…?” Wen said quietly. “That is the king, is it not?” 

“Einar, you…you are supposed to be konung someday?” Odhran asked, drawing 
the younger man’s gaze. 
Einar smiled hesitantly at Odhran, realizing his puzzlement. “Fathir did not tell 
you?” he asked. He shook his head and laughed softly. “No, of course not―he is so 
secretive about it, like I am made of glass now, and going to break if I am jarred the 
wrong way. Konung Fjolnir is his uncle―his father’s brother. Fjolnir has 
daughters―three of them―but no sons. His sjonar―fortune-teller―cast the runes and 
told him he should name me his heir until his wife gives him a boy of his own. That way 
the throne would remain in his kinline―not even Lopt could trick it from his clan.” He 
shrugged. “So he did.” 
“And they are trying like mad for a son,” Arnora said. “Given the alternative. They 
plead upon their knees to Heid, the goddess of fertility every day for her mercy.” 
“You are just jealous they did not name you,” Einar said, grinning at his sister. “If 
you had been born a boy, it might have been you.” He rolled forward, tucking his legs 
beneath him and drawing himself onto his knees. He reached down and unfettered his 
scabbard from his belt, offering it to Odhran. “See? It is here, inscribed on my sheath 
and sword.” 
He pointed to a series of runes engraved in the thick hide of the scabbard and 
repeated in etched lettering upon the broad pommel of his blade. “It says, This sword 
belongs to Einar Eirikson, kin to His Mighty, Fjolnir Itreker, Konung of Engjold and heir 
to his lands and keeps.”  
“So you will be king someday, Einar?” Wen asked, leaning forward. She peered 
curiously over Pryce’s shoulder at the sword and scabbard.  

Einar blinked at her, color stoking in his cheeks. Odhran had noticed that most 
any time Wen spoke to the young man, he would blush or look otherwise disconcerted. 
Sometimes Odhran would spy Einar looking at Wen when she was occupied in 
conversation, her attention elsewhere, and the boy’s gaze would be soft and somewhat 
wistful. He fancies her, Odhran thought with a smile―and not for the first time since 
they had left Lith. I will be. Einar is sweet on Wen. 
Einar looked somewhat shyly down at his lap. “Not likely,” he said, shrugging 
again. He glanced up at Wen, smiled and looked away again. “Konung Fjolnir has some 
years left in him, I think. Heid will give him a son, I am sure. It is just a formality―petty 
bickering between kyns. It has been this way for ages. Men from the northern 
clans―the Nordri from Mikillfit and H’rossjord―held the throne in Vornirtindr once a 
long, long time ago. Fjolnir is an A’Mithal, a midlander from Eng―like me and my father, 
and all of our kyns west of the Skor’vag Bay. The A’Mithal claimed the throne from the 
Nordri through marriage and they have always hoped to take it back from us. Their 
Hersirsons married Fjolnir’s daughters, thinking this would be their chance. I guess 
Fjolnir named me his heir to spite them.” 
Odhran regarded the younger man for a long moment. Aedhir had confided to 
him and Tacita after their meeting the night before that he had suspected Eirik was 
readying Einar for some sort of great responsibility. Aedhir had thought Eirik feared 
something would happen to him when the Enghan went to war against Torach, that his 
people, his kyn would be left abruptly in Einar’s charge, as they had Eirik’s when his 
own father had been murdered. Aedhir thought Eirik wanted Einar to be prepared; 
hence, his initiation into battle, and his presence at their conference in Lith. 

Eirik is preparing him for something, alright, Odhran thought, amazed. He is 
preparing Einar to be king. 
Einar noticed Odhran’s attention and seemed embarrassed by it. “It is no great 
thing,” he said. “Fjolnir only just announced it at the Motinn two months ago, when all of 
the clans agreed to face the empire together. He sent word to the kyns by falcon and 
sent the sword to me.” 
The Motinn was an annual meeting of kyn Tithendar, representatives of the 
konung who helped Hersirs and their elder councils throughout Engjold implement the 
konung’s official decrees and policies. Eirik had explained to Aedhir and Odhran that 
Fjolnir had summoned all of his Tithendar to Vornirtindr earlier in the autumn for a 
special Motinn, a meeting in which the Enghan had made the grim decision to tackle the 
Torachans en masse, to take them on in open war. 
Einar glanced at his sister and grinned mischievously. “I would have liked to have 
seen the looks on the faces of the Nordri Tithendar when Konung Fjolnir made that 
proclamation,” he said. He chuckled, shaking his head. “I bet they bristled, their beards 
poking out all around their heads.” He splayed his fingers demonstratively beneath his 
chin. 
“The Nordri Hersirs were probably furious to learn of it,” Arnora said quietly, her 
eyes round and troubled, as she apparently did not share in her brother’s amusement. 
“And their sons, too, having married Fjolnir’s daughters for no other reason,” 
Einar said, chuckling again. He looked at Odhran and smirked. “Rather plump, or so I 
have heard,” he said in a low voice, dropping a little wink as he puffed his cheeks full of 
air, mimicking a rotund face. “A bit on the well-fed side, Fjolnir’s lasses.” 

Odhran offered Einar his sword back, and Einar fastened it to his hip again. “But I 
got a splendid sword out of the whole arrangement,” he remarked. “A very keen blade, 
crafted by the finest smiths in all of Engjold.” 
“The sjonar said you would be konung someday,” Arnora said. “They saw it in the 
runestones.” 
He smiled at her. “They also said that you would marry someday,” he said. “The 
runestones are not always right.” 
“You are scat,” she said, slapping him in the arm again. She glanced at Odhran 
and then down at her lap, blushing brightly. 
“The Elves in Tiralainn use runestones to predict the future, too,” Odhran said. 
“Mianach Elves mostly―they live in the northern part of Tiralainn. They interacted a lot 
with the first Abhacan settlers thousands of years ago.” He looked thoughtful. “Maybe 
the Abhacan picked up the practice from your ancestors and then passed it along to the 
Elves.” 
“The futhork runes are a great gift to our people from the god Grimnir,” Arnora 
said. “He bestows his blessings on things we inscribe with them. That is why Einar’s 
sword is engraved. We also use them to beseech the blessings of Tyr, the god of war. 
Here is his futhork here…” She reached for Einar’s sword, tapping her fingertip against 
a rune character inscribed repeatedly along the edge of the pommel. “All of our Herr 
bear his mark―it keeps them safe in battle. It gives their swords strength.” 
“Arnora is studying to be a sjoni―a woman seer,” Einar said, his expression 
softening with fond pride as he looked at his sister. “Our mother was one. She was sjoni 
to Hersir Thrand, our grandfather before she…before she died.” His bright expression 

faltered at this, but then passed as quickly as it had come. His eyes widened and he 
grinned broadly. “Where are your stones? Get them out―here, do some readings.” 
“Einar, no,” Arnora said, color stoking in her cheeks. “I have only just learned and 
I…they would not want me to…” 
“Sure, we would,” Odhran said quickly, eagerly. “I…that is, I should say I would 
not mind,” he added quickly, sheepishly when she turned to him. “I…I suppose I could 
not speak for Pryce or Wen…not with them both sitting right here…perfectly able to 
answer for themselves, but I…as for me, I would not be opposed. Just the opposite, in 
fact. I…why, I had my runes cast once in Belgaeran…remember, Wen? At a’Clos, they 
had that vendor for awhile…?” 
“I would not mind for it, either, Arnora,” Pryce said. “I visited a seer once in 
Mengeira years ago. Some old Mianach woman―she told me I would find unexpected 
good fortune that day.” 
“Did you?” Wen asked him. 
He laughed. “I found a ten-mark someone had dropped in the street,” he said. 
“That was about it.” 
“I would try it,” Wen said, looking toward Arnora, smiling. “Why not? I think it 
sounds like fun.” 
“Where are your stones?” Einar asked his sister again. “Read for me first. It will 
be like practice, and then you can read for them.” 
“Einar, no,” Arnora said, looking uncomfortable. She glanced over her shoulder at 
the front of the wagon. “You know Fathir does not approve.” 
“He thinks it is foolish superstition,” Einar said to Odhran. 

“He does not,” Arnora said, frowning. “It reminds him of Mother.” 
“And he thinks it is foolish superstition,” Einar said. “He is way ahead of us, up 
there on his bergelmir. He will not see a thing. Get them out―come on, now.” 
Arnora sifted around in a small knapsack she had brought with her, still looking 
reluctant. “I am really not very good,” she said, glancing anxiously at Odhran as she 
drew out a small pouch fashioned of hide. “You do not have to, if you do not want to.” 
“I would like it, Arnora,” he said, making her smile hesitantly. “Truly.” 
“Alright,” she said, cradling the little bag between her palms. 
“Me first,” Einar said, slapping his palms eagerly against his thighs. 
“You are incorrigible, Einar,” Arnora said, her brows pinching slightly. 
“I am indeed,” he agreed, grinning broadly. 
“Here, give me that taflboard,” she said. “Turn it over. I need a flat surface.” 
Einar reached behind him, finding one of the square wooden boards they had 
been using to play games. He spun it between his hands, presenting it facedown 
against the floor of the wagon in front of his sister. Arnora loosened the drawstrings 
cinching the pouch closed and turned it over, spilling a set of small stone tiles against 
the board. 
“Turn them all facedown,” she told Einar. “Mix them around with your hand.” 
“I know,” he said, scooting closer to the board. He began to flip the little 
runestones over until they all sat with the uncarved sides facing upward. He then stirred 
them about with the flat of his hand. 
“Pick five of them,” Arnora said. 

He glanced at her and smiled. “I know,” he said again. He pointed five of the 
stones out to her, and she drew them aside, arranging them facedown before her in a 
cross formation, with three in a lateral row and one on the top and bottom. 
“Make them say something good,” Einar told her. 
“I cannot make them say anything,” she said. “They either say it or they do not.” 
“I cannot read them. I will not know the difference,” he said.  
Arnora turned the five runestones over in turn, and then regarded them for a 
long, pensive moment. She pointed to the furthest stone on her left. A character from 
the Enghan’s futhork alphabet had been carved into it: a vertical line with a V protruding 
from the middle. “The Thurs rune,” she said. “The Gateway. It represents 
transition―good luck to come, or misfortune.” 
“Which one?” Einar asked. 
“Misfortune, I think,” Arnora said. 
He arched his brow. “You are making that up.” 
“I am not.” She tapped her finger against the middle stone. “This is a reversed 
Brenna futhork,” she said. She looked up at her brother, her eyes round with sudden 
worry. “Your current situation is about to change for the worse.” 
“There is no food left in our packs but that you have made?” he suggested with a 
laugh. 
“I mean it, Einar,” she said. She pointed to the rune closest to her. “This is 
Nauth―the promise of hard times to come. It is reversed―upside down―and that 
means it will be very hard indeed.” 

Einar’s smile faded and he looked down at the stones, his brow cocked. Odhran, 
Pryce and Wen all leaned forward, looking down at the stones. 
“Here is your hope―the Munn stone. It means mouth; you will receive good 
counsel to help see you through the difficulties to come. Someone trustworthy is going 
to tell you something, and you must listen to them. If you do, you will know benefit for it.” 
She pointed to the last rune, the one to her right. “The Tyr stone is your guiding star. It 
means if you heed trusted counsel, you will overcome these difficult circumstances and 
your honor will be strengthened for it.” 
“How do you know what the difficult circumstances will be?” Wen asked softly. 
“You do not, I am afraid,” Arnora said. “The runestones do not tell us what will 
happen―only that it will.” 
“Urd guards her secrets well,” Einar remarked quietly, studying the layout of the 
runestones before his sister. 
“Urd?” Wen asked. 
“The Enghan goddess of destiny,” Odhran told her. “Of life and death. She is said 
to be a giant spider that lives in Asbith, in the great fortress of the gods, Vanaheim. She 
has no eyes of her own; she has denizen spirits called disir that travel the midbith―our 
world―for her, visiting every birth. Urd sees through their eyes and for every baby born, 
she spins a new web in Vanaheim. The size of the web, the intricacy of its design 
determines what sort of life you will have―long or short, good or bad. Spiders in the 
midbith are Urd’s disir spirits in disguise. It is considered bad luck to kill one.” 
“Maybe I am wrong, Einar,” Arnora said to her brother, drawing his gaze. “Or 
maybe the stones are. You said so yourself that they are not always―” 

“I trust what the stones tell you,” he said. “I trust what you see. Only a fool would 
think every fortune might be good, Arnora. And this one is not so bad. You said if I 
listened to good advice, it would be alright in the end.” 
“You are doomed for certain, then,” she told him, and she managed a laugh that 
did not quite touch her eyes. She was worried for her brother; the grim prophecy of the 
stones had left her visibly disturbed. 
“Read for Odhran now,” Einar said, turning the five stones over again as though 
he, too, was disconcerted by looking at them. “Odhran, mix them around with your 
hand.” 
“Alright,” Odhran said quietly, uncertainly. He reached down, shuffling the tiles 
about as he had seen Einar do. The irony of the fact that only weeks ago, he had been 
willing to condemn Rhyden Fabhcun aboard the a’Maorga for purportedly practicing 
such seeming magic was not lost upon him. Rhyden had been weighing heavily on 
Odhran’s mind since leaving Lith. Like Aedhir, he had been dismayed to learn of the 
Uru’ut massacre―and Rhyden’s likely murder. Like Aedhir, he had his own reasons for 
feeling to blame for it, and the realization of his culpability had left him stricken. 
“Choose five stones, Odhran,” Arnora told him, and he met her gaze. She smiled 
at him, trying to offer reassurance, and he smiled back, nearly dazed by her beauty. He 
pointed out five tiles in turn and she arranged them again in a cross formation upon the 
surface of the taflboard, turning them all up so they could see the runes. 
“This stone represents travel,” she said, tapping her forefinger against the center 
stone. “It could mean this journey you are on with us, or it could mean a journey of self, 
a transition from one frame of mind and heart to another.” 

She touched the stone to her left. It was the Thurs rune, one of the same stones 
Einar had chosen. “Thurs again. This stone represents your situation, your past, so the 
Thurs futhork means you have been finding change in your life, things that might have 
left you feeling restless, uncertain, maybe apprehensive or unhappy.” 
Odhran thought again of Rhyden Fabhcun. His shame and sense of 
responsibility in the Elf’s death came mostly from the fact that he felt very much like a 
different now, a better man than he had been in Tiralainn, or aboard the a’Maorga. He 
could see now that he had been wrong to vilify Rhyden; he had been wrong to think 
Nimon Hodder had been a friend to him, and he desperately regretted that he had only 
goaded Hodder in his hatred for Rhyden, encouraged him in his efforts to see some 
harm come upon the Elf. Changes in my life that have left me restless and unhappy? 
Odhran thought. Hoah, there is a bloody understatement, if ever I heard one. 
“You are moving toward further change,” Arnora told him, drawing his mind from 
his thoughts. “More than you can realize. But you will not be alone along this path.” She 
pointed to the top stone. “This is Gaeta, the rune of friendship and protection. It is above 
you, meaning old alliances and friendships will strengthen along your way, and new 
relationships will form and foster to help guide you. You will need them. This is the Fe 
stone reversed.” She tapped the bottom stone. “It means you will know great 
disappointment along the way. Obstacles will arise to try and delay you, discourage you. 
You may even lose people dear to you, either in form or only in your heart. But no 
matter what, you must not lose faith in those who love you―those you love.” 
She met his gaze and smiled as she indicated the runestone on her right. “Bolli, 
the rune of secrets and surprises means that for your struggles, you will find unexpected 

reward at the end of your journey. What is hidden to you now will be made clear, and 
you will understand why you have changed, and what is to come because of it.” 
“You should not be showing them such things, Arnora,” said a sharp voice from 
beyond the wagon. Odhran turned, startled, and Arnora blinked at Thorir, who had 
reined his bergelmir close to their wagon.  
“I was only reading the runestones, Thorir,” Arnora said, her brows drawing 
slightly. “I am not showing them anything. They read stones in Tiralainn, just like we do. 
Odhran told me so.” 
Thorir spared Odhran a glance, his brow arched as he snorted. “Tiralainn,” he 
muttered, shaking his head. “You speak too long and too much with them, the both of 
you.” He glowered between Einar and Arnora. “And you tell them things you should 
keep among your own kind.” 
“It is called being friendly, Thorir,” Einar replied, meeting his gaze evenly. “You 
might try it sometime.” He glanced at Arnora, and the corner of his mouth lifted slightly. 
Arnora drew her hand to her mouth, covering a sudden, soft snicker with her fingertips. 
“You would do well to choose your friends more wisely in the future, Einar,” 
Thorir said with a frown. “As these shall not be among us long enough to matter.” 
He dug his heel against the flank of his bergelmir, and the weasel sprang 
forward, quickening its pace, moving ahead of the wagon. 
Pryce watched him go, his chin lifted as he peered over the driver’s bench, his 
brows drawn. “He is a piece of work,” he said quietly, frowning. 
“His wife was murdered by the imperial legions,” Arnora said softly. “His father 
and mother, too. He has never been the same for it―his heart angry ever since.” 

Einar made a soft harrumphing sound in his throat, and pretended to be 
absorbed in turning over the rune tiles on the taflboard. “He has always been a 
holtaskalli,” he muttered, calling Thorir a wood-skull. He looked toward his sister. “And 
do not tell me that you―” 
An explosion ripped through the narrow ravine with enough sudden, violent 
power to rock the wagon on its joists. Odhran jerked his head at the first hint of the 
sound; he saw a sudden burst of fire that was abruptly engulfed in smoke and dust as 
the mountainside ahead of them exploded. The sound of the detonation reverberated in 
the tight confines of the chasm, and Odhran cried out, ducking his head, shoving his 
hands against his ears as his felt the concussion rattle his skull. Enormous hunks of 
shattered granite spewed in all directions, stone and earth defying gravity and soaring, 
hurtling through the air. In the wake of the booming explosion came a visceral groaning, 
a terrible and horrifying trembling in the ground as the cliff walls to their right collapsed, 
crashing down toward the Enghan caravan with new thunder in a tremendous, rushing 
tumble of dirt and stone. 
“Grimnir have mercy―!” Odhran heard someone scream, and then boulders 
began to rain upon them, their brief taste of flight ending suddenly and brutally. The 
thick cloud of smoke and dirt swept over the wagon, engulfing it, turning daylight into 
dusk and then abruptly into utter darkness; he felt grit and gravel sting his scalp, his 
face, and he cowered against the floor. He hitched in a breath to cry out, and felt it fill 
his nose, coat his tongue and he gagged, whooping for air, strangling on the dust.  
He heard a resounding crash as debris smashed into nearby wagons. He heard 
the shrill screams of terrified bergelmirs, the panicked yowls of the oxen, the shrieks of 

the Enghan around him. The ground shuddered; the wagon lurched beneath him, 
battered by the repeated, violent impact of stone against the earth.  
Something struck the wagon broadside. It heaved beneath them, careening 
sideways. Odhran felt the floor rise beneath him, tilting at a sharp, rising angle. It was 
turning over; he felt himself sliding toward the left side of the cart. He felt Arnora fall 
against his shoulder and then away from him; Pryce slammed against his back, sending 
him sprawling, and he heard the lieutenant utter a sharp, strangled yelp. 
The side of the wagon crashed against the ground, and then flipped, the wheels 
canting skyward, the bed of the cart tumbling toward the road. Pryce’s boot rapped 
Odhran squarely against the side of the head. He heard Einar screaming as the wagon 
listed and fell: “Leap! Leap! Arnora―jump―!” 
Odhran’s chin smacked hard against the dirt and loose gravel of the ground. The 
crates of firearms, knapsacks of food, packs of clothing and supplies came toppling 
down on him, striking his shoulders, his legs. He heard the lip of the wagon wall smash 
against the road, the old wood splintering at the impact, and then smaller rocks and fine 
debris pelted down against the belly of the wagon, smacking a cacophonous cadence 
over his head. 
Odhran shifted his weight. He shrugged his shoulders and wriggled his legs, 
dislodging fallen supplies from him. Two of the heavy isneachan crates had slammed 
against his legs with enough force to draw blood. He grimaced as he drew his knees 
beneath him, scooting his legs out from beneath the boxes’ broken, battered corners. 
He rested on his knees, supporting himself on his palms, choking. His breath 
rattled moistly, desperately and he felt his stomach churn. He dry-heaved, his throat, 

mouth and nose crammed full of dirt and dust. He opened his eyes, reeling, blinking 
dazedly at the unfamiliar darkness beneath the wagon. 
“Mother…Mother Above…” he wheezed, spitting and coughing. 
He heard a soft, fluttering moan from his right―Arnora’s voice, frail and hurting. 
Odhran turned toward the sound, reaching for her. He could not see anything; dim light 
wafted through the cracks between planks in the wagon’s sides, but it was not enough 
to cast even the faintest illumination.  
“Arnora…?” he croaked. 
He could hear people screaming. He could still hear rocks tapping and spattering 
against the top of the wagon. A woman was shrieking hysterically; others were weeping. 
Frantic footsteps pounded against the ground. Arnora whimpered again. 
“Arnora…” he whispered, and his outstretched fingertips brushed against her 
arm. He felt her move, her hand grasping him with terrified ferocity, her fingers coiling 
against his arm. 
“O-Odhran…?” she gasped. He heard her breath hiccup, and then she mewled 
softly, beginning to weep. “Odhran…?” 
“I am here,” he said, crawling to her. He winced as he moved his injured legs. He 
raised his head too high as he sat up and cracked the cap of his pate against the 
floorboards above him. He gasped sharply, flinching. 
“Odhran…” Arnora whimpered, and she fell against him. He felt her hair against 
his face, her forehead tuck between his throat and shoulder, and she shuddered against 
him, clutching at him.  

“Are you alright?” he said, drawing his arm around her. He cradled his hand 
against her head and tucked his cheek against the crown of her hair. “Arnora, are you 
hurt?” 
She shook her head against him, cowering, trembling. “Where is Einar?” she 
whispered, and she mewled again softly, her tears spilling. “Where…where is my 
brother…?” 
“He jumped clear when we overturned, I think,” Odhran said to her softly, stroking 
her hair. “I…I think Pryce and Wen made it, too.” 
“What happened?” she breathed, her fingers twining against his coat. 
“What…what was that? What happened? Was…was it Donar come…come to punish 
us?” 
Donar was the Enghan god of thunder. Judging by the way his ears were still 
ringing with the reverberated roar of the blast, Odhran was almost willing to concede 
that yes, Donar himself had dropped down from the Asbith to attack them. 
“It was an explosion,” he told her. “Not thunder. I think it was a black powder 
detonation…gersimi.” 
She raised her face in bewilderment. “Gersimi?” 
He nodded. He closed his eyes; it hurt to keep them open. Smoke and grit hung 
in a thick, stagnant cloud beneath the wagon, stinging his eyes, making them smart 
uncontrollably. 
“But…but how…?” she asked. “Who would…who could have possibly…?” 
A swell of bright, shrill shrieks rang out from the crumbled roadway beyond the 
wagon. Arnora jerked against Odhran, pressing herself against him, her breath tangling 

in a frightened knot in her throat. The screaming was joined in grim harmony by a 
roaring din of voices―men’s voices raised together in fierce and brutal battle cries. The 
ground beneath Odhran’s knees shivered and he heard people running, their shoes and 
boots pounding out frantic rhythm. He heard another rumble as well―bergelmir paws 
pounding against the earth, lots of them from the sounds of it. 
“Mother Above!” he hissed. 
He heard the resounding clatter of steel against steel, and the screams and 
battle cries grew all the louder. Things slammed into the wagon again, jostling it, 
shaking it on its uncertain foundation―not boulders or loose dirt this time, but people 
fighting, a sudden, furious battle underway. 
“Oh…Odhran…!” Arnora whimpered. “What is happening?” 
He leaned toward the far wall of the wagon. She would not let him move far 
without her; Arnora clung to him as if her hands had been stitched to his shirt. Odhran 
kept one arm around her to reassure her in her despair, her terror, and hooked his 
fingertips against one of the planks of the wall, finding a slim margin of space where 
faint, dusty light filtered through. He pulled against it, and it groaned, shifting loose of its 
nails. He peeked out through the opening he had pried, but he could not see much. The 
world outside swam in a cloud of smoke and dirt. He saw silhouetted figures dancing 
about; large, shadowy forms of bergelmirs rushing past, their paws quaking the ground. 
He saw a man stumble momentarily into view before disappearing into the haze again; 
one fleeting glimpse was enough, however. Odhran recognized his red vestments, his 
silver plate armor and helm, and he drew back from the wall, his breath caught in his 
throat. 

“It…it is the empire.” He looked at Arnora. He could see her now; his eyes had 
nearly adjusted to the gloom and grit. She blinked at him, tears streaking in the 
powdered dirt and grime on her cheeks, her blue eyes enormous with sudden, new 
terror. “Mother Above, the empire has attacked us.” 
 

Chapter Ten 
 
Odhran fumbled wildly about in the gloom beneath the upturned wagon, his 
hands pawing and grasping at the broken, tumbled crates of firearms. 
“Einar is out there!” Arnora cried, clinging to him, clutching desperately at his 
coat. 
“I know,” he said, grunting as he turned one of the heavy boxes over and pried 
back the lid. 
“Einar is out there!” she cried again, her voice shrill and frantic. She was terrified, 
trembling with shock. “Fathir is out there!” 
“I know, Arnora,” Odhran said again, groping around inside the crate, feeling 
what he had hoped to find―the smaller boxes of prepared loads the crew had readied 
aboard the longboat. Mother Above, Wen is out there, too! Pryce, Aedhir, the 
crewmen―all of them out there somewhere. 
“We have to do something!” Arnora said, her eyes darting about wildly. She had 
cut her head when the wagon overturned; blood streamed down from a gash along her 
hairline, smeared across her cheek and brow. 
“Help me,” he said. He twisted, reaching behind him, finding one of the crates of 
pistols. He jerked it toward him, wrenching the lid open. He was terrified; his hands 
shook uncontrollably. He grabbed an an’daga out of the crate and it fell from his 
quaking, clumsy hands against his lap. “Arnora, help me.” 
She blinked at him, wide-eyed and confused. “Wh…what?” 

He bit the tip off one of the loads, turning his head and spitting it against the 
ground. “Help me,” he said again, lifting the pistol and struggling to pour the prepared 
load of paper wadding, black powder and lead ball down the barrel of the pistol. He 
jerked the tamping rod loose from beneath the barrel and shoved it home, forcing the 
load into place. He set the readied pistol aside and motioned toward the crate, flapping 
with his hand. “Start handing me those―get them all open. Rifles and an’dagan―pass 
them to me.” 
“What are you going to do?” She handed him a pair of pistols, and as he set 
about loading them, she began wresting with the other fallen crates, pulling out rifles. 
“I do not know,” he said, glancing at her. Someone fell against the outside of the 
wagon with a loud thud that shuddered the wooden frame. Whoever it was shrieked 
piteously, and they both heard a loud clamor as he collapsed against the ground. 
Arnora whimpered again, her shoulders hunching toward her ears and she stared at 
Odhran in stark, quaking terror. 
“I will do something,” he told her. “Help me get these loaded―watch me.” 
The pistols and rifles had to be reloaded after every shot. He would not have time 
to do this in the middle of fighting; either Arnora would have to do it for him, or he would 
have to load and expend every firearm at his disposal: eleven an’dagan and sixteen 
isneachan. 
If I can fire even one of them, he thought. My hands are shaking so bloody bad, I 
do not even know if I can hold them still long enough to draw aim. He had also never 
shot one of the weapons in battle before; he had only learned aboard the a’Maorga, and 
though he had proven a fair, if not exceptional marksman, this was a skill gleaned only 

from drawing upon clay targets. Could I shoot a man? he thought, stricken. Even now, 
with all of this, how could I? 
What other choice is there? he told himself sharply, giving himself a mental slap 
across the face. Muster some mettle, Frankley! You are Crown Navy, not some 
simpering ninny. Your friends are out there! Wen is bloody out there―now get off your 
fat, bloody ass and do what you can to save her! 
He loaded six of the pistols and three of the rifles. He had showed Arnora how to 
do this, and she hurried to tend to the rest of them.  
“How did the empire make the mountain fall like that?” she whispered as they 
worked. Loading the guns gave her something to focus on besides her panic and fear. 
“How did the gersimi do that?” 
“They must have been waiting for us, drilled holes into the cliff edges,” Odhran 
said, canting his cheek and spitting out the tip of another load. “Dropped the charges 
down into the stone, ran fuse lines out and away, along the top of the ridge.”  
Abhacans had used this technique for millennia in order to blast out the open-air 
plateaus they used for agriculture. Odhran frowned as he considered this. But how in 
the bloody duchan did the empire know that? he thought. How could they? And how 
could they have known we were coming―that we would be following this path to 
Elbeuf? How could they know we were even traveling to Elbeuf? 
As if she had read his mind, Arnora fell still, her brows drawn. “How could they 
know?” she asked. “How could they have known we were going to Elbeuf―where to 
find us?” 

“I do not know,” Odhran said, meeting her gaze. He turned around, drawing his 
legs out from beneath him. He balanced his weight on his rump with his hands behind 
him, and then he kicked his legs out, driving the heels of his boots mightily against the 
side of the wagon. He heard the planks groan and splinter; he felt them shift at the 
impact, but they did not yield. 
“Stay here,” he told Arnora, glancing over his shoulder. He kicked the wall again, 
feeling the planks loosen all the more. “When I call for them, pass me the pistols and 
rifles. I will toss the empty ones back to you―you will have to reload them.” 
“Alright,” she said, nodding. 
He kicked the wall again and the wood splintered. The nails holding the board in 
place wrenched loose of their moorings, and the plank fell away, smacking against the 
unyielding cliffside beyond. The wagon had come to rest nearly flush against the stone. 
It would be a tight squeeze crawling out for a man of his size and bulk, he realized, but it 
would also offer him some protection and cover. 
“No matter what happens, you stay here,” he said, turning to Arnora. “You will be 
safe under the wagon.” I think. Mother Above, I hope. 
She nodded again, her blue eyes enormous and fixed upon him. “I will,” she said. 
“Alright then,” Odhran said. He did not move; all at once, he felt frozen in place, 
his limbs unwieldy and unwilling to bear him through the broken side planks and out into 
the open air. He blinked at Arnora, his hands shaking, his shoulders twitching, his 
breath fluttering from his throat. I do not know if I can do this, he thought helplessly. 
Mother Above, I…I do not know…! 

“I have to,” he whispered, his brows furrowing. He turned around, forcing himself 
to move. “I am Crown Navy,” he muttered, steeling himself with this mantra of 
Thierley’s. “I am Crown Navy, not some simpering ninny.” 
Swallow it down, lad, Thierley might have told him had he been close at hand. 
“I am swallowing it, sir,” Odhran hissed through gritted teeth. He ducked his head 
and shoved his way through the narrow opening, forcing himself out from the cover of 
the wagon.  
He found himself wedged between the side of the upturned cart and the granite 
wall, his shoulder tucked painfully against the stone. He got his feet beneath him, trying 
to keep his grip on the isneach. He planted his foot against an outcropping of stone and 
raised himself above the side of the wagon to see beyond it. The air was still thick with a 
cloud of impenetrable dust and grit, and he squinted as he peered over the edge of the 
wagon. 
An imperial rider raced by on a bergelmir and he ducked his head, cowering as it 
loped out of the gloom and disappeared once more. The sounds of battle were 
deafening and horrifying. He could hear sword and ax blade battering against steel; the 
thunder of rushing footfalls, shrill and terrified shrieks, piteous moans. He could smell 
blood above the stink of the dust, heavy and bitter, infused in the air. He could smell the 
stench of bergelmir musk; the animals were incensed and in feral, vicious humor. 
Odhran could see large, silhouetted forms all around them, and he stared in 
breathless, stunned realization. They were fallen chunks of mountain, boulders 
sometimes twice again as broad in circumference as the wagon that had rained down 

upon the Enghan caravan. He could see shadows flailing and darting around in the 
dust; men fighting with one another. 
Mother Above! 
He saw an Enghan man stumble from out of the smoke. He was bleeding 
profusely from a wound on his head. He was limping, his hip gored, the broken shaft of 
a spear lodged at the apex of his thigh and groin. He carried his ax in his hand, his 
footsteps shuffling and clumsy. Another shadow loomed toward him from behind, 
moving swiftly, and Odhran had a fleeting moment―not even enough time to cry out in 
warning to the Enghan―to realize it was a Torachan soldier on a bergelmir bearing 
down on the man. 
“No―!” Odhran shouted, and he swung the rifle toward his shoulder, slamming 
the butt of the isneach against the socket of his arm, catching the length of the barrel 
against his hand. His finger folded against the trigger, and there was no time for 
hesitation or frightened uncertainty. His eyes reflexively drew their mark, even before 
the bergelmir emerged in full, form and not silhouette from the gloom, and his fingertip 
closed against the trigger. The rifle boomed; a spray of smoke and sparks spewed from 
the tip of the barrel. The butt of the isneach recoiled sharply, his shoulder bearing the 
brunt of the impact. 
The soldier aside the bergelmir wrenched sideways, his head snapping back on 
his neck. He had been brandishing a spear, holding it out, meaning to thrust it through 
the Enghan’s back, and his fingers splayed wide, the shaft tumbling to the ground. His 
legs sprawled as his body tumbled backward, spilling from his saddle. 

The Enghan man whirled at the resounding boom of the rifle. He caught the shaft 
of his ax between his fists and swung, the blade catching the charging bergelmir against 
the angle of its jaw with enough force to open its throat in a sudden rush of blood. The 
animal snapped at the man, crashing against the ground, its paws spilling from beneath 
it and the Enghan backpedaled, whipping the ax about in his hands and bringing it down 
again swiftly, driving the blade into the cap of the weasel’s skull.  
Odhran pivoted, dropping the rifle to the ground. He caught a glimpse of Arnora’s 
hands reaching out from beneath the wagon to grab it, and then he turned again toward 
the fray, jerking one of the pistols from beneath his belt. The Enghan man was still 
swaying unsteadily on his feet above the felled bergelmir, and Odhran saw another 
shadow rushing toward him, another legionnaire. 
“Alitr or!” Odhran yelled, drawing the pistol up before him. Look out! Again he 
reacted out of instinct, his mind and heart not coordinating swiftly enough to give him 
any frightened pause. He squeezed the trigger, feeling the pistol buck against his palm, 
and he saw the bergelmir twist sideways as the lead ball struck it almost squarely 
between the eyes. The great animal collapsed, its paws clawing at the open air, and the 
Enghan man turned, limping into the smoke again, disappearing as he raised his ax, 
hoisting it above his head to finish off the fallen rider, pinned beneath his steed. 
Odhran looked wildly about for any sign of Wen, Pryce or Einar as he dropped 
the spent pistol and wrenched the other from his belt. He could not see anything with 
clarity, much less discern faces in the smoke and dust. He heard the rushing clamor of 
heavy paws and jerked toward the sound, seeing an imperial rider bolt out of the 

shadows. He leveled the an’daga between his hands and fired, sending the soldier 
toppling from his saddle, a trail of blood arcing in the air from his neck. 
The bergelmir rushed past the wagon and Odhran ducked, dropping the empty 
pistol. “Another an’daga!” he cried to Arnora. She poked her head out and looked up at 
him, holding a rifle between her hands. In his frantic rush, his panic, he had forgotten to 
tell her which of the weapons was which, and he reached down, taking the rifle from 
here. “One of the small ones,” he said. “Give me one of the small ones.” 
She nodded, ducking her head for a moment to glance behind her, and then held 
a pistol out for him. He nodded. “Perfect, Arnora,” he said, and he turned again, rising 
above the top of the wagon. 
He caught sight of a blur of movement from his left, and he whirled in that 
direction, dropping the pistol against the top of the wagon belly, drawing the rifle to his 
shoulder. A bergelmir darted out of the haze, and just as Odhran caught the underside 
of the isneach against his left palm, the tip of his right index finger hooked against the 
trigger, he realized it was not a Torachan. It was Thorir; the Enghan Hersir was 
wounded, the front of his kyrtill and leather armor bloodstained. His weasel had been 
injured as well; its broad, loping gait was clumsy and limping, and Odhran could see 
blood matted thickly in its fur along its flank. 
An imperial rider lunged out of the smoke to Odhran’s right, and he had no time 
to react. The Torachan bore down on Thorir, a length of spear thrust forward and poised 
toward the Enghan. Thorir leaned back in his saddle, arching his spine and digging his 
heels into the stirrups. The bergelmir skittered beneath him, its feet spreading widely 
and as it dropped toward the ground, the spear point skewered the air within scant 

inches above Thorir’s face. He reached up, closing his fist against the shaft as the 
bergelmir righted itself. As the Torachan darted past him, Thorir wrenched the spear 
from his grip. He reined his bergelmir about in a swift, tight circle, spinning the length of 
ash against his palm and brandishing the point toward the imperial rider. Thorir kicked 
his bergelmir, spurring it forward, and it lunged, leaping toward the Torachan. The 
soldier had only just barely spun his steed about; the spearhead skewered through his 
throat as Thorir raced past him. Odhran heard the soldier utter a squawking, gargled cry 
and he fell backwards, impaled. 
Thorir jerked on his reins and his bergelmir lumbered about again. Its right 
foreleg appeared to be the most grievously injured, maybe even broken, and it 
stumbled, uttering a low, hurting low. “Thu komr a!” Thorir shouted at the animal, kicking 
it, trying to spur it forward. Come on! “Hroerar, thik kamban heimskr oborna!” Move, you 
crippled, half-wit bastard! 
A silhouette loomed out of the haze behind Thorir, moving fast―a Torachan rider 
charging Thorir―and Odhran shifted his weight, swinging the barrel of the rifle around. 
“Thorir―alitr or!” he yelled. Look out! 
Thorir jerked his head at the sound of Odhran’s voice. His eyes flew wide as he 
caught sight of him, and the rifle pointing in seeming direct aim for his head. He threw 
himself sideways, folding himself over the side of his saddle, inadvertently clearing 
Odhran’s line of sight on the imperial soldier. His finger tightened against the trigger, 
and the rifle slammed backwards against his shoulder. The shadowy form of the 
bergelmir as it leaped toward Thorir suddenly twisted in midair as the lead ball found its 
mark. It spilled sideways, crumpling to the ground, sending its rider toppling. 

Another Torachan raced out of the gloom before the isneach had even fallen 
away from Odhran’s fingers. The rider rushed straight toward Thorir, his spear jammed 
in the air before him, aimed for Thorir’s middle, and Odhran screamed, grabbing for the 
an’daga, drawing back the doghead against his thumb as his arm swung out, trying to 
find desperate aim. 
“Thorir―fyrir thik! Alitr or!” In front of you! Look out! 
Thorir had caught sight of the Torachan’s charge as well, and his hand darted for 
his waist, his fingers curling about his dagger. He drove his heels brutally into the 
injured bergelmir’s side and it sprang forward to meet the advancing soldier. Thorir 
jerked back on the reins, lifting his hips from the saddle, and the bergelmir reared, its 
front paws groping at the air, its lips curled back from its teeth against the strained bit. 
The Torachan’s spear punched through the bergelmir’s vulnerable breast; the weasel 
uttered a shrill shriek, and Thorir swung his arm, sending his dagger flying. The blade 
buried itself just beneath the lip of the imperial soldier’s helmet, nearly to the hilt in the 
man’s skull. He fell backwards from his saddle, just as Thorir’s bergelmir collapsed to 
the ground. Thorir tried to leap free of the crumpling beast, but his foot caught in his 
stirrup. The bergelmir crashed onto its side, and Odhran heard Thorir scream in bright, 
new pain as his left leg and hip were crushed beneath it. 
“Thorir!” Odhran cried. He turned frantically over his shoulder and saw Arnora 
staring up at him, wide-eyed and frightened. “He is hurt! I have to go to him!” he cried, 
flapping his hand at her. “Give me another pistol, quick! One of the short ones―hurry!” 
She reached desperately behind her and held out an an’daga to him in both 
hands. He snatched it and then turned, scrambling over the top of the wagon. He 

stumbled over the exposed axles and crossbeams of lumber forming the cart’s frame 
and leaped to the ground. He rushed toward Thorir, jamming one of the pistols into his 
belt, keeping the other poised in his hand. 
“Far af mik!” he heard Thorir cry, and when he ran around the side of the dead 
bergelmir, he could see Thorir lying pinned beneath it. Get off of me! He arched his 
back from the ground, his eyes closed, his brows drawn furiously as he struggled to free 
himself. His voice was hoarse with terrible pain; blood spewed from his mouth as he 
cried out. His hand moved for his belt, and he tried to draw his sword. “Ek kljufar thik af 
fra mik, thik oborna! Far af mik!” I will cleave you off of me, you bastard! Get off of me! 
“Thorir!” Odhran cried. 
Thorir opened his eyes, staring up at him, stricken, apparently not the least bit 
pleased to see him. “Torachan oborna!” he cried, and he writhed against a sudden 
spasm of pain. Torachan bastard! He jerked his sword from his hip, the movement 
hurting him, forcing a strangled, agonized cry from him. He thrust the blade toward 
Odhran, his eyes wide, his hand shaking, and Odhran froze, his boots skittering to an 
uncertain halt. 
“Thorir, latar mik hlaupa thik,” he said quietly, holding out his hand to the man. 
Let me help you.  
“Eigi…eigi vil…ytharr hjalpa!” Thorir seethed at him, his brows furrowed deeply 
as he struggled to hold his blade on Odhran. I do not want your help! “Thu…thu velar 
oss…thu munur skjota mik…vega mik…” You betrayed us…you will shoot me…kill 
me…  
“Nei,” Odhran told him, shaking his head. “Ek munu leysa thik.” I will free you. 

Thorir was weak and semi-lucid with pain. The point of his sword wavered and 
then his fingers slackened, turning loose of the blade, letting it fall to the ground. Odhran 
set his pistol momentarily aside, and got his arm beneath Thorir’s shoulders, drawing 
the man against him, straining to pull him out from beneath the bergelmir.  
“No…” Thorir whimpered in the common tongue, trying to pull away from him, his 
efforts waning with his consciousness. He gasped sharply in pain, writhing against 
Odhran. “No…do not…do not touch me…” 
Odhran managed to haul him from beneath the fallen weasel’s flank, but the 
effort hurt Thorir. He twisted against Odhran again, crying out, fainting. His left leg had 
been badly broken; bones had splintered in his calf and thigh, leaving the limb swollen 
and misshapen beneath his kyrtill and pants. Thorir moaned as Odhran got his legs 
beneath him, squatting, and drew Thorir over his shoulder. He clasped his hand against 
the small of Thorir’s back, took his pistol in hand again and stumbled to his feet.  
He staggered back to the wagon, and managed somehow to haul Thorir atop the 
overturned cart. He leaned over the narrow space between the rock wall and the wagon 
wall and called out to Arnora. She appeared below him, her eyes flying wide as she saw 
Thorir. “Help me,” Odhran said, grunting as he lowered Thorir from his shoulder. Thorir 
was a tall man, well-muscled and heavy. Odhran was not small or feeble himself, but 
was winded and weary from lugging the Enghan over his shoulder. “His leg is broken, 
Arnora―here, get him underneath.” 
He tried to lower Thorir carefully over the side of the wagon, climbing down and 
standing against the outcropping of stone he had used as a shooting perch. Arnora 

wriggled out of the wagon and stood, getting her arms around Thorir, letting him 
crumple against her as she knelt, cradling him against her shoulder and torso. 
“Can you get him inside?” Odhran asked, trying to support Thorir’s injured leg 
with his hands. 
“Yes,” she nodded, her brows drawn as she struggled to hold Thorir’s weight. 
“I…I think so…”  
She managed to crawl back beneath the wagon, pulling Thorir’s head and 
shoulders with her. Odhran had to let go of his leg; when it jostled against the side of 
the cart, Thorir twisted, crying out softly, piteously in pain. 
Odhran heard a pounding sound from behind him, and he whirled, looking over 
the top of the wagon. His eyes flew wide in sudden horror; one of the Torachan riders 
had seen them and was charging the wagon, his spear aimed for Odhran’s head. The 
soldier’s bergelmir sprang into the air, leaping out of the smoke, and Odhran screamed. 
He drew his arm up wildly as he pitched sideways, diving for the ground. He managed 
to get off a shot with the an’daga in his hand; the round punched into the soldier’s 
shoulder, between his armor plates more by luck than any skilled aim on Odhran’s part. 
The Torachan shrieked and fell out of his saddle, but the bergelmir was still coming.  
Odhran twisted as he fell, wrenching the second pistol from beneath the strap of 
his belt. Arnora had only just barely yanked Thorir’s legs out of the way and beneath the 
wagon, and Odhran landed hard on his back, his shoulder striking brutally against the 
stone wall, the back of his head cracking against the dirt. He heard the sudden 
splintering of taxed wood as the bergelmir landed atop the wagon, and then it lunged 
over the edge toward him, its lips drawn back from its teeth, snapping at his face. 

“Mother Above―!” Odhran screamed, jerking the pistol up, closing his finger 
against the trigger. The round exploding from the barrel was deafening in the tight 
confines between wagon and stone, and the bergelmir’s face was no more than two feet 
from Odhran’s when the lead ball slammed into its skull just above its right eye. Odhran 
could feel the sudden huff of its hot, moist breath against him, and then its brains and 
blood splattered across his face, his chest.  
The bergelmir collapsed, dead, its body slumping between the cliffside and the 
wagon, wedged in the tight space. It drooped toward him, its snout slumping, spilling 
more blood against his groin as its nose brushed against him, and Odhran shrieked 
again, scuttling backwards, kicking at its head as he scrambled beneath the wagon. 
“Mother Above…!” he whimpered, shuddering, stricken. “Mother Above…Mother 
Above…!” 
“Are you alright?” Arnora cried, her voice shrill with panic. His eyes had not yet 
reacclimated to the darkness beneath the wagon, and he was blind in the shadows. He 
felt her hands flutter against his face, her breath against his mouth as she drew near. 
“Odhran…! Odhran, are you alright?” 
“I…I am alright,” he whispered, shaking uncontrollably. He reached out clumsily, 
his palms finding her shoulders, his fingertips finding her hair. She fell against him, 
weeping again, and he held her fiercely, struggling against his own tears. “I am alright,” 
he whispered again, clinging to her. “I am alright.” 
They huddled together for a long moment, and then Odhran pulled away from 
her, risking a peek out of the opening in the side of the cart. He had shot the bergelmir 
in the head, and it was not making any noises, squirming or struggling against the 

wagon, but he wanted to be certain it was dead. He poked his head out of the opening 
and blinked in horrified realization; the walls of both the wagon and stone were blood-
spattered, streaked with gore. The bergelmir hung limply in the margin of space, blood 
spilling from its head in a grisly puddle against the ground, its tongue lolling out in a long 
blade from between its agape jaws. It had nearly filled the space above them; there 
would be no getting around it to reach the top of the wagon again. There would be no 
moving the bergelmir, either; this was a large one, probably a male in excess of three 
hundred pounds.  
“Mother Above,” Odhran whispered, ducking back beneath the wagon. He stared 
at Arnora, his eyes adjusting to the darkness. “We cannot get back out,” he said. “We 
are trapped here…for the moment, anyway.” 
She was kneeling on the ground, surrounded by the scattered remnants of 
broken crates and tumbled supplies, pistols and rifles strewn about in their frantic, 
mutual haste. She had tried to lay Thorir comfortably on the ground, and cradled his 
head against the nest of her lap. She was stroking her hand against his face as he 
moaned softly, squirming with pain. 
“We will be safe here,” Odhran told her, crawling forward. He reached out with 
tentative fingertips and touched Thorir’s leg. Even this light prodding hurt him, and he 
arched his back, lifted his chin and cried hoarsely, his hands slapping in feeble protest 
against Odhran’s. 
“Ei…eigi gerar…” he pleaded. Do not. “Ek beid…haettar…” I beg…stop… 

“Thegjar, Thorir,” Arnora whispered, leaning over him, caressing his face. Hush. 
Her hair draped against his cheeks as she kissed his brow gently. Her voice quavered 
with tears. “Thegjar. Ek kenn…ek kenn that angrar.” I know it hurts. 
Odhran looked around in the gloom. His hands fumbled against the ground and 
he felt broken shards, planks from the crates of firearms. He began to gather them 
together. “Arnora, take off your apron,” he said.  
“What?” 
“I…I think I can splint his leg with these,” Odhran said. He had watched the 
surgeon aboard the a’Maorga tend to similar injuries following the storm at sea, and he 
thought he remembered the techniques. “We can use your apron, rip it into strips to tie 
some splints together and bind his leg.” 
She nodded, shifting her weight and gently lowering Thorir’s head against the 
ground. She unfastened the brooches at her shoulders holding the twin panels of fabric 
in place over her shift dress, and then, at his instruction, she began to rip the apron into 
long, broad strips. 
Odhran tied the broken planks of crate together until he had two long pieces, 
each about the length of Thorir’s leg. He overlapped them when he could bind them 
securely, wanting the splints to be as sturdy as possible. He then positioned them, one 
along Thorir’s inner leg, the other alongside of his hip. Thorir moaned as Odhran moved 
his leg gently, gingerly. 
“Hvat…hvat er thik…gerar at mik…?” Thorir gasped, breathless and hurting. 
What are you doing to me? He turned his face weakly toward his shoulder, his brows 

furrowing, his fingers fumbling clumsily for his belt, for weapons he no longer carried. 
“Ek…ek munu veg thik…” he murmured, his mind fading again. I will kill you… 
“It is alright, Thorir,” Odhran whispered, leaning forward and hooking his hand 
briefly against Thorir’s. He expected the Hersir to curse him, shove his hand and 
proffered comfort away and was startled to feel Thorir’s fingers close against his. 
“Ek beid…” Thorir whispered to him, his eyes closed, his expression softening, 
his brows lifting in implore. “Valla…hvar er mi kona…mi ast…? Finnar hana…ek 
beid…mi Valla…” 
He whimpered this name, Valla, over and over, and Arnora kissed his forehead 
again. “He is calling for his wife,” she whispered, her tears spilling against his face. She 
looked up at Odhran, anguished for Thorir. “He…he asked you to find Valla, his wife…” 
Odhran blinked at Thorir for a moment, stricken, feeling the man’s fingers tighten 
against his as he pleaded softly. He had known about Thorir’s wife; Arnora had told 
them only moments before the explosion, and Thorir had told them himself upon their 
capture, when he had flown into a rage, lunging at Aedhir at the Torachan camp. 
Odhran had known, but he had not realized fully until that moment, when Thorir’s 
customary anger had dissolved into a simple, vulnerable despair Odhran could 
understand and suddenly, poignantly empathize with. 
“Ek beid thik…” Thorir whimpered. I beg you. “Finnar Valla…ek…ek vil mi 
kona…” Find Valla…I want my wife… 
A spear or blade had pierced his shoulder, puncturing through his mail-lined 
leather armor. There was no evidence of the offending weapon; Thorir must have jerked 
it loose at some point, but he was still bleeding. Between the wound to his shoulder, and 

his crushed leg, Odhran realized the young man could very well be dying, Thorir had 
begun to shudder, overcome with pain, lapsing into shock.  
“Get his armor off of him,” he said to Arnora. He drew his hand away from 
Thorir’s and began to hurry, slipping the scraps of Arnora’s torn apron beneath his leg, 
doing his best to set the injured limb. “He is bleeding―get his armor off of him. Open his 
kyrtill.” 
He managed to bind Thorir’s leg to the makeshift splints, further immobilizing it 
by then wrapping fabric to fetter his left leg against his right. Arnora removed the layers 
of lined armor from his shoulders and unfastened the front of his coat. At Odhran’s 
direction, she had taken a folded wad of linen and held it against his shoulder, pressing 
against it to stave his bleeding. As she worked at this, Odhran found blankets among 
the tumbled mess in the wagon and wrapped them about Thorir, trying to keep him 
warm. 
“Did you see Einar?” Arnora whispered. They had both been tending to Thorir 
with such desperate urgency that this was the first moment she had found to ask him. 
Her eyes were round and filled with worry. “Did you see my father out there, Odhran?” 
“No,” Odhran told her, shaking his head. He had found one of their waterskins 
and offered it to Thorir, cradling his hand against the back of the Hersir’s head, lifting 
him. “Here. Drekkar, Thorir.” Drink. 
Thorir’s hand moved weakly toward the waterskin and he raised his chin as 
Odhran pressed the spout of the pouch against his lips. He drank some of the water, 
though most dribbled down his chin in thin rivulets. He sputtered and choked, gasping 
for breath as Odhran drew the water away from him. 

Odhran glanced at Arnora. “I am sorry,” he said, setting the water aside and 
lowering Thorir’s head again. He reached for her, and she caught his hand, squeezing it 
tightly. “I did not see Einar near the wagon…anywhere. I did not see Wen, either, or 
Pryce. I do not know what happened to them.” 
“Took…them…” Thorir whispered. 
Arnora and Odhran both blinked down at him in surprise. He was awake, or at 
least semi-lucid, looking up at them dazedly. His brows furrowed and he brushed his 
fingertips clumsily against his face. “Took them,” he whispered again, his eyes fluttering 
closed. “I…I saw the Torachans…take them…” 
“Take them where?” Odhran asked, alarmed anew. He leaned over Thorir, 
hooking his free hand against the man’s. “All three of them, Thorir?” 
Thorir nodded once, wincing. 
“Where did they take them?” Arnora asked, frightened.  
“I…I do not know…” Thorir said quietly. “Into the smoke…disappeared…I…I saw 
them take the girl first…heard her scream…” 
“Wen…!” Odhran gasped. 
“The others…they took as they…they rode by…bergelmirs…” Thorir murmured. 
“Tried to follow them…” He opened his eyes again, his fingers tightening against 
Odhran’s. “They took Einar,” he said, his voice and his expression stern and suddenly, 
remarkably coherent. “Like they…like they meant to…your friend, too…the boy.” 
“Pryce?” Odhran asked. He glanced at Arnora. “Why would they take them 
deliberately?” 

“Because they…they are young,” Thorir told him. He raised his chin, looking 
toward Arnora. “They…killed the others but took the…the Seggr…and the young Rekkr. 
All of them…” 
“They are all Einar’s age,” Arnora whispered, her eyes enormous and stunned. 
“They knew Einar was among us. They have learned somehow he is Fjolnir’s heir. They 
took all of the Seggr, Thorir? Allr af drengarnir?” All of the young men? 
Thorir nodded. “They…do not know his face…” he breathed. “But they…know his 
age…” 
“Einar!” Arnora cried softly, terrified. She jerked away from Odhran, scrambling 
for the opening in the wagon.  
“Arnora, no―!” Odhran cried, grabbing her as she tried to dart past him. He 
caught her about the waist and drew her back, and she fought with him, driving her fists 
against him, weeping in her sudden, horrified anguish. 
“Let go of me!” she cried. “They took Einar! They took my brother! If they see his 
sword―his scabbard―they will know who he is! They will kill him! Let me go!” 
“If they meant to kill him, they would have killed every man in this caravan,” 
Odhran told her, leaning close to her, tucking his cheek against hers. He felt her 
thrashing still between his arms, and she shuddered, weeping. He turned his face 
against hers, holding her. “If they meant to kill him, they would not have taken him, 
Arnora.” 
“Then…then why…?” she whispered, drawing her hands to her face. “Why would 
they take him?” She moaned softly, sobbing. “Einar…!” 

A second explosion ripped through the narrow chasm of the roadway outside of 
the wagon. Arnora shrieked, thrashing against Odhran again, and he folded himself 
over her reflexively. Again, the force of the blast nearly shattered Odhran’s ear drums; 
he could feel it slamming in his head. Again, the earth beneath them thrummed and 
shuddered as blasted chunks of mountainside hurtled down to the ground. He could 
hear boulders whistling in the air; the crashing thunder of wood splintering as more 
wagons were smashed beneath a sudden rain of rocks and dirt.  
A chunk of granite the side of well-tended pony slammed into the back of their 
wagon, punching through the wooden frame and rear axle, splintering the thick beams 
like dried kindling, and sending a spray of splinters, dirt and grit spewing through the 
wagon. Arnora screamed, cowering against Odhran, clutching at him with enough terror 
in her fingertips to leave bruises against his forearms. The ground shook beneath them 
with the impact; the edge of the massive rock only missed Thorir’s injured, outstretched 
legs by less than two feet. 
Odhran twisted, moving for Thorir, drawing Arnora with him, keeping her pinned 
against his chest. He hooked his free arm across Thorir’s chest and pulled the man 
toward him, trying to shield him.  
They listened to the hissing spatter of debris pelting the belly of the wagon above 
them. More dense dust and smoke clogged the air and filled the wagon, choking them. 
They heard more screams from beyond the shelter of the wood as the resonant, rolling 
thunder of the detonation faded into silence, as the last of the boulders and enormous 
chunks of stone tumbled from the sky. They huddled together, gasping and coughing for 
breath, trembling with terror. Arnora squirmed in Odhran’s grasp, turning to face him. 

She drew her arms about his ribs and hugged him fiercely, burying her face against the 
side of his throat as she sobbed. 
“It…it is alright…” he whispered, closing his eyes against the sting of grit. He tried 
to draw the blankets over Thorir’s face, to protect him from the dust. He stroked 
Arnora’s hair, canting his face down to kiss her forehead. “It is alright, Arnora…it is 
alright…” 
When the echo of the explosion had subsided, a peculiar, eerie calm descended 
upon the world. Odhran could hear faint cries from beyond the wagon, but not many. He 
realized in horrified dismay that there were probably not many left among the Enghan 
caravan to cry out; they had either been butchered by the Torachan cavalry or 
abducted, stolen like Einar, Pryce and Wen. He heard no footfalls at first, no more 
pounding of bergelmir feet or rushed tromping of imperial sabatons against the ground. 
The patter of dirt against the wagon waned into silence, and there was nothing but that 
uncanny, disturbing stillness, a weight in the air as palpable as the dust and smoke. 
“Are you alright?” Odhran croaked at Arnora. He felt her hair brush against his 
face as she nodded. 
“Are…are you?” she whispered, drawing her hands to her face as she choked. 
“Yes,” he said. He felt her hands move again, her arm hooking about her neck, 
her other hand pressing against his cheek, his dirt-encrusted beard. 
“Oh, Odhran…” she gasped, her breath fluttering with tears. She tucked her face 
against him, her forehead against his cheek, and he held her. 
“It is alright,” he whispered to her, kissing her hair. “I am here, Arnora. It is going 
to be alright.” He looked down at Thorir, drawing the blankets back for a moment. 

“Thorir,” he said. Thorir’s eyes were closed, but he opened them blearily, blinking at the 
sound of his name. Odhran leaned down, reaching for him, cradling Thorir’s cheek 
against his palm. “Ert thu granda?” Are you hurt? 
Thorir closed his eyes. The corner of his mouth lifted slightly, and he managed a 
soft snort of laughter. “Ek…ek engr…at buar meth…bjorn’sterkr…” he murmured softly, 
reaching up and brushing his fingers feebly against Odhran’s hand. I was hurt to begin 
with, strong bear. 
The ground trembled beneath them, and Odhran jerked his head toward the dim 
daylight filtering in through the shattered end of the wagon, seeping around the corners 
of the fallen boulder. He heard a thrumming like drumbeats, and heard voices, men’s 
voices shouting out. Arnora heard it, too, and she shrank back against the wall of the 
wagon. 
“Odhran…!” she gasped. 
“Riders!” He reached behind him, his hands fumbling until his fingers brushed 
against the butt of an an’daga. He snatched it in hand and drew it before him, pointing 
the barrel at the far end of the wagon. They were vulnerable now, the shelter the wagon 
had offered compromised. A passing Torachan rider on bergelmir might be able to see 
them around the boulder, the smashed corner of the cart.  
He looked over his shoulder at Arnora, wide-eyed with fright. “Pull Thorir back,” 
he whispered to her. “Keep quiet―do not let them find us!” 
She nodded, drawing her arms about Thorir and struggling to draw him further 
back in the wagon. He moaned as he moved, not much of a sound, but enough to seize 
both Arnora’s heart and Odhran’s with sudden, bright terror. 

“Oh, Thorir, please…” Arnora whispered, lowering her face over his, tucking 
herself over him. “Please…do not…please…!” 
Odhran heard a loud voice cry out from near the wagon and he froze, his finger 
poised against the trigger of the pistol. He was so frightened, his heart slamming in 
frantic rhythm beneath his breast that he thought at first his mind played a trick on him. 
“Einar!” the voice shouted out. 
Arnora lifted her face, her eyes flown wide. 
“Einar! Arnora! Hvar eruth ther?” 
“Fathir!” Arnora stared at Odhran, as confused as he was. 
“Wen!” Odhran heard Aedhir scream, his voice shrill with panic. “Pryce! Odhran! 
Where are you?” 
“Captain Fainne!” Odhran cried, relaxing his grip on the pistol, lowering his arm. 
He scrambled to get his feet beneath him and yelped as he smacked his head sharply 
against the belly of the wagon. He staggered clumsily, slapping his hands against the 
chunk of granite that had struck the wagon. He wriggled, trying to get around it and 
climb outside. 
“Captain Fainne!” he shouted, and as he whooped in a mouthful of dust and 
smoke, he began to choke. “Captain Fainne! Here! We are here!” 
“Fathir!” Arnora cried, right behind him, scrabbling against the stone, her hands 
pawing against his legs as she struggled to follow Odhran. “Fathir!” 
Odhran managed to haul his head and shoulders from around the crumbled 
stone. His waist got lodged, the jagged corners of broken wagon planks digging 
painfully into his back, and he squirmed. He could not see anything through the thick 

cloud of dust, but he raised his hand, gasping for breath. “Captain Fainne! Eirik!” he 
cried out. 
He saw a silhouetted form loom out of the smoke, and he cowered. It was a 
bergelmir, moving swiftly toward him, and he watched a smaller figure―the rider―leap 
from the animal’s back before it even came fully into view. The figure rushed toward the 
wagon, and the first thing to appear clearly out of the dust was a broad length of sword, 
clasped in hand and poised at the ready, pointing directly at him. 
“Bugger me―!” Odhran hissed, trying to scuttle back, his stomach shoved 
painfully against the rock. It is a Torachan! Mother Above―it is a legionnaire! 
He looked over his shoulder, frantic and terrified toward Arnora, opening his 
mouth and drawing in breath to scream at her to throw him a pistol. He heard the blade 
of the sword smack against the stone, the scuttling of boot soles against the granite as 
the rider tried to climb the angular slope of the boulder, and he jerked toward the sound, 
balling his hands into fists, meaning to at least go down swinging. 
If it bloody ends like this, I will fight you, you bastard rot, he thought, his heart 
flailing in panicked alarm. I will beat you bloody rot senseless while you run me 
through― 
A hand fell against his own, and a man leaned forward, his features coming into 
view through the swirling dust and smoke. Odhran recoiled; it took his mind nearly a full, 
startled breath to realize, and then his eyes flew wide, his fists relaxing. 
“Captain Fainne!” 
“Odhran!” Aedhir cried, throwing his sword aside. He had clambered up the 
boulder, leaning his body across the side of the stone, and his hand tightened against 

Odhran’s. His arm hooked around Odhran’s neck, and as he embraced him, Odhran 
drew his arms around the Captain’s shoulders, shuddering against him. 
“Captain Fainne…!” he gasped again, pressing his cheek against Aedhir’s 
shoulder. 
“Hoah, lad,” Aedhir whispered, clutching at him. He pulled away, cupping his 
hands against Odhran’s cheeks, his eyes filled with tears, his mouth spread in a broad 
smile. “You live. Hoah, Odhran…lad, you are alive…!” 
He hugged Odhran again fiercely, and then turned over his shoulder, shouting 
out into the gloom. “Eirik! Here! They are over here!” 
Aedhir took Odhran’s hands in his own, and helped haul the younger man loose 
from the shattered wagon. Eirik appeared out of the shadows just as Odhran’s boots 
stumbled clumsily against the ground, and Arnora’s hands appeared in the margin of 
space he had just vacated, groping desperately for escape. 
“Fathir!” she cried. “Fathir!” 
“Arnora!” Eirik cried. He caught his daughter’s hands and drew her, scrambling 
and staggering out of the wreckage. He seized her in his arms and lifted her from her 
feet, weeping as he held her in his arms. “Arnora,” he wept, kissing her cheek, her ear, 
her hair. “Dottir, ert thu granda?” Are you hurt? 
“Thorir is inside, too, Captain,” Odhran told him. “He is hurt, sir…his leg is 
broken, I think, and he…” 
“Is Wen there, too?” Aedhir asked. He turned to the ruined wagon, stepping 
toward it. “Wen? Pryce?” 

Odhran caught him by the sleeve. “They are not there,” he said softly, pained, 
and Aedhir turned to him, bewildered and frightened. “Captain Fainne, Thorir said he 
saw them…” 
“Where is your brother?” Eirik asked Arnora, setting her on her feet once more, 
holding her face between his palms. His face was battered, his beard streaked with 
blood and dirt, his tears cleaving paths through the dust and grit caked on his cheeks. 
“Is Einar hurt? Is he…?” 
Her face twisted with grief, and his voice faded in anguished realization. “Where 
is your brother?” he asked again, his voice hoarse and stricken. He looked at Aedhir in 
alarm. 
“They took him, Fathir,” Arnora whimpered, bursting into new tears. She fell 
against Eirik, shuddering, clapping her hands over her face. “They…they took Einar!” 
“What?” Aedhir gasped, stunned anew. He stared at Odhran in helpless horror. 
“And Pryce, sir,” Odhran said softly. “And Wen, too. They jumped clear when the 
wagon overturned. I tried to find them, but Thorir told us…” 
“He said he saw the Torachans take them,” Arnora wept. “Thorir told us he…he 
saw them taking all of the Seggr, Fathir, and…and the young Rekkr! All of them, Fathir!” 
“Grimnir bjargar oss,” Eirik whispered. Grimnir save us. 
“They knew, Eirik,” Odhran told him grimly, limping toward the Hersir, drawing his 
gaze. “They do not know Einar’s face, but they know how old he is. They knew 
somehow…they knew he traveled with us for Elbeuf.” 
“No…” Eirik gasped, anguished, fresh tears spilling from his eyes. 

“If they know who he is, then they must know about the sword,” Arnora told him. 
“Fathir, if…if they can read the runes on the hilt, they…they…” 
“They will know who he is,” Eirik whispered. He staggered away from Arnora in 
shock, his feet stumbling in the dirt. He fell upon his knees. “They…they will know…” he 
said, trembling. “Einar…” 
“Who he is?” Aedhir asked, confused. “Eirik, I do not understand. What do you 
mean ‘who he is?’” 
“Einar is kin to the konung,” Eirik whispered, hanging his head, shoving the heels 
of his hands against his brow. He uttered a low, agonized moan, and his shoulders 
shuddered. “I tried to keep him from it. I…I tried to keep it secret…my…my boy safe…” 
“He is Konung Fjolnir’s heir, Captain,” Odhran said quietly, laying his hand 
against Aedhir’s shoulder. “The king has no sons of his own―two months ago, he 
named Einar his heir. The empire learned of it somehow. They knew, and they came for 
him.” 
“I have feared for this,” Eirik said. “I have tried to keep him from it, but he does 
not understand. He is so young yet, and he did not understand the danger to him…” 
He stared at Aedhir in broken implore. “They took my son!” he cried. Arnora fell 
onto her knees beside him, and he clung to her, weeping. “Grimnir help, me, they…they 
have taken my boy…!” 

Chapter Eleven 
 
The initial explosion set off by the Torachans from the cliffs overlooking the 
roadway had sent tons of stone, dirt and rubble collapsing into the narrow ravine. It had 
effectively cut off Eirik, Aedhir and nearly half of the Enghan Herr regiment traveling with 
the caravan from the wagon train. While Odhran, Thorir and those who remained alive 
after the blast had struggled and fought with an onslaught of seemingly hundreds of 
Torachan cavalry soldiers, Eirik, Aedhir and the others trapped on the other side of this 
imposing wall of rubble had struggled frantically to cross it and reach their friends and 
loved ones. They had been able to hear the screams, the sounds of battle, and they had 
been desperate in their efforts. Nearly twenty among them who had been unharmed in 
the detonation were killed trying to scramble over and around the rubble; the mound 
was unstable, and the weight of so many men and bergelmirs moving with such urgency 
was enough to trigger slides of earth and stone, shifting the enormous tumble of 
boulders, crushing anyone and anything in its path as it moved. 
The second explosion had come from behind the caravan. It was a cruel and 
deliberate effort on the part of the empire to keep anyone who had survived from 
following them as they retreated, taking with them nearly forty young men and boys, the 
Enghan’s Seggr and young Rekkr warriors―their sons. 
The carnage left in their wake was nearly too horrible to be believed. As the 
smoke and dust began to thin and wane, they could clearly see the devastation the 
Torachans had brought upon the little caravan of Enghan. No wagon remained 
untouched by falling debris. There were bodies everywhere, heaped together in broken, 

tangled piles, crushed by stones, felled by spear or imperial sword. Bergelmirs and oxen 
lay sprawled among the rubble. Supplies and simple, sentimental belongings were 
scattered everywhere, from clothing and food to toys packed for children who made 
their way to Elbeuf by knarr. The stink of blood remained strong and apparent in the air, 
and the last of the Enghan Herr, forty-two Rekkr warriors, the straggled survivors of the 
vicious assault, stumbled about together, wide-eyed with shock. 
“Fyrirgefar…mik…” Thorir whispered to Eirik. Forgive me. They had managed to 
move him from beneath the ruined wagon, but such effort had little purpose. The few 
wagons they had left among them were on the other side of the mountainous debris, 
unable to cross the rubble. The Enghan were gathering their injured as best they could, 
and rigging together makeshift litters with lengths of broken wood and blankets so that 
either one man could drag an injured fellow behind him, or two could carry one between 
them back to the wagons. 
“Thegjar,” Eirik said to him softly, gently. Hush. He knelt beside his friend, holding 
Thorir’s hand, keeping his other pressed against his forehead to comfort him.  
“Ek…freist gaeta Einar…” Thorir whimpered, closing his eyes and sucking in a 
hissing breath through his teeth against a spasm of pain. I tried to protect Einar. “Hoefat 
hann…ok thik…” I failed him…and you… 
“Nei, Thorir,” Eirik said, tears in his eyes. No. He leaned over, pressing his lips 
against Thorir’s brow. “Althri.” Never. “Munu’um fylgja tha. Mumu’um finna Einar―finna 
allr af tha ok foerar tha aptr.” We will follow them. We will find Einar―find them all and 
bring them back again. 

“How could this have happened?” cried one of the Enghan. His name was Heri, 
and he was Styrimathr of Thorir’s kyn, the Dalr. He had been horrified to see his leader, 
Thorir, in such a dire state, and he paced about, distraught. “How could the empire have 
known to find us―that we would be following this route to Elbeuf? That Einar would be 
among us?” 
Heri stopped and turned to Aedhir and Odhran, standing together nearby with 
Thierley, who had been fortunate enough to be riding near the front of the ranks in the 
caravan, and had avoided serious injury in both the blast and the crossing of the debris 
mound. Of the ten crewmen from the a’Maorga’s longboat, only the three of them 
remained. They had found poor Semias Lehern and Sengel Jukes crushed beneath 
rubble. Duffin Nevyne and Euan Fancott were unaccounted for; they were Pryce’s age, 
and like Pryce, young enough in appearance to pass as teens. Aedhir suspected they 
had been abducted as well, taken by the Torachans in the misnotion they were young 
Enghan warriors. 
After a long moment of Heri’s unfriendly regard, Thierley stepped forward, 
returning the man’s scowl, his large hands folding into fists. “You have something you 
would like to say?” he asked. The events of the day had left even the ordinarily 
unflappable Thierley rattled and on edge, and he met Heri’s gaze with menacing intent. 
“Thierley, stand down,” Aedhir said, hooking his hand against the master-at-
arms’ elbow. “There has been enough blood spilled today.” 
“There is about to be some rot damn more, if he is implying what I think he is,” 
Thierley said sharply. 

“How did you do it?” Heri asked, his own hands closing. “How did you get word to 
them? One of your lot who escaped by boat? Or did the legions just follow you, keeping 
a wary distance―using you to trick us?” 
“Heri, that is enough,” Eirik told him firmly, rising to his feet. 
“Hersir Thorir has said all along they are Torachan spies, Eirik,” Heri cried at him. 
“You have not believed him. What better proof than this do you need?” He swept his 
hand out, indicating the rubble and carnage. 
“Hoah, that is it…” Thierley growled, stomping forward, drawing his right fist back.  
“Thierley―stand down!” Aedhir snapped, grasping Thierley’s forearm between 
his hands and stumbling forward in tow with Thierley. 
“Heri―thu haettar!” Thorir shouted, summoning from some deep reservoir of 
strength and resolve. Stop! He sat up, shoving his elbows beneath him. He glared at his 
Strymathr. Heri blinked at him, startled and caught off guard. 
“No…no more…” Thorir said, struggling to hold himself upright. “There will 
be…no more talk against these men…from me…or my kyn.” 
“Thorir, you are delirious,” Heri said, hurrying to his side, falling onto his knees 
beside him. Thorir caught him by the throat, enough force left in his hand to crush a 
warbling cry from between Heri’s lips. 
“There will be no more, Heri,” Thorir hissed at him, his brows furrowed. “I was 
wrong. These men…they are no more Torachan than…than I am.” He released Heri, 
and turned his head, meeting Odhran’s gaze. “That one…saved my life…” he said 
softly. “For the offenses I…I have offered him…his friends…this boy answered with 
kindness and…courage…the sort I…I can only long for. I am not fit to be his servant.” 

“Thorir…” Heri whispered, stricken and confounded. 
“They…did not betray us,” Thorir told him. He looked at Eirik and said one word: 
“Nordri.” 
Eirik knelt beside him again, helping Thorir lay back. “Did you see them?” 
Thorir shook his head. The effort he had made to reprimand his soldier sapped 
whatever precious little strength remained in him. His eyelids fluttered closed and he 
moaned softly. “Who…who else could it be?” he whispered to Eirik, holding his friend’s 
hand. “They…they came from the same Motinn…as our own Tithendar. They would 
know…about our byrs…that we…we were in Lith…that we would bring our people…to 
Elbeuf before turning for Eng…for war…” 
“Orbornar!” Eirik said in dismayed realization, his brows drawn, caught between 
anguish and rage. Bastards! “They would have known about Einar,” he said, and Thorir 
nodded.  
“They…would be angry enough…with Fjolnir…to betray him,” Thorir murmured. 
“Nordri?” Aedhir asked, genuflecting beside Thorir. 
Eirik turned to him. “Northern clans,” he said. “North of the Nordr Fjell in Mikillfit 
and H’rossjord. They want the throne―and married the Konung’s daughters to claim it. 
Fjolnir named Einar his heir to keep it from them, keep it in his clan.” Eirik’s face filled 
with sorrow. “I knew the Nordri would not simply walk away and leave it be. They have 
wanted the crown for ages. I knew they would be furious to learn about Einar. Fjolnir 
underestimated them, and what they would do against him for that offense.” 
“Heimskr saurr,” Thorir whispered with a frown. Stupid dung. “Fjolnir althri 
hugsar…athr vikjar.” Fjolnir never thinks before he acts. 

“Fjolnir made his announcement two months ago, at the Motinn when the kyns 
agreed to war,” Eirik told Aedhir. 
Aedhir arched his brow. “Plenty of time for these northern kyns to betray you to 
the empire.” 
Eirik nodded grimly. “And for the empire to reach here, the Ve’dal valley to wait 
for us. Those legions in the south might have even been just a distraction to delay us, 
occupy us, give the others enough time to cross the Keiliselgr Fjell mountains.” 
“Why would the Nordri betray you?” Odhran asked. “What benefit could it have to 
them? If the empire defeats you, Engjold belongs to them―not the Nordri.” 
“Ulus still keeps its royal house in Kharhorin to the south,” Eirik said. “Their 
Kagan, Targutai Bokedei retains his title, his armies, his authority in his land.” 
“So long as he follows Torachan rules and laws,” Aedhir said. 
“Tempered power is still power,” Eirik told him. “The Nordri might take whatever 
they can get if they think it will get them the throne of Vornirtindr. Fjolnir’s people―my 
people, the A’Mithal from the midlands of Engjold―claimed the throne by marriage, not 
by blood. By blood, it belonged to the Nordri kyns―they have never forgotten this, and 
never forgiven us fully for taking it from them.” 
“They will use Einar to get it back,” Aedhir said, frowning. “If they have told the 
empire about your son, they have probably told them about the war, too.” 
“Yes,” Eirik said, sighing heavily, pinching the bridge of his nose between the tips 
of his forefinger and thumb. “Grimnir protect us, all of our Herr from every kyn in Engjold 
is likely marching headlong to their deaths. The empire has probably fortified their 
border with every man they could summon.” 

“The empire will trade Einar for Fjolnir’s surrender,” Aedhir said. 
“Of his armies, yes,” Eirik said. “And when he agrees, they will take his throne 
and give it to the Nordri.” He snorted softly, his brows furrowed, the corners of his mouth 
turned down. “Their reward for their deceit―for their betrayal of their own people. Once 
the Nordri have what they want, they will give the empire what it wants―gersimi, and all 
of the means to make it.” 
“Will he agree?” Aedhir asked, laying his hand against Eirik’s shoulder. “Will 
Fjolnir surrender to them?” 
“If he thinks harm will come to Einar? Yes,” Eirik said. “I am certain of it. He did 
not just name Einar his heir because of blood―he named him because he has always 
loved Einar, and Arnora and Bjarki, too. He used to travel in disguise from Vornirtindr 
when they were small and visit with us in our byr. He has not been able to see Einar for 
many years, but he loves him still.”  
“We have to go,” Aedhir told him, tightening his grip on Eirik’s shoulder. “They 
took my boy, too. And my daughter.” 
“You will help us, then?” Eirik asked. 
Aedhir met his gaze. “Whatever I have is yours, Eirik,” he said. “Whatever I can 
summon, whatever I can do.” 
“You said this is not Tiralainn’s battle,” Eirik said. 
“Maybe not,” Aedhir said, his brows drawing gravely. “But it is mine now. It was 
mine the moment they touched my children.” 
Eirik clapped his hand against Aedhir’s. “We will get them back,” he said. “By all 
that I hold, we will get them all back.” 

“Where would the Torachans bring them?” Aedhir asked. 
“From here? Back through the Keiliselgr, across the Merki Isthmus and into 
Enthimork,” Eirik said. “From there, likely east through Eng and then south into Ulus. 
The closest imperial city is Kharhorin, in the Taiga. Our Herr will be gathering near 
there―just west of the Nordr foothills in Eng.” 
“How long to get there?” Aedhir asked. 
“Three weeks at least by foot,” Eirik said. “With the bergelmirs that have 
survived? Maybe two―if the weather holds in our favor.” 
“How fast can one of your knarrs reach the Muir Fuar from Elbeuf?” Aedhir asked 
him. “And cross it from there to Tiralainn?” 
“We would sail north from Elbeuf,” Eirik said. “Out over Rockall, across the 
Chagan Sea until the northern currents find us and draw us southwest.” 
Aedhir nodded. Eirik was talking about the Ionium currents―the very forces of 
wind and water that had brought the a’Maorga to Capua could swiftly deliver the 
Enghan’s small knarrs across the Muir Fuar sea. 
“Maybe three weeks,” Eirik offered in estimation. He arched his brow. “I thought 
your king would be unwilling.” 
“He might,” Aedhir said. “But there is one who could convince him―a sort of ally 
to you already.” Eirik looked at him, perplexed. “The King of the Abhacan state of 
Tirurnua, Neisrod Baruch will be very interested―and concerned―once enlightened of 
the empire’s intentions to claim the recipe for black powder from you. They have only 
shared it with us in recent years, and he has expressly forbid Kierken share it with the 
empire.  

“Neisrod does not trust Torach. He has his own army, his own fleet of armed 
ships―and he and my king, Kierken are as close as brothers. You can sail to 
Tirurnua―it will be easy if you follow the Ionium current south. I can write an implore 
you can deliver to Neisrod. Your people were allies to his ancestors once, and he 
perceives Torach as a potential enemy now. He will help us and he will convince 
Kierken to help us, as well. Even if they cannot reach Eng in time, they can send their 
gunships to Cneas―to the heart of the empire itself.” 
“And he will believe you at only your word?” Eirik asked. 
“I have more than my word now,” Aedhir told him. “They have taken your son. 
There is no other purpose except to force your king to surrender his lands―and his 
recipe for gersimi. That makes it proof in my mind.” He smiled without humor, his brows 
narrowing all the more. “They have also abducted a commissioned officer of the Crown 
Navy, three of our citizens and murdered two others. That makes it personal.” 
Eirik stood. He turned to Heri. “Can you bear him to the wagons?” he asked, 
nodding toward Thorir. 
“Ja, Eirik,” Heri said. 
“Do it―keep with him, and with my daughter. You will lead a group of ten Herr 
with the injured for Elbeuf. The rest of us will leave for the east as soon as our injured 
have been moved.” 
“What of the dead?” Heri asked. 
A shadow of sorrow crossed Eirik’s face and he looked down at the ground. “We 
must leave them,” he said softly. “Grimnir’s herjans’disir will find them―the great ladies 
of Asbith will lead them all to the glory of Vanaheim for their sacrifice. Light pyres in their 

honor on the shores of the Chagan outside of Elbeuf.” He draped his hand against 
Heri’s shoulder, his expression grave. “Tell my uncle where we have gone, what has 
happened. If he has not sent his clan’s warriors already, tell him to make haste. We will 
meet him in Eng.” 
“Ja,” Heri said again, nodding in deference. 
Eirik turned to Aedhir, meeting his gaze. “Someone find this man a square of 
hide,” he shouted out. “Strike a fire―get some ashes that he might write.” 
*** 
“I am going with you,” Tacita told Aedhir. 
He had crossed over the mountainous pile of rocks and debris to reach her. She 
waited with the bergelmirs and remaining wagons, the few and straggled survivors that 
had been at the front of the caravan. 
Aedhir’s brows lifted in implore. “Tacita…” he said, draping his hands against her 
shoulders. 
She turned her head, her expression stricken as two Rekkr moved past them, 
carrying a litter between them bearing one of their injured fellows. The man was 
grievously injured, moaning and writhing weakly, his kyrtill soaked in blood. She looked 
at Aedhir again, her blue eyes round, her face ashen with horror. “I am coming with 
you,” she said again. 
“You will be safe in Elbeuf,” he told her, and he touched her face. “Please, 
Tacita.” 
“You need me,” she said. “There are none among you who know as much about 
the empire as I do. I worked for them―I sometimes traveled among their troops. I know 

how they move, how they think. I have been to Kharhorin before. I know how the city is 
fortified, and I know where they would take prisoners.” 
He fell silent, anguished, cradling her cheek against his palm. 
“You need me, Aedhir,” she insisted. 
“I need you alive,” he whispered, brushing his thumb against the cruel mark of 
her tattoo. “I need you safe. I…I cannot lose you, too.” He lowered his face, his eyes 
stinging with sudden tears. He had not wept yet for Pryce and Wen; the shock was still 
too new to his heart, too unfathomable for his mind. His defenses were beginning to 
crumble, and already he could feel the strain of grief and fury upon him. “Please,” he 
breathed. “They took my children, Tacita.” 
She reached up, touching his face with her fingertips. She leaned toward him, 
her soft, delicate mouth settling gently against his. “You need me for that, too,” she 
whispered to him. There were tears in her eyes as she looked at him. “There are none 
among you who know more about that, either.” 
He blinked at her, startled and confused. A tear spilled down her cheek and she 
uttered a quiet, fluttering gasp. “You are frightened for your children,” she said softly. 
“Aelwen and Pryce. I know, Aedhir.” She closed her eyes and hung her head. “The 
empire took my daughter, too, and I…I know your fear.” 
“Your daughter?” he whispered, and she nodded. “Tacita, you have a daughter?” 
She nodded, opening her eyes and looking at him, anguished. “Her name is 
Aurelia. They took her away from me. They…they took my daughter…” 

Her voice dissolved and he moved toward her, drawing her into his arms. She 
clutched at him and Aedhir turned his face against her hair. “Tacita,” he breathed. “Why 
have you never told me?” 
“There is nothing you could have done,” she said. She met his gaze, tears 
spilling down her cheeks. “They took her in Euboea, in the south. I…I was not supposed 
to have children. They give members of the donarium paelex some sort of elixir…a tonic 
when we are young, and it stills our wombs. I was not supposed to have children and 
that is why it was such a miracle to me and Marcus that Aurelia would be born to us.” 
Aedhir looked at her in sudden realization. He knew who Marcus was, of course; 
he had been the young Median viatori Tacita had traveled with for the last decade. 
“Marcus,” he said softly. “He was the father?” 
“Yes,” Tacita said, nodding. “We did not mean for it to happen. It was strictly 
forbidden among the sacerdotium by temple code, but we did not think anyone would 
ever know. They did not, not for a long time. Aurelia is five. We kept her with us…kept 
her safe as we traveled, but two months ago, Torachan soldiers came to Galjin and they 
took us. There was nothing we could do. I…I do not know how they learned of it.” She 
stared at him, stricken. “The Pontifex punished us. They sent Marcus away―banished 
him in the company of imperial guards to the east, to a parish in Teutoni. I…I did not 
even get to see him…tell him good-bye.” Her voice fluttered, her breath shuddering and 
she lowered her face toward the ground.  
“They sent me as far from him as they could,” she said. “They sent me to Capua, 
sold me to flesh traders. Marcus was born free, but I was born a slave. They made me a 
slave again.” She pressed her fingertips against her mouth, closing her eyes. “They 

could have done whatever they wanted with me. Whatever they wanted, I would have 
bore it gladly, but they took my baby girl from me. I do not know what has become of 
her.” 
“Tacita,” Aedhir said gently. At last he understand her pain, the tremendous 
sorrow he had sensed in her, the quiet tears she would offer in the night when she 
thought no one could hear her. He understood, and whatever defenses he had forced 
upon his heart to steel himself against the pain of his own loss shattered. He held her 
and began to weep. She trembled against him, as delicate and slender as a winter-
barren maple branch, and he kissed her hair softly.  
“I know what it is like to lose a child,” she breathed, lifting her chin against his 
chest. “I know what it is like to have one stolen from you…taken someplace where you 
are helpless to protect them…shamed of your own inability to keep them safe.” She 
brushed her fingertips against his face, his tears. “And I know you,” she whispered. “You 
will blame yourself for it, as I have blamed myself for my Aurelia. It is not your fault.” 
He wept freely, and she held him, kissing his temple, his ear. “I am sorry,” he 
gasped at her, tangling his hands in her hair, shuddering against her. He wept for her 
loss and anguish; he wept for his own. “I…I am sorry, Tacita.” 
“I cannot help my child,” she said. “But I can help yours, Aedhir. I can help you. 
Please, let me help you.” She pressed her forehead against his shoulder, holding him 
tightly. “I love you,” she said. “You have given me so much…more than anyone has 
ever…even Marcus. Please, I beg you. Let me help you.” 
“I cannot lose you, too,” he said. “I…I could not bear it…” 

She drew away from him, taking his face between her hands again. She kissed 
him deeply, and he pulled her against him, holding her fiercely, tasting her sorrow, the 
tears of her grief against his tongue. “You will not lose me,” she promised, her lips 
brushing against his as she spoke. She tried to smile for him, caressing his cheek. “I 
belong to you…always, if you would have me, Aedhir.” 
He embraced her, lifting her feet from the ground. “Mother Above, I love you,” he 
whispered, as she wrapped her arms around his neck. I will get my children back, he 
thought, closing his eyes, feeling her soft hair against his face. By my breath, I will get 
Wen and Pryce back. And then I promise you, Tacita, with all that I have, we will find 
your child, too. I will bring her back to you. 
She kissed his ear, trembling in his arms. “I love you, too,” she breathed. 
*** 
“The runestones were right,” Arnora told Odhran. They, too, had crossed the 
rubble and debris and stood together near one of the wagons, watching and waiting as 
the Enghan loaded their injured for transport to Elbeuf. They were nearly completed, 
and it was time for the Rekkr who were riding east with Aedhir and Eirik to leave, 
including Odhran. This realization, this moment of farewell had left the young woman 
stricken and distraught. 
She stood facing him, holding his hands with her owns, her eyes filled with tears. 
“Einar’s fortunes have changed for the worst, and you have lost those dear to you. You 
are going on a journey. You are leaving.” 
“You told me the rune of friendship and protection would help me,” he said. She 
had been looking down at the torn, ragged hem of her dress, her eyes forlorn, but she 

looked up at him now, his words drawing her gaze. He offered her hands gentle 
squeezes. “New friendships would guide me. Do you not remember? New friendships, 
Arnora.”  
She blinked at him, her lip trembling, her tears welling. “Please, Odhran,” she 
whispered. “I do not want you to go.” 
“Arnora,” he whispered gently, turning loose of her hand and touching her face, 
brushing his fingertips against her cheek. Her pleas nearly broke him; a woman had 
never begged anything of him before, unless one counted Wen, who usually only 
begged him to do things like abandon the university and join the Crown Navy.  
“Take me with you,” she begged. “I want to go with my father. I want to go with 
you.” 
“You have to go to Elbeuf,” he said softly. “We are going to war, Arnora, and it 
will not be safe for you to be with us.” 
“I do not care,” she said, tears spilling down her cheeks. Her brows furrowed and 
she blinked down at her shoes, struggling to compose herself, her breath fluttering. “I 
am not helpless. I know how to fight―to wield a sword. Einar showed me last summer. 
He spent hours with me…days at a time showing me. He…he told me I was very good.” 
She uttered a soft, hurting noise and her hand darted to her mouth. “He told me I was 
very good,” she said again, whispering. 
Odhran hooked his hand against the back of her head and drew her against his 
shoulder. She wept against his sleeve, trembling. “He will be alright,” Odhran whispered 
to her. “I will bring him back to you, Arnora. I promise you―all that I have―I will bring 
Einar back to you.” 

Her arms slipped about his middle, her hands against his shoulder blades. “I do 
not want you to go, Odhran,” she said again. “I do not want anything to happen to you.”  
He turned his cheek against the top of her head, her hair. “I do not want anything 
to happen to me, either,” he said, and despite her tears, he heard her laugh softly, as he 
had hoped she might. 
Arnora lifted her face, looking up at him. “I might never see you again,” she said, 
mournfully. “What if you are killed…?” 
“I will not be killed,” he told her gently, offering her a promise they both knew he 
could not keep. Her words startled and touched him beyond measure; her fear and 
worry were as real and earnest in her words, her eyes as they had been when she 
spoke of her brother. 
“You will not come back,” she said. “Even if you survive, you will go home again. 
Back to Tiralainn.” More tears fell, rolling down her cheeks, cleaving his heart. “You will 
leave us.” 
Mother Above, how could I leave you? he thought, anguished, caressing her face 
with the cuff of his fingers. I think I love you, Arnora. Bloody rot it all, you are the most 
amazing woman I have ever met. I could never leave you. 
“I will come back,” he told her softly. “I promise, Arnora.” 
She blinked at him, still so beautiful to him, even in her sorrow. She moved her 
arms, drawing them about his neck, and he held her. “I will come back for you,” he 
promised, turning his face to speak against her ear. 

He embraced her for a long moment, cherishing the simple comfort of her in his 
arms, pressed against him. When they drew apart, he touched her cheek with his palm 
and leaned toward her, her blue eyes upon him, holding his gaze. 
“I will come back for you, Arnora,” he said again, and she lifted her chin, brushing 
her nose against his. His lips danced against hers; he felt the soft intake of her breath 
against his mouth, and then she drew against him, kissing him deeply, sweetly, stealing 
his very breath. 
*** 
Pryce groaned, coming to as a Torachan soldier jerked roughly against him. He 
felt his legs slip from astride a bergelmir’s shoulders, a saddle, and then his boot heels 
struck the ground. His knees buckled beneath him, and the Torachan grabbed him 
about him middle, hauling him upright. He stumbled, his vision bleary, his mind reeling 
as the soldier dragged him in tow. The Torachan shoved him forward, pushing him into 
a cluster of frightened young Enghan men gathered together like a clutch of rabbits 
caught from their den. Pryce stumbled and fell to the ground, dropping to his knees, 
catching himself with his hands. 
His head ached. He pressed his palm against his brow and closed his eyes 
against the topsy-turvy landscape that greeted his gaze. His mouth tasted nasty, and he 
tried to spit. His sinuses, the narrow passageways and cavities behind his eyes were 
tender and throbbing. The Torachan had shoved something over his face when he had 
grabbed Pryce, a square of fabric soaked in some sort of liquid that had burned Pryce’s 
nose as he had been forced to inhale it. Whatever it was, it had taken almost 
instantaneous hold on his mind. He had been struggling against his captor, thrashing 

wildly, trying to scream for Wen, his boots flailing between the open air and the 
bergelmir’s flank. When the soldier had clapped his hand over Pryce’s mouth and forced 
his head back against his shoulder, when Pryce had breathed in a searing lungful of 
whatever tainted the scrap of cloth, he had faded into darkness, his mind winking out 
like a candle snuffed by the wind, his body falling still and limp in his captor’s grasp. 
Wen! he thought, and his eyes flew wide in alarm. The Torachans had grabbed 
her before Pryce had even regained his wind or wits in the wake of the explosion. He 
had dim, groggy recollection of leaping from the wagon and cowering against the 
ground, his hands thrown over his head as boulders and pelting debris had rained upon 
the caravan. He had landed hard in his tumble from the wagon, jarring the senses from 
his skull, the breath from his lungs. He had sat up, dazed and confused, squinting 
against the sting of grit, the thick cloud of dust and smoke that had filled the air, and he 
had heard Wen scream, her voice shrill with bright terror. 
“Wen,” he whispered, lifting his head from the ground. He tried to stand, 
stumbling dizzily in place, keeping his palm against his brow. He looked around, 
bewildered and frightened, but all he saw were Enghan men around him, none of them 
more than boys. They were all ashen and stricken, their faces streaked with grime and 
blood, battered and bruised. They huddled together, about a dozen of them, including 
Pryce. Another group of Enghan youths stood nearby, and another beyond them, all of 
them kept separated from one another, and flocked close together by a seemingly 
countless swarm of armor-plated imperial troops. 
He did not see Wen anywhere, and he staggered forward, shrugging past the 
Enghan, his heart seized with panic. As he started to break away from the group, a 

Torachan soldier planted his palm firmly against Pryce’s shoulder and shoved him 
backwards. Pryce’s balance was only tenuous at best to begin with, as the effects of the 
drug they had given him waned, and he stumbled, tripping over his own feet and landing 
on his rump, his legs sprawled before him. 
“Where are you going, little Enghan rot?” the guard asked him, sneering at him. 
He shoved the pad of his thumb against the lip of his helm and situated it comfortably 
against his brow. “Keep in your place, laddie, lest you want to see yourself run through.” 
“Please,” Pryce said to him, drawing his legs beneath him, kneeling against the 
ground. The guard blinked at him, visibly startled by his address in the common tongue. 
“Please, you…you took a girl…” He stumbled to his feet again and moaned softly as his 
head swam. He struggled to clear his mind, forcing himself to meet the soldier’s gaze. 
“You took a girl…” he said again. 
“There are no girls here―get back in the fold,” the Torachan said to him. He 
shoved Pryce again, sending him floundering backwards. Pryce felt someone grab him, 
lean but strong arms wrapping about his middle, saving him from a fall. Pryce groaned, 
his knees buckling, and he heard whoever was behind him grunt softly against his ear. 
“Get on your feet, Pryce,” the person said. It was a familiar voice and Pryce 
turned his face, blinking in bewilderment. 
“Einar?” he whispered. 
The young man nodded. “Get on your feet,” he said again. “Come on now…” 
With Einar’s help, Pryce managed to get his legs beneath him. Einar let Pryce 
lean heavily against him, catching Pryce’s hand against his own and drawing his arm 
about his shoulders to support him.  

“Are you alright?” Einar asked him softly. 
Pryce nodded. “My…my head,” he murmured, brushing his fingertips against his 
brow and wincing. “Feels like it…it is full of cobwebs.” 
“They gave us something when they took us,” Einar said, his brows drawn, his 
expression grim. “They put a cloth over your mouth?” 
Pryce nodded again. “Burned my nose,” he whispered.  
“It will wane,” Einar told him. “I am just now feeling steadier, and I only came to 
awhile ago.” 
Pryce looked around them. They were in the Keiliselgr Fjell again, deep in the 
mountains from the looks of things. There was no sign of the Ve’dal valley; nothing for 
as far as the eye could see except for an overlapping horizon of towering mountain 
peaks and snow-draped crests of granite. It had only been early morning when they had 
been attacked; by the looks of the waning sunlight, it was now late afternoon, 
approaching dusk. He blinked at Einar in confusion. 
“They are taking us east?” he asked. 
Einar nodded. “Back to the Merki Isthmus and into Enthimork, I would guess.”  
Pryce glanced about again. He had never seen so many imperial troops in all of 
his life. The soldiers were everywhere, tromping about on foot, or riding about on the 
lumbering spines of bergelmirs. 
“They are bellatori―imperial infantrymen,” Einar told him. “Two maniples at least 
of them―four hundred men.” 
“They took Wen,” Pryce said. “Have you seen her? Do you know what happened 
to her?” 

Einar blinked at him, his expression stricken. “Wen?” He looked around, his eyes 
wide and frantic. “She is here? I have not seen her. I have not seen anyone except men 
from the caravan. Most of them are Seggr. There are some Rekkr, as well, but they are 
all young.” 
“What do they want?” Pryce asked. He tried to pull away from Einar, straining to 
look around him for any sign of Wen. 
Einar held him firmly, drawing him against him again. “I do not know,” he said. 
“Do not, Pryce. Keep still.” 
“They have Wen, damn it,” Pryce said, turning to him, his brows drawing 
together. “I have to find her. If they have bloody touched her, I will…” 
“If they have her, there is nothing we can do,” Einar told him softly, lifting his chin 
and speaking directly against Pryce’s ear. “Not now―not here. There are thirty-seven of 
us by my count and four hundred of them. I would say the odds would be in their favor 
in a fracas. They let us keep our swords, even―that is how confident they are.” Einar 
draped his hand against the pommel of his blade. His expression softened as he saw 
the anger and anguish in Pryce’s face. “We will find her,” he whispered. “We will find her 
somehow, Pryce―I promise.” 
A loud voice boomed out, speaking in Enghan, startling Einar and Pryce. “Hvat 
eigum her?” a man shouted. What have we here? Pryce could see him, a tall, strapping 
man with chestnut hair and a hastily plaited beard, dressed in the clothes and leather 
armor of the Enghan Herr. A group of Enghan men walked with him as he approached, 
all of them passing freely and undetained among the Torachan soldiers, all of them 
regarding the young men from Lith with scornful expressions and disdainful sneers. 

“Who are they, Einar?” Pryce whispered. 
“Orbornar,” Einar hissed, his brows furrowing, his grip against his pommel 
tightening. 
“What?” Pryce asked. 
“I said they are bastards―Hildofar, one of the Nordri kyns,” Einar whispered. He 
nodded once at the men. “See the brooches they wear against their breasts, marked 
with the emblem of the wolf? That is their kyn mark.” 
“They are Enghan?” Pryce asked. 
Einar turned his face and spat against the ground, scowling. “They have no right 
to call themselves such.” 
“They are the ones who married your king’s daughters,” Pryce said. 
Einar nodded. “Yes―hoping to claim his crown.” 
“What are they doing here?” Pryce asked, watching as the Hildofar men began to 
seize some of the young men in their group in turn, laying their hands against the boys’ 
shoulders and barking to them in sharp imperative.  
“I would say they are betraying us to the empire,” Einar seethed, his brows 
furrowing all the more. 
Groups of Hildofar had spread out among the clusters of young men, searching 
them. The Torachan soldiers had allowed the young Enghan captives to keep their 
weapons, as Einar had pointed out, but now the Hildofar took them away, wrenching 
swords, daggers and axes from belts, tossing them on the ground. They would study 
each weapon in turn, grasping blades by scabbards and peering closely at the inscribed 

hilts and sheaths, shouting out each young man’s name while an imperial scribe hurried 
along behind them, marking each name down in a ledger. 
“Bastard cowards,” Einar said softly, enraged. “Deceiving their own people. They 
have no honor.” 
Pryce watched the Nordri men jerk a sword loose from a boy’s waist and 
brandish it aloft, reading the rune carvings along the pommel and hilt aloud. “This blade 
belongs to Ivladi Ulfheidinson―may the blessings of Tyr grace this steel and see it 
true.” 
The Hildofar guffawed at this, shaking their heads. The largest among them, the 
one whose voice had first drawn Pryce’s gaze shoved the boy back among the others. 
He tossed the sword aside, and it clattered into a mounting pile. 
Konung Fjolnir has daughters―three of them―but no sons, Einar had told them 
only earlier that morning. His sjonar cast the runes and told him he should name me his 
heir until his wife gives him a boy of his own. That way the throne would remain in his 
kinline.  
Fjolnir only just announced it at the Motinn two months ago, when all of the clans 
agreed to face the empire together. He sent word to the kyns by falcon and sent the 
sword to me. 
The Nordri Hersirs were probably furious to learn of it, Arnora had said quietly, 
her expression troubled. 
The A’Mithal claimed the throne from the Nordri through marriage and they have 
always hoped to take it back from us, Einar had said. 

Pryce blinked in sudden, startled realization. “Einar,” he whispered, turning his 
face slightly, keeping his eyes fixed on the Hildofar. “Give me your sword.” 
“What?” Einar blinked at him, bewildered. 
“They are looking for your sword,” Pryce breathed. “They are looking for you, 
Einar.” 
Einar stared at him, his eyes widening with shock. He looked toward the Hildofar, 
his brows furrowing, his hands closing into furious fists. “Orbornar,” he hissed again. 
Bastards.  
“They must have made a deal with the empire, told them about the war your 
people are planning,” Pryce said. “The empire must think they can force your king to 
surrender if they have you―his heir.” 
“And if Fjolnir surrenders, the empire will claim Engjold,” Einar whispered. 
“I do not think so…not exactly,” Pryce said quietly, drawing Einar’s gaze. “The 
Nordri are helping them. They led them to us. They are reading the rune 
inscriptions―the names―on your weapons. They must expect something in return.” 
“I know what they are expecting,” Einar said with a frown. “Fjolnir’s throne.” 
“There is only one reason Torach would promise them that, agree to barter with 
them,” Pryce said. “Gersimi, Einar―black powder. The Nordri will teach the empire to 
make black powder if they are given Fjolnir’s throne.” 
“Grimnir gaetar oss,” Einar whispered. Grimnir protect us. 
The Hildofar grabbed another young man, and he yelped as he was dragged 
forward, stumbling in their rough tow.  
“Give me your sword,” Pryce said again, looking at Einar.  

“But they will think you are me,” Einar said. 
“I know,” Pryce told him, holding his gaze. 
Einar’s brows furrowed. “I am unafraid of them,” he hissed. “Let them find it with 
me. Let them do their worst for it. I am―” 
“You are too important to your people, Einar,” Pryce whispered, leaning over, 
speaking so near to Einar, his lips brushed against the younger man’s ear. “Let them 
think they caught you―let them take me in your place. I can waste their time. I can fool 
them. If they try to barter with me as Fjolnir’s heir, it will not work for long. He will know I 
am not you. Your people will still have a chance, Einar.” 
Einar blinked at him, stricken. “No, Pryce,” he whispered, shaking his head. “No, 
I…I cannot let you…they might hurt you…” 
“They cannot do anything to me,” Pryce told him quietly. “If they try, I will tell 
them who I am. They cannot find you without your sword―not with any certainty―and 
they cannot touch me. I am a commissioned officer in the Crown Navy of Tiralainn. Any 
offense against me can be construed as an act of war against my king. Torach will not 
risk that, not without black powder to fight us. They will not have black powder without 
the Nordri―without you, Einar.” 
He spoke with firm confidence, conviction he did not feel. He was lying through 
his teeth; Kierken could no more declare war on the empire for Pryce’s abduction, or 
any harm that came to him because of it, than he could for Rhyden Fabhcun’s―and 
Rhyden had at least had the benefit of being the king’s friend going for him. But Pryce 
did know that if the empire mistook him for Einar, they could not use the leverage of 
Fjolnir’s heir to force the Enghan’s surrender. The Enghan could still fight the empire. 

There was a chance they could yet defeat Torach, and by doing so, keep them from 
black powder. 
They are attacking the Enghan because they think they can get it easier that 
way―the formula for Abhacan black powder, Odhran had told him. If they get it, they 
will come for us. 
What Pryce was doing was reckless and foolish and could very well see him 
killed by the empire if and when they learned the truth. It was something bold and 
rash―something Aedhir would do if he was in Pryce’s place, and something Pryce, by 
his inherent, rational nature, would have tried desperately to prevent. Even as he spoke, 
whispering to Einar, his mind screamed at him: What are you doing? Have you gone 
bloody daft? Shut up! You will get yourself killed! 
I have to do this, he thought, his brows furrowing. I have to. If the empire finds 
Einar, they can force the Enghan to surrender―and if they do, they will have the means 
to make black powder. They will have the means to attack Tiralainn. 
Einar was quiet, blinking at him, his dark eyes round and troubled. The Hildofar 
seized a boy standing near to them; they had nearly reached Pryce and Einar in their 
search.  
I am an officer in the Crown Navy, Pryce told himself firmly. I swore an oath to 
my kingdom and my Crown to protect Tiralainn. I have to do this. I have to. 
This would have been Aedhir’s rationale, the argument Aedhir would have used 
to counter Pryce’s protests. Pryce’s own argument to himself was somewhat simpler, 
but equally as poignant: Wen is here somewhere among these soldiers. I have to find 

her. Maybe they are keeping her separate from us―maybe if they think I am Einar, they 
will bring me to her, keep me with her. I have to do this for Wen. 
“Give me your sword,” Pryce whispered to Einar.  
Einar did not move; he did not speak for a long moment. At last, he reached 
down, slipping his hands between his hip and Pryce’s, using Pryce’s body to shield his 
movements as he quickly unfettered his scabbard. 
“Tie it to my belt,” Pryce breathed, glancing over his shoulder. “Hurry, Einar.” 
“I am trying,” Einar whispered, and Pryce could feel him tugging against his belt, 
his fingers fumbling with the straps of hide on the sheath. He could hear approaching 
footsteps; the Hildofar had made short work of searching their last captive and were 
coming for the next. 
“Hurry,” Pryce hissed urgently. 
“I am,” Einar said. 
“Komr her,” snapped one of the Hildofar and Pryce felt large, heavy hands clamp 
against his shoulders, jerking him away from Einar. He stumbled along as the Enghan 
man hauled him away from the others. Einar stared after him, his eyes enormous and 
stricken. 
“Takar brandarnir af hann,” said the larger man, who was obviously the group’s 
Fylkir, or leader. While the one Hildofar jerked against Pryce’s belt, loosening the knots 
Einar had only just tightened, the Fylkir reached out, closing his broad hand painfully 
against Pryce’s jaw, forcing his head back. “Vaenn litt einn,” he said, leaning close 
enough to Pryce’s face that Pryce could smell the pungent stink of his breath. He did 
not understand what the man said; his comprehension of the Enghan language was 

fairly limited, and the Hildofar spoke more swiftly than the people in Lith, with a much 
stronger, more distinctive lilting accent. He thought he understood litt einn; Blakinn had 
called him this sometimes: little one. 
Pryce winced, his brows furrowed as the Fylkir continued to hold him firmly by 
the face. The man behind him wrested the sword free from Pryce’s hip, and grew very 
still and quiet. The Fylkir glanced beyond Pryce’s shoulder toward him, his brow cocked. 
“Hvat er that?” he asked. What is it? 
“Einar Eirikson,” said the man behind him softly, his voice tremulous, as though 
he struggled to repress some deep and exuberant delight. “Hinn er Einar Eirikson.” 
“Gangar mik that,” said the Fylkir. He shoved Pryce aside, sending him stumbling 
into the grasp of the nearest Hildofar warrior, who spun Pryce smartly about and held 
him firmly by the shoulders. 
The Fylkir snatched the sword away from his fellow and peered at it closely, 
studying both the engraved hilt and the inscription in the scabbard. “This sword belongs 
to Einar Eirikson, kin to His Mighty, Fjolnir Itreker, Konung of Engjold and heir to his 
lands and keeps,” he read aloud, drawing all of his men, along with the Torachan 
soldiers standing nearby to silence. 
The Fylkir looked at Pryce, the corner of his mouth unfurling beneath his 
mustache. “Vidar be praised.” He walked slowly toward Pryce; the closer he drew, the 
more his smile widened. “It is you.” 
Pryce lifted his chin defiantly and held the man’s gaze as he approached. He 
shrugged his shoulders against his captor’s tight grip and narrowed his brows at the 

Fylkir. He heard one of the Torachans say in hissing directive to another: “Go find 
Praetorius Paulus―get him now.” 
“You are Einar Eirikson?” the Fylkir asked Pryce. 
“I am, yes,” Pryce replied, not averting his gaze. 
“I met your father once, many long years ago,” the Fylkir told him. He raised a 
speculative brow. “You look nothing like him.” 
“I am told that a lot,” Pryce said. “I am Einar, Fjolnir’s heir. Let these others go 
free. I am the one you want.” 
The Fylkir arched his brow all the more, snorting with disdainful amusement. 
“Let them go,” Pryce said again. 
“And if I will not?” the Fylkir asked him. His hand shot out, his fingers crushing 
against Pryce’s jaw again. He leaned toward Pryce, until their noses brushed together. 
“Do you know who I am, you insolent whelp?” he snapped. “Do you?” 
“I know you are a traitor,” Pryce said, gasping as the man’s hand tightened 
against his face. “You are a traitor to Engjold. You let the empire murder your own 
people―butcher them for a crown!” 
“What do you know of the crown?” the Fylkir hissed through clenched teeth, a 
fine spray of spittle peppering against Pryce’s face. “My name is Bersi Kappi, Fylkir and 
Hersirson of the Hildofar kyn in Mikillfit. That crown belongs to my people by right! My 
people―not yours! My brother Arinbjorn married that fat bitch Ithunn, Fjolnir’s first-born 
and eldest daughter to reclaim the throne of Vornirtindr for the Nordri, and you would 
take it from him?” Bersi crushed his fingers against Pryce’s jaw. “You? You are more 
pup than man―a whelp only weaned from its mother’s teat.” 

He wrenched Pryce away from his captor and threw him, sending him staggering, 
falling to his knees. Bersi stomped toward him, closing his fist in Pryce’s hair, forcing his 
head back at a painful angle. Pryce arched his back against the strain, gasping sharply. 
“For every indignity my people have been forced to bear since Fjolnir named you 
heir, I will see you answer in turn―and in full―cub,” Bersi seethed. He looked up at one 
of his men. “Bring me that cart!” he shouted. “Roll it over here―bring it, I say!” 
He jerked Pryce to his feet by his hair, and Pryce staggered, dancing on his 
tiptoes, his scalp searing with agony. Two of the Hildofar shoved a two-wheeled cart 
toward them, the sort one pushed by hand to haul small loads, like firewood.  
“Turn it over!” Bersi demanded. “Turn the damn thing over!” 
“You are a traitor,” Pryce said, his brows furrowed defiantly as he strained to look 
over his shoulder at Bersi. “A traitor and a murderer. The only indignities your kyns have 
suffered have been those you have brought upon yourselves.” 
“I will show you indignity, A’Mithal pup,” Bersi hissed, shoving Pryce facedown 
onto the overturned cart. He shifted his grip, moving his hand to the scruff of Pryce’s 
neck, pinning him firmly against the wagon. “Someone get me some rope. Tie his rot 
hands to the wheels―bind him fast!” 
Pryce winced, trying to struggle as two burly Hildofar seized him roughly by the 
wrists, forcing his arms out across the axle of the wagon. 
They meant to beat him, he realized; undoubtedly, they planned to lay his back 
open with a lash strap. Pryce had never been beaten before. His parents had never 
struck him, and Aedhir had never raised his voice, much less his hand against Pryce. 
He had not even ever thrown a punch in a pub brawl, although Aedhir had taught him 

how to fend for himself in a scrap. You are an officer and a gentleman of the Crown, 
Aedhir had told him. Officers do not brawl. It was good advice that unfortunately Aedhir 
himself had seldom taken to heart. 
Hoah, Mother Above, Pryce thought in bright alarm. I think I am in trouble here.  
The Hildofar had gathered around, abandoning the groups of other prisoners to 
cluster about the wagon, attracted by the loud and heated exchange of words between 
Pryce and their Fylkir. They laughed at Pryce, shouting and jeering at him in Enghan, 
spitting at him. Even the Torachan soldiers drew more closely about the wagon, 
clapping their hands together as Pryce’s arms were bound, calling out and hooting in 
enthusiastic encouragement to the Hildofar. 
“Truss him up!” one of them shouted out, laughing loudly. 
“Tighter than that, lads!” cried another. “Come on now―draw those lines taut!” 
They lashed Pryce’s arms to the wheel hubs, drawing the ropes painfully around 
his wrists, leaving him immobilized and helpless, his stomach shoved against the edge 
of the cart. Pryce twisted his hands desperately, straining in vain against the tethers, 
and when he heard the sound of Bersi’s heavy footfalls behind him, he flinched. The 
Fylkir grasped him by the hair again, jerking his head back, forcing a cry from him. 
“Hoah, I am going to enjoy this, pup,” Bersi hissed, bringing his lips against 
Pryce’s ear, his breath hot and damp. 
“Let him go,” Einar said from behind them, shouldering his way to the front of his 
group of captives. Pryce turned to him and met his gaze, wide-eyed and stricken. 
“N-no…!” he said, shaking his head.  

“Let him go,” Einar said again, baring his fists. In that moment, even without him 
saying another word, Pryce could not understand how they did not know, how they 
could not realize. Einar did not look like a boy anymore; he had summoned within 
himself the stern poise and commanding presence of a man―and more than this, of a 
king. 
One of the Hildofar stepped toward Einar, shoving him roughly. “Get back, whelp, 
unless you would like a turn, too,” he sneered. Einar stumbled, but regained his footing, 
and when his dark eyes locked with the Hildofar’s, when his brows drew together and 
he stepped forward once more, the man shied back. Two of his fellows came to his aid, 
slapping their palms against Einar’s shoulders and forcing him back again. 
“You rot pup,” Bersi said to Pryce. “I will see you answer for all of Fjolnir’s 
offenses in turn.” 
The Hildofar and Torachan soldiers howled at this, raising their fists and faces 
skyward and baying like a pack of crazed wolves.  
“Hoah―give him a turn alright, Bersi!” shouted one of the Torachans, eliciting 
another rousing cheer from the crowd. 
“Give the pup a coronation he will not soon forget!” cried another. 
Pryce realized what they meant, what Bersi meant to do, and his eyes flew wide. 
He felt Bersi jerk the hem of his kyrtill up toward his hips, shoving the thick, furlined 
folds of hide out of his way. “No!” Pryce said, struggling against him. “No, you 
bastard―!” 
“I have fifty-seven men among these maniples, whelp,” Bersi said to him, 
tightening his grip against Pryce’s neck, shoving him against the wagon and holding him 

fast, despite his struggles. Pryce felt Bersi’s broad thigh plant squarely between his legs 
to keep him still, and then he felt Bersi’s fingers hook beneath the waist of his pants, 
jerking roughly against them. “And for my brother―for Airnbjorn’s honor―I promise you 
every one of us shall have a turn in making you answer.” 
“No!” Pryce cried, thrashing his arms futilely, shearing his wrists open and bloody 
against his ropes. “Get away from me, you bastard rot…!”  
The more he fought, the more delighted the Torachans and Hildofar became, and 
the more wildly and eagerly they screamed and cheered. 
“Hoah―you heard the man! Get in line, lads!” one of the soldiers cried out, to 
roars of approving laughter. 
“Four months spent in the field―here is better than a pristine Cneasan whore!” 
yelled another, stepping forward and pretending to loosen his belt while his fellows 
yowled and clapped him on the shoulders. 
“Let us see the little bastard walk upright again after tonight!” someone cried. 
“He shall not, I promise you,” Bersi hissed, his ego and mettle stoked by the 
rousing cries of his fellows. He yanked at Pryce’s pants, tearing the seams along the 
waist. 
“No!” Pryce shouted, struggling against his ropes. “No, you bloody rot damn―!” 
“Leysar hann!” Einar roared, lunging forward. Release him! “Take your hands off 
him!” The Hildofar grabbed him, and he fought with them wildly. “You honorless 
bastards!” he shouted. “Let him go!” 
“What is going on here?” 

At this, a loud and commanding voice booming over the din, the whooping group 
of soldiers abruptly fell silent. Torachans and Hildofar alike shrank back, drawing away 
from the wagon, their eyes darting toward the ground. Pryce felt Bersi’s fingers slacken 
against his neck and fall away. 
“Lord Paulus!” Pryce heard someone hiss breathlessly. 
“Bloody rot―it is the Praetorius and the centurions!” gasped another, sounding 
stricken.  
A Torachan man walked toward them, flanked by a tight cluster of four imperial 
centurions. He was dressed in a resplendent uniform adorned with elaborately 
embossed silver armor plates. He wore a tall helmet capped with a long tail of scarlet-
dyed horsehair. He was clean-shaven and handsome, perhaps Aedhir’s age, if not 
slightly older. He was broad-shouldered and long-legged. He carried a magnificent 
sword with an ornately detailed two-handed hilt, and as he strode toward Pryce, he kept 
the palm of his black leather glove draped across the imposing blade’s pommel. 
“What is going on here?” he demanded again, his tone sharp and admonishing, 
as though he scolded an unruly hound. “I gave implicit orders that I was to be 
summoned at once when Fjolnir’s heir was found.” 
Bersi blinked at him as he approached, his eyes wide. “Praetorius Paulus, I…” he 
said. “I was only…I meant only to…” 
“I know what you meant to do, you savage rot,” the man, Paulus said, his brows 
narrowing. He strode past Pryce without sparing him another glance, keeping his gaze 
fixed upon the Enghan man. “You meant to defile that boy. You meant to mete forth 

some measure of your misperceived dishonor upon him in brutal and boorish assault. 
You meant to let your rot band of barbaric fellows each have their part in this offense. 
He turned to the four centurions with him, nodding his chin sharply at Pryce. “Cut 
him loose,” he said. The men moved at his direction, two of them drawing knives from 
their hips and setting to work, sawing at the ropes fettering Pryce’s hands to the wagon 
wheels. 
“Praetorius Paulus, I…” Bersi stammered, drawing Paulus’ gaze. Paulus turned 
to the Enghan, jerking his sword from his scabbard. With no further warning, Paulus 
stepped against Bersi, driving the blade squarely into the Enghan’s stomach. Bersi 
uttered a gargled cry, and he convulsed against the Praetorius, his large hands slapping 
against Paulus’ shoulders as his knees buckled. He crumpled against the shaft of the 
sword, and as Paulus wrenched it loose from his gut, he collapsed to the ground. 
“This boy is imperial property,” Paulus said loudly, turning his face and 
addressing all of the men gathered around him. He thrust the blood-smeared length of 
his blade toward Pryce. “All of these prisoners belong to the empire―not to the Nordri 
tribes of Engjold. Offense against them is as offense against Torach. I will have you all 
mark that―and well―lest you wind up in the dirt with your liver and lights against your 
palms.” 
He glowered at the soldiers who had been cheering Bersi along, howling and 
applauding his brutal efforts. Paulus let his gaze linger upon each in turn, until they 
dropped their eyes toward the toes of their boots, abashed. “You and you…you 
four…the five of you.” He pointed among the soldiers and then glanced at the nearby 
imperial scribe. “Mark their names, all of them. Those four there, as well―and those.” 

He pointed again and then turned to the soldiers once more. “Gather your gear and 
strap it to your spines. Tender your steeds to the Calo at once―the lot of you. You will 
all be walking from here to Kharhorin.” His brows narrowed in disapproval. “I will also 
see each of you docked a day in full from your wages. How dare you stand by idle, 
impotent―and against my rot damn orders―while this boy is brutalized? You are 
imperial legionnaires―men of civility and bloody damn reason, not these barbaric 
wildmen of Engjold and this is no rotted cabaret in Serdica for your amusement. When I 
give an order, you will bloody well see it through.” 
He walked away, motioning with his fingertips toward Einar and the other young 
men from Lith. “See that your men load them into wagons,” he said to the four 
centurions. “Get them ready to leave. Have their hands and feet bound, and bring 
Fjolnir’s boy-heir to me. I can see I shall need keep near the bloody little bastard until 
we reach Kharhorin.” He spared a contemptuous glower over his shoulder at Pryce. 
“See that he bathes first. Get that fetid, Enghan-rot stench off of him. I find it most 
offensive.” 

Chapter Twelve 
 
“That bitch,” Aulus Tertius hissed. 
He sat behind a massive desk in Yisun’s suite of chambers. He had moved into 
the suite within a week of the Qatun’Eke departing the royal city, ordering all of his 
belongings, clothing and books moved to this, his new and self-declared appointment at 
the palace. He had likewise ordered all of Yisun’s personal effects inventoried and 
removed from the suite. She would not have future need for the mountains of silk and 
furlined clothes, shoes, hair accessories and cosmetics. If the damn rot bitch ever 
ventured within one hundred miles of Kharhorin again, Aulus fully meant to see her run 
through on the spot. 
It had not been her departure that had incensed him so much―it was everything 
that had come to light in grim and infuriating detail in the three weeks since. Three days 
after Yisun had left, two cohorts of imperial bellatori infantrymen had arrived at the city. 
Aulus had been caught off-guard, totally bewildered by their unexpected appearance. 
His confusion must have been apparent on his face when he met in the palace with the 
two cohorts’ tribune of centurion commanders and the optio, or first officers. 
“My Lord Consul, we received orders of specific dispatch from the city of Badapur 
in Galjin,” the tribune’s senior centurion, Appius Septimus had told him. “We were to 
report within the month to you, my lord―the acting tribunicia potestate in Kharhorin.” 
“To me?” Aulus had asked, confounded. 

“Yes, my Lord Consul,” Appius had replied, looking for all of the world as 
befuddled as Aulus felt. “Our orders are to supplement your bellatori here, my lord, to 
fortify the city.” 
“Fortify the city?” Aulus had asked, feeling as though he had just taken a swift 
punch to the groin. “Against what?” 
“The Enghan, Lord Consul,” Appius had said. He had raised his brow and cocked 
his head at a slight angle. “Has Cneas not informed you of such matters, my lord?” 
“That bloody rot bitch,” Aulus muttered, sitting at his desk, surrounded by an 
enormous clutter of papers and parchments―hundred upon hundreds of 
correspondences stacked and arranged in haphazard order. 
He had suspected that Yisun had somehow been intercepting correspondences 
couriered to him from both Cneas and the Torachan Praetorius, Decimus Paulus in 
Engjold. He had believed Yisun was reading these correspondences, keeping abreast 
of pertinent activity and policy affecting Ulus. He had received word from Decimus and 
the imperial Senate sporadically at best, but had dismissed these irregularities. He had 
thought a combination of the distance from Cneas, the imposing conditions of the 
Ulusian winter and the simple fact that not much of imperial interest or consequence 
occurred within his region accounted for the lapses in correspondence. It had not 
occurred to him that Yisun might have been deliberately keeping some of these letters 
from him until that fateful meeting with the centurions from Galjin. 
When three more cohorts had arrived in Kharhorin within four days of Centurion 
Septimus’ troops, their tribunes bearing similar orders of both dispatch and duty from 
Ulus’ neighboring states of Ebesun, Bagahan and Ordos, Aulus had at last realized that 

something very large―and very important to the empire―was brewing in Ulus, and it 
was something Yisun had kept from him. 
“Let her drag her rot ass back here from the west,” he said with a scowl as he 
skimmed through a packet of orders and instructions that were to have been given to 
him upon his arrival in Kharhorin, but which he had never received. “I will drive my blade 
through Yisun’s bloody damn gut myself.” 
He had taken six guards with him and stormed her suite, forcibly tossing her 
chattering, fussing bevy of servants who had remained at the palace out into the 
corridor on their scrawny asses. Aulus and the soldiers had torn the rooms apart, 
discovering crates of correspondences―veritable years’ worth of documents and 
letters―that Yisun had hoarded. Aulus had realized perhaps his predecessor, Tiberius 
Crassus had not been so incompetent after all; judging by the more than three hundred 
letters from Cneas addressed to his attention that had apparently never found their way 
there, Crassus seemed to have simply been a victim of circumstance, purposely kept 
out of exchanges of information by the manipulative and deceitful wiles of the 
Qatun’Eke. 
Aulus had trembled with rage when he had discovered bundles of additional 
correspondences―these addressed to him, including the large packet of documents 
bearing the official seal of the imperial Senate that Aulus now held in his hands. No 
matter how many times he read through the pages, the result was the same―he would 
shudder with fury, his brows drawing together so tightly, he could feel the strain along 
the crimped bridge of his nose. 

That bitch, he thought. That treacherous, rotted bawd. Hoah, she played me well 
with her feigned manners and social graces―her tales of dragons, damnable drugs, her 
pack of whores. She would have seen me out of my mind, dazed and incapacitated 
while all of this unfurled about me. She would have left me to ruin―she would have 
seen to it gladly. 
The packet contained sensitive, classified information that Yisun never should 
have been privy to. When he had found the pages in her bedchamber, tucked with 
countless others in a wooden crate stowed beneath her bed, Aulus had at last learned 
the true reasons for the empire’s interest in Engjold, and why the territory of Ulus was 
so important to them. At last, he had come to understand why nearly a full and standard 
legion of troops had been sent to the Taiga, and at last, he had realized just how much 
Yisun had undermined him in the timeframe of less than three months. 
Black powder, one of the documents in the packet said. An Abhacan devising 
worth more than gold to the empire, a composite capable of manning weapons of 
warfare vastly superior to any currently employed by our imperial legions. 
Little more than two months earlier, just after Aulus’ arrival in Kharhorin, Decimus 
Paulus had sent word to him of new developments in Engjold―events that Decimus felt 
could at last see the empire successful in their efforts to claim the secrets of black 
powder. Aulus found this note now, atop a stack of others on the right side of his desk. 
He lifted it in hand and read through it for at least the thousandth time. 
We have found unexpected allies, Decimus had written. The Nordri clans of 
Engjold, the collective tribes of H’rossjord and Mikillfit north of the Nordr mountains have 
come to us in good faith, offering a most tempting barter. The Nordri want the crown of 

Engjold. If we get it for them, they will share with us freely their black powder production 
capabilties. 
Decimus wrote that the king of Engjold, an ignorant rot named Fjolnir Itreker had 
named an heir to his throne at a meeting in which he had declared war against Torach. 
Fjolnir had no sons, and the Nordri tribes’ noble sons had married the king’s daughters 
in the hopes of inheriting the crown. In a maneuver that Aulus had to admit was pretty 
underhanded and admirable, Fjolnir had trounced the Nordri’s hopes by naming a 
distant nephew his heir―a boy, no less, a lad of seventeen named Einar Eirikson. 
The boy will be the key to our victory, and the Enghan’s defeat, Decimus had 
promised in his letter. He is dear to Fjolnir Itreker and the king will take no risk that 
would see harm befall the boy by that benefit alone. Fjolnir Itreker will bend like a willow 
against a sharp wind―with no thought to his royal bloodline or throne―if he thinks it 
shall spare the boy.  
Decimus had followed this correspondence with another that was dated only 
about three weeks earlier. This one had been received in Kharhorin a week ago, and 
had actually made it to Aulus’ hand―the hand for which it was intended―without Yisun 
there to intercept it.  
Our efforts have been rewarded, Lord Consul, Decimus wrote. Thirty-seven 
prisoners claimed―including the boy-heir, Einar Eirikson. We are returning with eager 
haste for Kharhorin, where I will tender the boy to your custody. The others should 
make for unique and splendid fare at the Cneasan catastas. 
According to the correspondence, Decimus and his troops―with the Enghan heir 
in tow―were due in Ulus, in Kharhorin any day now.  

And here I would have been to greet them, sprawled and trussed to a bed, dazed 
into obliviousness on serekum with a Khahl whore straddling my hips, Aulus thought, 
frowning, closing his hand into a fist. At least, if Yisun Goyaljin had her way. 
“Rot damn bitch,” he whispered. 
His steward Faustus appeared in the doorway of the chamber, brushing his 
knuckles lightly, courteously against the frame to draw Aulus’ gaze from his thoughts. 
“You summoned me, Lord Tertius?” 
“Yes, Faustus,” Aulus said, lowering the correspondences he held in his hand. 
He lit a toitin, tilting his head back and exhaling a thick plume of smoke toward the 
ceiling. “I have a errand for you.”  
He dipped his hand into the pocket of his justicoat, pulling out a small velveteen 
bag of coins. He tossed it to his steward, who caught it between his palms and blinked 
curiously. 
“I am a brilliant man, Faustus,” Aulus told him. He glanced at Faustus, his brow 
arched. “And do you know why?” 
“I have not the slightest inkling, my lord,” Faustus replied. 
“You should not risk the wrath of a former exactor to the imperial Dioecetes,” 
Aulus said. 
“I shall bear that in mind, my lord,” Faustus assured him. 
“It is really most delicious, Faustus,” Aulus said, kicking his feet down from the 
desk. He rested his elbows against the edge and smiled at Faustus. “I do not know why 
it occurred to me sooner. Of course, it was likely because that rot bitch Yisun had me 
swooning with her drugs, exhausted by the relentless assault of her whores.” 

“Yes, my lord, I cannot tell you how it grieved me to watch them force themselves 
upon you so ruthlessly,” Faustus said. “So many times, as you protested their offerings 
of serekeum and lovemaking, I felt my heart ache for your suffering, my lord.” 
Aulus glanced at him. He had gotten rid of the concubines, and knew that 
Faustus, who had grown rather friendly with the lot of rotted bawds, was still sore at him 
for this. Aulus had sold them all to flesh traders to be brought to Cneasan catastas. In 
fact, Aulus had sold each and every member of Yisun’s household staff and remaining 
Minghan guards. He had used part of the monies he had earned from their sales to 
purchase new slaves―imperial slaves, with Torachan features and pale Torachan 
complexions.  
“As tribunicia potestate, I have the authority to seize all of Yisun Goyaljin’s 
properties and assets,” he said. He was not going to let Faustus’ petulance diffuse the 
victory he had achieved. 
“Which you did straight away, yes, my lord,” Faustus said, nodding. 
“Of course, to any other consul, such deliverance would end up in the name of 
the empire,” Aulus said. “An earnest transferral―like those of the parliamentary 
members―that would likely earn no more than a doting pat on the head by the Senate 
and Pater Patriae. Certainly not a share in the new-found and significant earnings.” 
Faustus raised his brow. 
Aulus smiled broadly. “Therein, Faustus, lies the advantages of having been a 
dutiful exactor for so long,” he said, tapping his fingertip against his brow. “I had all of 
the Khahl funds transferred into a secured deposita ad signa at the treasury―an 

account, Faustus, which is in the empire’s name, but opened and held during a time of 
official war.” 
He drew in on his toitin again. “In a way, these circumstances have been as a 
favor to me,” he said. “By law―lus fetiale―occurrence of hostile relations outside of the 
empire grants imperial consuls unique privilege. By my authority―and with no approval 
from the Dioecetes or Senate―I can dictate and move imperial funds as I see fit in 
circumstances of war.” 
He looked at Faustus, pleased with himself, and frowned to note the confusion 
on Faustus’ face. “The money is mine, you stupid bastard,” he said, throwing his hands 
in the air in exasperation. “Yisun’s money―all of her properties and titles―it is mine. I 
do not even have to tell the bloody empire of its existence.” 
“Then why sign it all to the empire’s name, my lord?” Faustus asked. “Why not 
simply have them tender it to yours?” 
Aulus’ frown deepened. “Because, you rot-wit, if it is in the empire’s name, even 
if they learn of it, they cannot question my distribution of it. Not during wartime―I do not 
even have to mark bloody ledgers to account for its comings and goings. If it was in my 
name, and the empire learned of it, they could nail me to the wall―if only for taxes 
owed on it all.” 
“Begging your pardon, my lord,” Faustus said. He raised his brow at Aulus. “But 
does this not make you guilty of a sort of treason? Withholding information from the 
empire?” 
“It might, yes,” Aulus said with a smirk. “Were it not perfectly legal.” He dropped 
the toitin onto the floor and pivoted in his chair, snuffing out the smoldering scrap with 

the toe of his shoe. “These are imperial laws, not mine, Faustus,” he said. “I am merely 
applying them to my own benefit.” 
Faustus looked at him dubiously. 
“I am a brilliant man,” Aulus said again, paying him no attention. 
“You would certainly seem to have some wits in your skull, yes, my lord,” Faustus 
said. 
Aulus smiled again. “Never cross an exactor,” he told Faustus. “Anger a soldier, 
and you find a sword through your gullet. Anger a man of the imperial treasury, and he 
can break more than you―he can destroy the hopes and prosperities of countless 
generations of your descendents.” 
Aulus stood and walked toward the mirror. He paused before the glass, admiring 
his reflection, from his powdered wig that gathered in a dapper, bow-adorned tail 
against the nape of his neck to his immaculate, starched stockings and polished, heeled 
shoes. He tugged the lapels of his justicoat into proper place along his chest, lifted his 
chin and tapped against the meticulous folds of his cravat, making sure it was arranged 
suitably about his throat, tucked into place beneath the top of his embroidered silk 
waistcoat. He dusted his palm against the knee-length tails of his coat and gave each of 
his broad sleeve cuffs an adjusting pull to settle everything as was fashionable and 
flattering. “What is a man without his money, Faustus?” he asked. “Nothing.” 
“Funny,” Faustus remarked. “I thought that was honor, my lord.” 
Aulus snorted, turning to him. “Honor, like anything else in the bloody wide Bith, 
my dear Faustus, is bought, bartered and sold,” he said. “It is naught but an antiquated 
term used by people such as yourself―slaves or plebeian refuse―to offer some 

semblance of hope and dignity that their purses cannot provide.” He opened a desk 
drawer and produced another pouch of coins, twice again as large as the one he had 
tossed to Faustus. Aulus held it over the desk and opened his hand, letting it fall, 
listening as the coins inside jangled melodically together. “Here is all of the honor a man 
needs in the end,” he said. “This and nothing more.” 
A letter on top of one of the nearest stacks of correspondences drew his gaze, 
and he lifted it in hand. It was the letter from Decimus that Aulus had received a week 
ago. He had returned it to the pile with the last page of the correspondence atop the first 
two, and the last paragraph the Praetorius had written caught his attention, as it had 
nearly from the first time Aulus had read it. He glanced at Faustus and then took the 
money pouch in hand, tossing this one to the steward, as well. 
“My lord?” Faustus asked, catching it deftly. 
“Go forth and hire me a dress maker,” Aulus told him, looking down at the 
parchment.  
Something else of interest and possible bearing has come to light for our efforts 
against the Enghan, Decimus had written.  
“A dress maker, my lord?” Faustus asked. 
“Yes,” Aulus murmured, nodding, without averting his gaze. “Have them brought 
to the palace at once, with the finest assortments of their wares and fabrics. Tell them 
no expense shall be spared.” 
The boy, Einar Eirikson shall prove a boon to the empire, Decimus wrote. But 
another revelation has come to pass besides, one that might prove of equal benefit to 
us―and surely sweeter company. 

“A wigmaker, too,” Aulus said, glancing at Faustus. “Tell them to bring cosmetics 
and what-not…” He flapped his hand toward his face. “Perfumes, underpinnings, 
panniers, stockings. Whatever is the height of fashion for imperial noblewomen.” 
Aulus turned his eyes toward the letter again, smiling as he had the first time he 
had read Decimus’ words. We found a young woman among the Enghan, he said. A 
beautiful flower of apparent Median descent. She claims to be from the city of 
Belgaeran, the royal capital of Tiralainn, noble daughter to a Captain in the realm’s 
Crown Navy, and new bride to a Naval Lieutenant under her father’s command. They 
were captured by the Enghan, held against their will by the savages, and though there 
is no sign we have found of her father’s survival, or her husband’s, she is grateful 
nonetheless for her rescue from such dire circumstances. Her name is Lady Aelwen 
Fainne-Finamur, and I will deliver her to your charge upon my arrival in Kharhorin. I 
assure you, my Lord Consul, she shall receive naught but courteous and genteel 
treatment in the meanwhile. 
“You are expecting visitors, my lord?” Faustus asked. 
“Yes, Faustus,” Aulus said quietly, glancing toward his steward, his smile 
widening. “As a matter of fact, I am.” 

The adventure continues… 
 
 
Enjoy this sneak peek at the next installment, 
 Book of Dragons, Volume 3  
Coming soon in ebook and trade paperback  
from Double Dragon Publishing! 
 
The shriek startled all of the Oirat from slumber. Toghrul sat up, scrambling to get 
his knees beneath him as his hand darted clumsily, groggily for the hilt of his scimitar. 
He jerked the blade loose of its sheath, stumbling to his feet. “Tengri ibegel bide!” he 
cried. Tengri help us!  
“What was that?” one of his Kelet, Jelmei cried hoarsely, staggering upright, 
drawing his scimitar. 
Another scream resounded through the night, seeming to echo through the trees, 
and Aigiarn leapt to her feet, pulling her own blade loose from her hip. “That was 
Rhyden!” she cried, terrified. She whirled about in a broad circle, trying to figure out 
which direction the scream was coming from. “Rhyden!” she cried out, desperately. 
“Rhyden, where are you?” 
Juchin rushed toward them from out of the shadows, his scimitar in hand, his 
brows drawn. “What is that?” he shouted. “What has happened?” 
“Where is bugu Yeb?” Jelmei cried, his voice overlapping Juchin’s and Aigiarn’s. 
“Where is Temu?” Toghrul said, realizing the boy was gone. He met Aigiarn’s 
gaze, stricken. “Where is Temu?”  

Nala had stumbled to her feet, her expression twisted with fright and alarm. She 
turned to the trees, her fingertips pressed against her brow. “They have gone to the 
oboo,” she said softly. 
Aigiarn spun toward her. “What? Why? What are they doing?” 
“I do not know,” Nala said, closing her eyes, concentrating. “But they are there, 
all three of them.” She opened her eyes and looked at Juchin, frightened. “And they are 
not alone. Something is with them.” 
“Rhyden!” Aigiarn shrieked, and she ran into the trees.  
“Aigiarn―no, wait!” Toghrul cried, racing after her. She did not slow her pace at 
all at his plea; she ran as hard and as fast as she could, plowing through the pines, 
clutching her scimitar in her fist. 
“Rhyden!” she screamed, as another cry wrenched through the night. She had 
never heard such a piteous, terrifying sound in all of her life. Rhyden sounded as though 
his heart was being torn from him, twisted and mauled and drawn, yet beating from his 
breast. “Rhyden! I am coming! I am coming!” 
She did not know what could make a person scream like that, as though their 
body and mind were being broken, torn apart. She felt tears stream down her cheeks as 
she raced through the woods; she felt wayward limbs slap and whistle against her face. 
Her gutal soles skittered in the thick carpeting of pine needles, but she did not slow. She 
ran with all of her might, screaming his name, straining for breath. 
“Trejaeran!” she heard Rhyden scream. “Trejaeran―help me! Mathair Maith! I 
cannot keep him from me! Help me!” 

“Rhyden!” Aigiarn shrieked. She rushed headlong into the clearing where the 
oboo stood, draped in shadows and moonlight. She had one bewildering, horrifying 
moment to realize Yeb lay crumpled before the tower of stones, and Rhyden was 
beside him, on his knees, his spine arched back so that his shoulders and head rested 
against the ground. Rhyden was convulsing, his hands pawing and flapping at the sky, 
and he was screaming, a strangled, cawing mixture of sounds and unfamiliar words 
flying from his lips. 
“Rhyden…!” she gasped, and then she saw Temu across the clearing from her, 
running toward Rhyden. His movement, and a sudden, blazing point of bright blue light 
attracted her gaze, and she realized he had the anam’cladh; somehow Temu had come 
to have Rhyden’s Elfin sword in his hand. 
“Temu!” she screamed, and her voice ripped up shrill, anguished octaves as she 
watched her son grasp the hilt of the sword in both hands and plunge the blue, fiery 
blade without a moment’s hesitation squarely into Rhyden’s breast. 
“No!” Aigiarn shrieked, her feet stumbling from beneath her. She fell, dropping 
her scimitar, and scrambled, forcing her gutal beneath her. “No, no, no! Temu! No!” 

About the Author: 
 
Sara Reinke lives in Kentucky with her husband and son. She is the author of Book of 
Days, the award-winning first volume in the Chronicles of Tiralainn series, Book of 
Thieves and Book of Dragons. To find out more about Sara, or to read excerpts from 
these and other available or upcoming titles, visit online at www.sarareinke.com.  

