
 SAUDI ARABIA 

 Titles in ABC-CLIO’s  Latin America in Focus Series 
 Venezuela Elizabeth Gackstetter Nichols and Kimberly J. Morse 
 Titles in ABC-CLIO’s  Africa in Focus Series 
 Eritrea Mussie Tesfagiorgis G. 
 Ethiopia Paulos Milkias 
 Titles in ABC-CLIO’s  Asia in Focus Series 
 China Robert André LaFleur, Editor 
 Japan Lucien Ellington, Editor 
 The Korea s Mary E. Connor, Editor 

 SAUDI ARABIA 
 Sherifa Zuhur 
Middle East in Focus

 Copyright 2011 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in 
writing from the publisher. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Zuhur, Sherifa.
 Saudi Arabia / Sherifa Zuhur.
  p. cm. — (Middle East in focus)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-571-6 (hardcopy : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-1-59884-572-3 (ebook)
1. Saudi Arabia. I. Title.
 DS204.Z84  2011
 953.8—dc23    2011019833 
 
ISBN: 978-1-59884-571-6 
 EISBN: 978-1-59884-572-3 
 
15 14 13 12 11  1 2 3 4 5
 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 
ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

v
 Contents 
 About the Author, xi
 Preface, xiii
 Acknowledgments, xvii
 1 GEOGRAPHY, 1
 The Geology of Petroleum, 5
 The Deserts, 7
 Water, 9
 Climate, 10
 Fauna, 10
 Flora, 11
 Environment and Pollution,  12
 Historic and Modern Divisions, 12
 2 HISTORY, 17
 Timeline, 17
 The Rise of Islam, 32
 Muslim Dynasties, 35
 Later Muslim Dynasties and the Arabian Region,  37
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and the First Sa‘udi State, 39
 The Second Sa‘udi Realm (1824–1891),  41

 Contents
vi |
 ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (Ibn Sa‘ud) and the Forging of Saudi Arabia, 42
 King Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz,  49
 The Reign of Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz,    53
 The Reign of Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 58
 Saudi Arabia under King Fahd, 62
 The Gulf War, 65
 Reactions to the Gulf War, 66
 The War on Terrorism and the Global War on Terror, 68
 The Reign of King ‘Abdullah, 69
 3 GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS, 79
 The King, 81
 The Crown Prince,  88
 The Royal Diwan, 89
 The Council of Ministers, 90
 The Majlis al-Shura, 91
 Judiciary and Legal System, 93
 Civil Service Board and Independent Agencies, 94
 Regional and Municipal Government, 95
 The  ‘Ulama, 95
 Family and Tribal Inﬂ uences, 97
 National (Meeting for Intellectual) Dialogue, 100
 Domestic Political Issues, 101
 Foreign Policy, 103
 Broader Saudi Arabian Foreign Policy,  125
 4 ECONOMY, 137
 Overview, 137
 Economic Planning, 140
 Industry, 144
 The Private Sector and the State, 158
 Labor,  160
 Trade and Finance, 164
 Taxation, 166
 Investment, 167
 Banking and Financial Systems, 168
 Economic Outreach and Aid, 169
 5 SOCIETY, 175
 Religion and Law, 175
 Islamic Law, 180
 Islamic Duties, 181

Contents | vii
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab,  186
 The  ‘Ulama, 189
 Governmental Religious Departments, 190
 Shi‘a Muslims in Saudi Arabia, 193
 Other Competing Ideologies, 194
 Social Classes and Ethnicity, 199
 Overview, 199
 Bias in Social Information, 200
 Modern Societal Studies, 201
 Ethnicity versus Nationality, 201
 Tribalism, 202
 Endogamy, 202
 Tribal Values, 203
 Religious Elite, 203
 Merchants, 203
 Religious Minorities, 204
 Slavery, 204
 Racial Relations, 205
 Traditional Social Values, 206
 Age, 207
 Gender and Social Status, 208
 Modernization and Society,  209
 Foreign Workers, 209
 Poverty, 212
 The Royal Family, 212
 Women and Marriage, 218
 Women and Education, 221
 Restrictions, 222
 Expansion, 223
 Employment, 223
 Rules and Expectations,  224
 Guardianship, 225
 Guardianship and Marriage, 225
 Social Equivalence and Polygyny, 227
 Divorce, 228
 Abuse, 229
 Rape, 229
 Dress, 229
 Servants, 230
 Education, 232
 Overview, 233
 Universities, 236
 Separate Gender Education, 238

 Contents
viii |
 International Schools, 239
 Education and Aramco, 239
 Shi‘a Higher Education and Activism, 240
 Islamic Education, 240
 Critiques of Islamic Education, 241
 Learning by Other Means, 242
 6 CULTURE, 245
 Language, 245
 Language Features, 248
 Numbers, 250
 Features of Arabic, 251
 Etiquette, 256
 Coff ee, 261
 Gestures, 262
 Gifts, 262
 Clothing, 262
 Deportment and Segregation of the Sexes,  264
 Business, 265
 Bargaining, 266
 Photographs, 267
 Weddings and Funerals, 267
 Literature, 268
 The Impact of the Qur’an,  270
 Ghazal Poetry, 270
 Folk or Vernacular Poetry and Lyrics, 271
 Early-Modern Arab Literature,  272
 Modern Poetry, Novels, and Short Stories, 272
 Theater and Drama, 277
 Later Novels, 278
 Theater in Private Spaces, 279
 Visual Art and Film, 281
 Photography, 283
 Young Artists, 283
 Film, 284
 Music and Dance, 288
 Music: General Features, 290
 Popular Music Industry,  292
 Traditional Musical Forms, 292
 Large-Ensemble Music, 296
 Styles of Hijaz and Asir,  297
 Dance, 298

Contents | ix
 Religious Music, 299
 Songs of Pilgrimage, 301
 Food, 305
 Sports and Leisure, 317
 Sports, 317
 Leisure and Entertainment, 325
 Popular Culture, 328
 Amthal, 329
 Jokes,  Nawadir , and Short Tales,  330
 Superstitions, 330
 Games, 330
 Tribal Law and Mediation, 331
 Tribal and Traditional Medicine, 332
 Popular Occasions, 334
 Clothing and Historic Costume, 334
 Architecture, 342
 The Mosque, 343
 Markets, 345
 General Features of the Hijaz, 346
 Asir and Abha, 349
 Najd, 349
 Eastern Province, 351
 7 CONTEMPORARY ISSUES, 355
 Defense, 355
 Islamist Opposition and Terrorism,  361
 Health, 368
 Women and Social Transformation, 372
 Media, Freedom of Speech, and Censorship,  374
 Human Rights, 376
 Capital Punishment, 377
 Glossary, 385
 Facts and Figures, 399
 Major Saudi Arabian Holidays, 415
 Country-Related Organizations, 419
 Annotated Bibliography, 445
 Thematic Index, 495
 Index, 519


xi
 About the Author 
 Sherifa Zuhur is a professor of Islamic and Middle Eastern studies, history, and 
national security aff airs, formerly of the Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War 
College. She directs the Institute of Middle Eastern, Islamic and Strategic Stud-
ies and has written 17 books and monographs, including  Saudi Arabia: Islamism, 
 Political Reform and the Global War on Terror ,  and Ideological and Motivational 
Factors in the Defusing of Radical Islamist Violence . She was a member of a NATO 
research team focusing on antiterrorism and wrote white papers and book chapters 
such as “Decreasing Violence in Saudi Arabia and Beyond” (in Pick, Speckhard, and 
Jacuch, eds., 2010) about Saudi Arabia. She is a former president of the Association 
of Middle East Women’s Studies and an editor of the  Review of Middle East Stud-
ies , and she holds a BA in political science and Arabic and Arabic literature, an MA 
in Islamic studies, and a PhD in history, all from the University of California, Los 
Angeles. 


xiii
 Preface 
 All books are written at particular historical moments. Especially in nonﬁ ction 
 writing, special concerns that color media, governmental, or scholarly publications 
are reﬂ ected, if not in the author’s intent, in the questions formulated by editors and 
readers. This is true of both contemporary and historical writings. I want to note 
that both immediate and uncertain political currents are now impacting Saudi Ara-
bia’s neighbors in the Middle East; the Tunisians have ousted their long-time presi-
dent, the Egyptians have overthrown Hosni Mubarak and are trying to implement a 
democratic and pluralist political system, Yemeni president Ali Abdullah Saleh has 
left Yemen for Saudi Arabia after months of protests when he was wounded in an 
attack, the Libyan people are battling the loyalists of Col. Mu‘ammar Qadhdhaﬁ , 
and Syrians, Bahrainis, Omanis, Moroccans, Algerians, and Jordanians are calling 
for reform or changes in government. Saudi Arabian eff orts to organize protests 
were anticipated and repressed, but it seems unlikely that the country will remain 
untouched by the regional fever for political change. 
 My second prefatory note is a general one; one ﬁ nds far too schizophrenic a treat-
ment of Saudi Arabia at this historical juncture. Portraits are painted with great love 
or sharp distaste, so strong as to cover over a truer panorama. Saudi Arabia is far 
too often essentialized as an unchanging archaic and exotic desert monarchy whose 
primary importance to the Western world is oil and/or Islamic extremism. Over many 
years, I have found it fascinating that so many outspoken American critics of Saudi 
Arabia were consulted at expert meetings in Washington, DC, primarily on the basis 
of their profound dislike of the country, which some had never visited. On the other 

xiv | Preface
hand, diplomats to the country have often served as experts, as they had acquired 
information inaccessible to others. 
 Just as great antipathy for Saudi Arabia and all things Saudi is expressed in some 
circles, others are at turns defensive or nostalgic, or off er apologia without much use-
ful analysis or comparative perspectives. Nothing is ever so black or white as Saudi 
Arabia has been painted! The polemical manner in which Saudi Arabia is covered 
makes it diffi  cult for a reader to acquire basic familiarity with the country’s features. 
Contemporary scholarship in the Arab and Muslim worlds is also divided on the 
question of Saudi Arabia, and the country’s own scholars are often unfortunately 
bound by prudence, discipline, bonds of employment or kinship, or justiﬁ able suspi-
cions about the motives of outsiders. This has complicated my task. As a responsible 
scholar, I have to write about subjects such as political succession in Saudi Arabia 
and the potential for struggle over that issue. However, Saudi Arabian scholars and 
writers are not free to share their insights on that issue, at least not at this time. About 
a month before I wrote this preface, Mohammed al-Abdulkarim, a Saudi Arabian 
professor of law, was arrested for publishing an article on royal succession and the 
potential for struggles over power within the royal family. Hatoon al-Fassi, a Saudi 
Arabian historian, was warned off  at ﬁ rst by her editor at a Saudi Arabian newspaper 
for her depiction of Arab governments’ response to the Tunisian revolution ( KQED 
News , January 26, 2011). Now, if Saudi Arabian intellectuals cannot speak or write 
freely, then, unfortunately, external reportage from Western sources far less familiar 
with the dynamics of Saudi Arabian or other Arab nations will continue to shape 
opinions about their country. 
 Ma ﬁ  mushkila! (No problem! A typical Saudi response and subtle recommenda-
tion to relax and lighten up!) This book does not pretend to remedy these bifurcated 
perspectives and the struggle over the nation’s image. It is, however, intended as a 
guide to uncover information about the real, multifaceted modern nation using an 
interdisciplinary approach and resources. My background and professional inter-
ests in Islamic studies, politics, security issues, and other interests in music, poetry, 
popular culture, gender relations, political economy, and race helped me formulate 
thoughts in brief on these subjects, although I could only hurriedly mention many 
that are covered in depth elsewhere. The book’s format required coverage of so many 
other topics in order to make sense of contemporary Saudi Arabia that the reader 
would be well advised to continue her or his exploration of this fascinating country 
with materials suggested in this work and others. 
 The ﬁ rst chapter, “Geography,” introduces readers to the physical and environ-
mental basis of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This includes its climate, weather pat-
terns, major land forms, water sources, fauna, ﬂ ora, and the scientiﬁ c understanding 
of oil formation. Much of the wonderful photography and scientiﬁ c studies of the 
landscape, geology, and fauna have come from Saudi Aramco. The second chapter, 
“History,” provides the essential details of Arabia’s ancient past, the advent of Islam, 
and the area’s condition in the premodern era. Greater emphasis is put on contem-
porary history for it will greatly aid in understanding the nuances of Saudi Ara-
bia’s politics, international relations, economic policies, and laws. The third chapter, 
“Government and Politics,” begins with an overview of political structures and roles. 

Preface | xv
I added a section on Saudi Arabia’s international relations with Arab, Muslim, and 
foreign partners because of my interests and daily involvement in such issues over the 
last decade. Also, I believe that to study a country in isolation, without considering 
the impact of subregional, regional, and global inﬂ uences on it, and vice versa, can 
be misleading and is a type of essentialism. 
 The fourth chapter, “Economy,” provides an introduction to the country’s 
 resources, oil and other industries, agriculture, labor situation, and ﬁ nancial struc-
tures. The ﬁ fth chapter, “Society,” begins with a section on Islam, the reform move-
ment of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, and today’s religious structures, with 
some attention to the functioning of Islamic law in Saudi Arabia. I have brieﬂ y 
mentioned other ideological trends at the end of the subsection. The second subsec-
tion, on social class and ethnicity, reveals that social divisions in Saudi Arabia take 
various forms. Some predate the oil boom and arose from tribal, geographic, or 
occupational affi  liations and gender. Slavery played an important role in the Ara-
bian Peninsula that has not yet been fully explored or described. Other divisions are 
modern, arising since King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud’s creation of the nation and dur-
ing its governance by his descendants, whether from the need for foreign labor, the 
youth bulge in Saudi Arabia’s demography, or disputes over the appropriate role of 
religion in society. The next subsection deals with women’s roles and history in Saudi 
Arabia and with marriage. As many international groups have accused Saudi Arabia 
of suppressing women’s rights, it is important to understand which limitations have 
the greatest impact on women’s lives and to note the intense value placed on family 
ties and cohesion. Education is the subject of the next subsection. This sector has 
greatly expanded due to governmental policy, and its quality must improve as well. 
Also, to echo Dr. Khalid Alnowaiser, “reforms depend on a tolerant and informed 
citizenry,” and thus reforming religious education to seek the “advancement of the 
human race” ( Arab News , January 10, 2011) rather than replicating “memorizers” is 
a key, albeit disputed, goal. 
 The sixth chapter, “Culture,” is composed of subsections on the Arabic language 
and Saudi dialects; social etiquette; Arabian and Saudi Arabian literature of the past 
and present, including poetry and prose; visual art; photography and ﬁ lms; music, 
dance, and public ceremonies or performances; Saudi Arabian cuisine and food 
traditions; and leisure activities, including popular sports in the kingdom. Another 
subsection is on popular cultural traditions not treated earlier, including proverbs, 
folktales, and superstitions,  ‘urf (customary or tribal law), customary and Islamic 
medicine, herbology or ethnobotany, popular gatherings, and traditional dress and 
its construction, which diff er by region. This is a part of the living Saudi Arabia 
that is being rapidly forgotten and may be in danger of being relegated to obscure 
anthropological studies or museum exhibits. 
 The ﬁ nal chapter, “Contemporary Issues,” of the book concerns subjects that may 
be controversial or that are of particular interest today. Many of these can be viewed 
alternatively as new stages of development; reaffi  rmation of the rulers’ promise of 
security to their subjects, who in turn promise loyalty but have yet to fully acquire 
civil rights and responsibilities; struggles over the deﬁ nition of Saudi Arabian na-
tionhood; or struggles emanating from global conﬂ icts and alliances. This chapter 

 Preface
xvi |
sets out Saudi Arabia’s defense capabilities and weapons capacity as opposed to its 
relatively small military. This high weapons to low defense manpower ratio is the 
very reason that the kingdom requires coordination with and backing by an external 
power (and has led to the extremists’ claim that it is overly inﬂ uenced by the United 
States). The rise of violent extremism in Saudi Arabia over the last decade and the 
government’s counterterrorism eff orts, which I have written about elsewhere, are 
then described. To some degree, this problem has spilled over into Yemen. The next 
subsection covers health issues in the kingdom as an aspect of national develop-
ment. The development of women’s capabilities is also discussed, as well as the role 
of the women in the royal family, who are often overlooked by the international 
press. Saudi Arabia’s media establishment and government censorship are, along 
with human rights issues, lightning rods for international criticism. Human rights 
are considered in the broadest meaning of the term; therefore, the large numbers of 
impoverished and homeless persons and children are mentioned along with issues 
of criminal justice. My intent is primarily to direct the reader toward issues of con-
temporary concern that are documented and likely to generate further public policy 
eff orts. 
 A glossary of Arabic terms used throughout the text has been provided, and read-
ers are advised to turn to this section whenever puzzled by a repeated usage of an Ara-
bic term. Saudi Arabia’s major holidays are described, and a section on organizations 
in Saudi Arabia includes some bilateral organizations, business portals, important 
organizations of the Saudi Arabian government, and a few examples of charitable 
and humanitarian organizations. Some of the most important international organi-
zations of which Saudi Arabia is a member are listed, and because political parties 
are forbidden in Saudi Arabia, a few of the country’s opposition groups are also 
brieﬂ y described. 
 I have included a bibliography that is intended to represent the many issues cov-
ered in this volume; in addition, a brief listing of musical recordings is provided 
for those who are curious about that aspect of cultural production. There is a vast 
literature on Saudi Arabia, and I have excluded a great deal of the works in Arabic 
because this series is geared toward English-language readers (I do urge readers to 
try, if they can, to learn this remarkable language, because without it, they may be 
missing about 80 percent of the available information on Saudi Arabia and much 
of the nuance.) The sidebars include some items of particular interest, and tables 
and additional information that should help provide a more detailed picture of the 
country’s status and development are included in the back matter. 

xvii
 Acknowledgments 
 A number of acknowledgments are in order, as I have acquired various intellectual 
and personal debts while working on this book. I thank ABC-CLIO editors Lynn 
Jurgensen, Evan Brown, and Christian Green, who brought this book to life; Spencer 
Tucker, who had previously convinced me to work with him on other large encyclo-
pedia projects for ABC-CLIO; and the copyediting team. 
 I could never have undertaken this book without the generosity of many individu-
als, scholars, and offi  cials who live in Saudi Arabia or are connected to the Saudi 
Arabian diplomatic corps. Among them I want to thank the perennially supportive 
Hassan al-Hussaini, my former classmate and fellow Bruin Abdullah al-Askar, the 
faculty and members of the Diplomatic Institute in the Saudi Arabian Ministry of 
Foreign Aff airs, Elizabeth Hall, Dr. Abdullah Musa Al-Tayer, Elham Al Ateeq, 
Afaf Alhamdan, Huda Al-Jeraisy, Dr. Abdulmohsin Al-Akkas, Mohamed Ayaz, 
Desmond Carr, Abdulrahman al-Hadlag, Khalil al-Khalil, Muhammad Al Eissa, 
Sherry Cooper, Kay Campbell, Nadia al-Baeshen, and others not named here. When 
I arrived at the U.S. Army War College, I was supposed to embark on a large research 
project on Iraq. My supervisor prevented me from writing what I had intended to 
write, and I decided to work on a brief study of Saudi Arabia and its signiﬁ cance to 
the U.S. defense and political sectors. My interests deepened, and I began a more 
detailed case study of the Islamist opposition movement in Saudi Arabia, only to be 
forbidden from publishing it there. They say that when God closes a door, he opens 
a window, and so other venues for my work presented themselves, allowing me to 
review many special materials on Saudi Arabia. As I explored Saudi Arabia’s cul-
ture and circumstances, I felt strongly that the Saudi bashing in the U.S. media was 

 Acknowledgments
xviii |
impeding an understanding of that country, and I made an eff ort, supported by Lt. 
Gen. David Huntoon and certain War College faculty, to bring Amb. H. R. H. Prince 
Turki Al-Faysal Al-Sa‘ud to speak twice to the entire class and our international 
fellows. My travel to the kingdom from 2005 through 2008 for research prior to 
this book was supported by the U.S. government; however, the standard disclaimer 
applies—the government is no way responsible for those earlier research works, my 
opinions, or this book. Thanks are also due to Laurie Fenstermacher of the U.S. Air 
Force Research Laboratory, Anne Speckhard, Tom Pick, and others who encour-
aged me to pursue my “alternative” idea that Muslims may craft their own responses 
to terrorism and extremism, sometimes more eff ectively than external actors. 
 I have beneﬁ ted greatly from the insights and published works of many special-
ists on Saudi Arabia, who include Donald Cole, Eleanor Doumato, Soraya Altorki, 
Gregory Gause, Abdullah al-Askar, Khalid al-Dakhil, Natana Delong-Bas, Tim 
Niblock, Kay Hardy Campbell, Gwen Okruhlik, William Ochenswald, David Com-
mins, Madawi al-Rasheed, Thomas Hegghammer, Christopher Boucek, Anthony 
Cordesman, Nawaf Obaid, John Duke Anthony, Lisa A. Urkevitch, Stèphane La-
croix, the late Sadekka Arebi, and others named in the book. As’ad AbuKhalil and 
Mona Eltahaway are vociferous critics of the Saudi Arabian government (not its 
people), but their attention to certain issues was a very constructive starting point 
for my own review. 
 I want to thank my son, Jean-Paul, and my husband, Ahmed, for putting up 
with an intense period of writing and the uncertain conditions it has entailed, and I 
dedicate the book to them, my daughter, Natasha, and my mother, Margot, who has 
always supported the life of the mind and spirit.  

1
  CHAPTER 1 
 Geography 
 The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is located on the Arabian Peninsula in southwestern 
Asia, lying to the north of Yemen and to the west and north of Oman and the United 
Arab Emirates. It sits to the south of the Syrian Desert and Iraq, Jordan, and Kuwait; 
its northern boundary runs from the Arabian (Persian) Gulf to the Gulf of Aqaba 
for about 870 miles (1,400 kilometers). The Red Sea is located on its west, and the 
Arabian Gulf to the east, as well as Bahrain and Qatar. The Red Sea is part of the 
Great Rift Valley, which extends northward to the Gulf of Aqaba and the Jordan 
River valley. The natural land border of Arabia in the past was the great Syrian 
Desert to the north, although today borders are also demarcated with its southern 
neighbors on the Arabian Peninsula. 
 The country is between 756,954 and 899,766 square miles (1,218,199 and 2,331,000 
square kilometers). The Saudi Arabian government states that the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia is 2,217,949 square kilometers (856,356 square miles). The ﬁ gures vary in 
diff erent sources because the borders with Oman and the United Arab Emirates are 
not very precisely deﬁ ned and have been disputed. The Saudi Arabian–Oman border 
runs through the Rub ‘al-Khali , the great desert known as the Empty Quarter. Saudi 
Arabia comprises about 80 percent of the Arabian Peninsula and is about one-ﬁ fth 
the size of the United States. 
 Its northern boundaries were negotiated in the Treaty of Muhammara in 1922 and 
the al-Uqayr Convention, which created a diamond-shaped neutral zone between 
Saudi Arabia and Iraq, covering about 7,000 square kilometers (2,702.715 square 
miles). That neutral zone was dissolved by agreement. The other divided zone, also 
diamond shaped, exists between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, with each country gov-
erning its half. 

 Chapter 1 Geography
2 |
 Much of Saudi Arabia is desert or semiarid, and only 2 percent of the land is ar-
able. A decreasing  badu  (bedouin or nomadic) population lives in the desert areas. 
Historically, the country was sparsely populated, and three types of populations 
lived there: the bedouin, herders who traveled to let their ﬂ ocks graze; small agricul-
tural communities; and communities in the highlands. There was both hostility and 
a degree of interdependence between the tribal groups and the settled communities, 
because while the tribal groups could attack the settled peoples, they also needed 
various types of food from them. The tribal groups also competed ﬁ ercely with each 
THE FLAG OF SAUDI ARABIA
The ﬂ ag of Saudi Arabia has its origins in the reform movement of Muhammad 
ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and the warriors of the al-Sa‘ud. The ﬂ ag above was 
adopted as the standardized form in 1973.
The color green has always symbolized Islam. The ﬂ ag of Saudi Arabia 
is a green banner inscribed in white with the shahadah (testimony of faith) 
“There is no God but God; and Muhammad is his Messenger.” The sword 
was added to the ﬂ ag in 1906 to symbolize the military successes of Islam 
and of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, who by then controlled Najd and founded the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The royal emblem consists of two crossed swords 
underneath a palm tree.
The Saudi Arabian Flag. (Dreamstime.com)

| 3
Geography
other, and raiding and looting were customary features of their subsistence. The 
presence of these various types of populations with diff erent cultural traditions and 
patterns gave rise to various leaders who tried to solidify local or regional power. 
This made the political uniﬁ cation of the peninsula extremely diffi  cult, with two 
main exceptions: the initial Islamic conquest and the rise of the Wahhabi-Sa‘udi 
movement. 
 The peninsula experienced desertiﬁ cation after the end of the last Ice Age some 
15,000 years ago due to changes in the currents of the oceans, mountain formation 
in the Middle East, monsoon patterns, and, since then, global warming. However, 
the country’s topography is extremely varied, ranging from diff erent types of desert 
terrain and oases to mountains of up to 9,840 feet (3,000 meters) in the Asir region 
to the southwest. The Asir area is greener and more tolerable than other parts of 
the country in the summer months due to its elevation. Mountains extend down the 
western side of the peninsula from the Gulf of Aqaba to the Gulf of Aden. The north-
ern part of the mountain range, the Red Sea Escarpment, is in the Hijaz region and 
extends to a gap near Mecca (Makkah). Then the southern part of these mountains 
extends down through Asir. The Tihamah lowlands are a 40-mile-wide area from 
the Asir coast to the mountain range. The mountains of the southwestern area rise 
to 9,000 feet in elevation. The western coastal area can be humid, in comparison to 
the dry heat of much of the country. 
 To the east of the Hijaz is the central Najd region, a plateau about 200 miles (320 
kilometers) wide that slopes down from the west to the east, dropping about 1,800 
feet to 2,200 feet. A limestone escarpment is found in the middle of Najd near Riyadh, 
called Jabal Tuwayq, dotted by oases and salt marshes. To the east of Jabal Tuwayq 
is a long, narrow desert area, al-Dahna, extending 800 miles from the al-Nufud Des-
ert in the north to the Rub‘ al-Khali desert in the south. To the east of Najd is the 
Eastern Province. The coast of the Eastern Province is composed of rocky and sandy 
lowlands extending to the shores of the Arabian or Persian Gulf. The gulf coastline 
is made up of  sabkhas (salt ﬂ ats), marshes, and sandy areas. The sea is quite shallow 
with reefs extending far out into the gulf. The eastern portion of Arabia is sometimes 
called al-Ahsa because of the large oasis by that name located there, which is really 
made up of two oases ; one of these oases includes the city of al-Hofuf. 
 About 41 miles to the northeast of Medina lies the Harrat Khaybar volcano, at 
an elevation of 6,867 feet and covering about 150,694 square feet. The volcano was 
described by explorer and traveler Charles Doughty in his 1876 work, which was 
published in 1888 (Doughty 1968). The area is actually three lava ﬁ elds—Harrat 
Khaybar, Harrat Ithnayn, and Harrat Kura—with another lava ﬁ eld, Harrat Rahat, 
lying about 15.5 miles to the south. Harrat Rahat is huge, two times the size of 
 Lebanon. Scientists believe the volcanic activity of this ﬁ eld goes back millions of 
years; at least 13 eruptions have been chronicled. A world team of volcanologists and 
geologists mapped the  harrah  region, theorizing that a 373-mile- (600-kilometer-) long 
volcanic axis, the Medina-Mecca-Nufud line, lies under it. The geological mapping 
of the country shows another ﬁ eld in the north between Tuwayf and al-Qurayyat, 
extending into Jordan, and other  harrat near al-Wahba and al-Bahah. The ashy sum-
mits of Jabal Bayda and Jabal Abyad are huge and starkly white. Under the  harrat 

 Chapter 1 Geography
4 |
lie tunnels called lava tubes. One of these, the Hibashi lava tube, has been studied 
by the National Space and Aeronautics Administration (NASA) as an example that 
helps them understand the lava tubes located under the planet Mars’s basaltic plains 
(Harrigan 2006). Within the basaltic lava are minerals called xenochrysts or, com-
mercially, peridots, gemstones now produced in this area. 
 Caves, sinkholes, tunnels, and caverns exist in the limestone areas of the Umm 
al-Radhuma formation, many of these at the edge of the al-Dahna Desert. The explo-
ration of these geological formations was pioneered by Aramco’s Max Steineke and 
Tom Barger and, later, by others including John Pint, a speleologist and writer, and 
through a project manned by the King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals 
and the Austrian Academy of Sciences (Pint 2003). 
 The limestone and dolomite of the Umm al-Radhuma formation were gradually 
created when the area was the ocean ﬂ oor of a huge sea more than 60 million years 
ago. Over time, rain might ﬂ ow into cracks in the stone, and its acidity ate away at 
the rock, forming cavities. During dry periods the underground water table receded 
Provinces of Saudi Arabia. (ABC-CLIO): The transliteration of places and names in this 
map and other illustrations diff ers from the system used in this book.

| 5
The Geology of Petroleum
even further, leaving some caves to ﬁ ll with air and forming stalactites and stalag-
mites within them (Pint 2000, 27). At Ain Hit, in the Sulairy limestone formation 
near Ma’qalah to the northeast of Riyadh, there is a sinkhole called Dahl Hit, which 
continues into a series of water caves going down from the anhydrite layer into the 
limestone layer beneath. It was explored by cave diver Eric Bjurstrom (Bjurstrom 
1997). 
 THE GEOLOGY OF PETROLEUM 
 The major theory explaining petroleum deposits is that they occur where very an-
cient organic matter, once zooplankton, or algae found on the bottom of a sea or 
lake, became fossilized. Then the fossilized matter was heated or subjected to pres-
sure. (The alternative thesis is that petroleum is of abiogenic origin.) This material 
was buried under sediment, and that in turn created heat and pressure in a process 
More than oil ﬂ ows under 
the Arabian Peninsula. Here, 
volcanic lava beds (harrat 
in Arabic) in western Saudi 
Arabia. (Peter Harrigan/
Saudi Aramco)

 Chapter 1 Geography
6 |
called   diagenesis . That turned the material into kerogen or, when even greater heat 
occurred, into hydrocarbons of a liquid or natural gas type. Usually, the oil or natu-
ral gas was trapped below the surface, in a porous variety of rock where it formed 
reservoirs. A less permeable kind of rock is usually above the reservoir, and one must 
drill through the rock to pump it out or inject water to pump out the oil. 
 The largest deposit of crude oil in the world, the Ghawar oil ﬁ eld, is approximately 
125 miles west of Riyadh and covers about 1.3 million acres. Ghawar produces about 
half of Saudi Arabia’s light crude petroleum (more than 5 million barrels/day of 34o 
API Arabian Light crude), totaling more than any other nation except for the United 
States and Russia (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2010). The ﬁ eld has 
been divided into six areas—the Fazran, ‘Ain Dar, Shedgum, ‘Uthmaniyyah, Ha-
radh, and Hawiyah—for the purposes of mapping and production (although they are 
not physically separated from each other). The source rock of the Ghawar oil ﬁ eld 
is the Tuwayq mountain formation. The oil-water contact of the ﬁ eld is at a higher 
Map of Oil and Gas Fields in Saudi Arabia (2005). (Saudi Aramco World/SAWDIA)

| 7
The Deserts
level on the western side than the eastern side. To the east of Ghawar is the Abqaiq 
oil ﬁ eld, which contains about 12 billion barrels. The other major Saudi Arabian oil 
ﬁ elds are the Safniyya-Khaﬁ ji, Qatif, Shayba, and Zuluf ﬁ elds (Greg Croft, n.d.; U.S. 
Energy Information Administration, 2010). 
 THE DESERTS 
 To the south of the Eastern Province is the sandy al-Jafurah Desert, which extends 
all the way to the Gulf at Dhahran and then to the south, where it merges into the 
Rub‘ al-Khali (Empty Quarter). The Rub‘ al-Khali is one of the world’s largest sandy 
deserts, at 212,000 square miles. Here, there is very limited vegetation, and the an-
nual precipitation is only about four inches. Daytime temperatures in the summer 
are often 113°F (45°C). The other major desert areas are al-Nafud to the north of 
Najd, which covers 20,000 square miles, and, to its north, the Syrian Desert. Some 
of the arable land in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia lies in the oases of these deserts, 
such as Buraydah or al-Hofuf, which are heavily populated. 
 The three huge deserts historically isolated the region of the Najd on its northern, 
eastern, and southern sides. Located in the al-Nafud Desert are huge sand dunes, 
sometimes as high as 295 feet. To the south of al-Nafud is the al-Dahna area, which 
has sand mountains, reddish in color like the al-Nafud. This area covers an arc of 
about 78 miles, ﬁ nally merging at the south with the Empty Quarter. The land forma-
tions of the Empty Quarter are extremely varied, with dunes and sand mountains, 
Aerial view of sand dunes in the al-Nafud Desert, Saudi Arabia. (Dreamstime.com)

 Chapter 1 Geography
8 |
and the region is somewhat higher in the west, at about 1,969 feet, than in the east, 
where the elevation is only 591 feet. 
 Prior to large-scale oil production, the herding of animals and farming in the 
oases were the main means of sustenance in the interior regions; dates and Arabian 
horses were exported. In the Gulf and Red Sea region, pearl ﬁ shing, accomplished by 
means of slaves and credit-bound “free” laborers, was an important source of income 
until the pearl market collapsed about 1929. Date exports to the United States were 
negatively impacted by the rise of the date industry in California at about the same 
time (Hopper 2008, 27–28; Hopper 2010). The taxes on pilgrims on the  hajj were the 
only other major source of income for the local rulers and for the Saudi Arabian 
government in its early years. 
 The desert areas and lifestyle have impacted the language, literary heritage, and 
culture of Saudi Arabia. For instance, many words existed in the early dialects that 
distinguished diff erent types of sand or terrain that are unique; wildlife such as  al-
maha , the oryx or Arabian antelope; and the domesticated camels and horses used by 
the nomads. However, today’s urban environments in the country’s capital, Riyadh, 
with few restrictions on construction, do not necessarily reﬂ ect many aspects of the 
desert heritage due to rapid urbanization and new living patterns. 
 Some features of traditional architecture, such as thicker walls, helped to soften or 
control the high temperatures, in contrast to modern concrete-block buildings (see 
Chapter 6, Architecture). Certain sectors of Saudi Arabian society want to spread an 
appreciation of the country’s heritage and unique aspects of its former lifestyle and 
Herd of camels outside the city of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (Dreamstime.com)

Water | 9
aesthetics and to retain or revive the social values that were supposed to accompany 
that heritage. 
 WATER 
 There are no rivers or lakes in Saudi Arabia. Wadis (valleys) may brieﬂ y surge with 
rivers following a rainfall. The water supply comes from rainfall, groundwater, and 
water that has been desalinated. In the Eastern Province and in the Jabal Tuwayq, 
many underground springs rise up into deep pools and are used to provide irrigation 
in the oases. In the Hijaz and Asir regions, springs are also common, as is well water, 
but water is less available and of poorer quality in the Najd and, naturally, in the 
desert areas. Saudi Aramco (Saudi Arabian Oil Company, formerly Aramco) was 
able to locate important aquifers in the northern and eastern areas of Saudi Arabia; 
the largest of these is called the Wasia. 
 The country has 1,553 miles of coastline along the Red Sea and the Arabian Gulf, 
which attract a wide variety of marine life. The Red Sea is quite deep, extending to 
8,202 feet, while much of the Arabian Gulf is quite shallow. The Farasan Bank, part 
of Saudi Arabia’s continental shelf off  the Red Sea and containing 100 coral islets, 
and some of the islands of the Farasan archipelago are coral ecosystems. They have 
been reported on by Jacques Cousteau in the 1960s and by other divers (Bjurstrom, 
January/February 2000, 18–27). Some 250 types of coral have been recorded in the 
Red Sea, and coral reefs that shelter marine life are also found in the Arabian Gulf. 
At least 11 types of sea grass beds are found in the Red Sea and 3 types in the Ara-
bian Gulf. 
DESALINATION
Somewhere between 50 percent and 70 percent of Saudi Arabia’s drinking 
water is desalinated. As of 2010, the desalinated water is pumped through 
4,157 kilometers of pipelines with 29 stations transporting water to 168 res-
ervoirs with a capacity of up to 9.5 million cubic meters. But desalination is 
an expensive process which consumes 1.5 million barrels of oil per day. The 
technology of desalination improved and became less expensive; however, 
the Saudi Arabian minister of water and electricity explained that material and 
labor costs have increased, thus leading to rises in the price of desalinated 
water (Emirates Business, November 2009). The government plans to build 
solar-powered desalination plants projected to reduce water and energy costs 
by 40 percent; the ﬁ rst plant is to be built at al-Khafji. Saudi Arabia plans 
to become an exporter of solar energy in the future. In addition, nanotech 
membranes are being considered as a way to improve desalination. An inter-
national center in nanotechnology is being established at the King Abdullah 
Institute at King Sa‘ud University.

 Chapter 1 Geography
10 |
 CLIMATE 
 The highest temperature recorded was at 124°F (51.1°C) in Dhahran in 1956. The 
lowest recorded temperature was at Turayf: 10.4°F (−12°C). The heat of the day 
drops to much lower temperatures at night. While summers are extremely hot, frost 
and snow can occur at higher elevations in the winter, but this occurs only once or 
twice every 10 years or so. The average winter temperature lies between 47°F and 
68°F (8°C to 20°C), while the average July temperature is from 81°F to 109°F (27°C 
to 38°C). Though rain is very limited, it occurs between January and May in the east 
and between November and January in the Jeddah area, and it can cause ﬂ ash ﬂ oods 
in the wadi (valley) areas. 
 Most of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a true desert climate, with more extreme 
heat and dryness in the interior and more humidity and somewhat lower tempera-
tures in the coastal areas on the Gulf and the Red Sea. In these areas, the humidity 
may create a mist or nighttime fog. The extremely high heat of the day in Najd, al-
Qasim, and the deserts may far exceed the averages given earlier, at 113°F (45°C), 
and quite often going up to 129°F (54°C). In the winter, the same areas can be ex-
tremely cold due to the dryness of the climate. The Asir Province is aff ected by the 
change from the dry to the wet season, like areas of Africa and Asia; its monsoon 
season comes between May and October. Rainfall also occurs there and in parts of 
the Hijaz due to the higher mountain slopes. Very little rainfall occurs in the rest of 
the country, occurring often in storms. 
 During June and July, sandstorm conditions may develop, as low pressure mounts 
and the  shammal (northerly) winds sweep over the northeastern coast. These condi-
tions weaken in August and September. Humidity may increase in October and No-
vember, and storms can take place from December through February, with weather 
fronts typically passing from west to east, sometimes bringing dust in these months. 
Storms can also occur in March and April. 
 FAUNA 
 The Red Sea and the Arabian Gulf are home to 1,280 and 540 species of ﬁ sh, respec-
tively (Tasnee Petrochemicals 2005, Appendices 4 and 12). Endangered species of 
turtles and vulnerable species like the dugong (sea cow), the great white shark, and 
other sharks exist here. 
 Because the Arabian Peninsula was linked to Africa through an isthmus across 
the Red Sea in the Miocene period, diff erent species were able to move between 
Africa and southwestern Asia. For instance, the common cat native to Egypt, the 
Nile Valley Egyptian, which is an ancient mixture between  Felix sylvestris Lybica 
(the wild cat) and the domestic cat, is also found in the Arabian Peninsula as well as 
the Sinai and Negev regions. In the highland areas of Arabia, one may ﬁ nd native 
ibex, wildcats, wolves, hyenas, and baboons. In addition, antelopes, bats, badgers, 
camels, foxes, gerbils, goats, hamsters, hyenas, jackals, leopards, mongooses, sheep, 
and shrews can be found in Saudi Arabia. Certain types of gazelles and oryx are par-
ticular to the region. The Arabian oryx became extinct in the 1970s; however, oryx 

Flora | 11
and diff erent varieties of gazelles have been reintroduced in the wildlife preserves. 
Between 67 and 100 species of lizards, 7 indigenous amphibians, and 45 to 53 species 
of snakes are present on the peninsula. (The lower numbers are provided in Appen-
dix 4 of Tasnee Petrochemicals 2005.) 
 Many varieties of birds live in the highland areas and in the oases, or they touch 
down there as part of their annual migrations. At least 10 types of birds are native to 
Saudi Arabia, and falcons arrive in the winter. Other migrating species include  hou-
bara , kingﬁ shers, owls, doves, ducks, geese, vultures, swallows, and warblers. Crows, 
sparrows, and black kites also live in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The southern 
areas have even more types of birds, such as partridges, thrushes, woodpeckers, 
eagles, bustards, and goshawks. A royal decree established the National Commission 
for Wildlife Conservation and Development in 1986. This led to the designation of 
17 wildlife reserves to protect the habitat of endangered species. 
 FLORA 
 The ﬂ ora of Saudi Arabia is extremely diverse, although fewer varieties of plants may 
be found in the desert areas, geographically classiﬁ ed as the Saharo-Sindian regions. 
Even here, when there is rainfall, there are purple irises and bright red fruits on the 
 ‘abal bush. Plants here adapt to little water and the high heat. While many sources 
describe the Arabian Peninsula as completely barren, Betty Vincett cataloged and 
photographed some 80 varieties of ﬂ owers in the 1970s (Vincett 1977). In the East-
ern Province, there are drying winds and salty soil. Some 360 types of plants can be 
found, including weeds. Livestock graze on the  arfaj  bush, the  rimth  salt bush, and 
 tkumam , a kind of grass. James Mandaville (1968) provides the Latin and Arabic 
plant names. 
GLOSSARY OF ARABIC PLANT NAMES
‘abal Calligonom comosum
‘arfaj Rhanterium epapposum
ghada Haloxylon ammodendron
hambizan Emex spinosa
hamd several species of saltbushes of the family Chenopodiaceae
harmal Rhazya stricta
ja‘dah Teucrium polium
kaftah Anastatica hierochuntica
kahil Arnebia decumbens
khuzama Horwoodia dicksoniae
kurraysh Glossonema edule
rak Salvadora persica
ramram Heliotropium ramosissimum

 Chapter 1 Geography
12 |
 Traditional medicine in Saudi Arabia relies on many herbs, spices, and other 
mineral or natural substances that grow in diff erent parts of the country, including 
anise for colic, indigestion, and coughs; alum and   habbat al-barakah  (nigella sativa, 
or black seed), to aid digestion and rheumatism; and cardamom, which also relieves 
indigestion and gas (Lebling 2006). 
 The high mountain ranges from Ta’if to Yemen actually possess temperate spe-
cies that one could ﬁ nd in other areas of the world, including the white iris, the 
Ethiopian rose, and terrestrial orchids, which also grow in Africa. The Ethiopian 
rose ( Rosa abyssinica ) and the orchids may derive from the time when the peninsula 
was conjoined to Africa. Others, like the iris, might be found in other European or 
Asian highlands, and still other varieties, like thyme, are similar to their European 
or Asian temperate counterparts but have adapted in a speciﬁ c form to their Arabian 
ecosystem (Larsen 1983). 
 ENVIRONMENT AND POLLUTION 
 Pollution exists to some degree in the large cities such as Riyadh and Jeddah due to 
automobile traffi  c. The greatest environmental problems came following the ﬁ rst 
Gulf War in 1991, when a huge, 8-million-barrel oil spill occurred, which has im-
pacted areas of the Saudi Arabian coast, damaging plants, shallow areas, and sea life. 
This measurably aff ected areas at al-Jubayl, at the harbor, on Abu ‘Ali island, and 
the beaches of the Gulf coastline. In addition, during the war, some 700 oil wells in 
Kuwait burned or exploded, releasing pollution into the air and oil into the Kuwaiti 
desert. The particles from this pollution moved as far south as Riyadh, coating items 
left outdoors and soaking into the desert areas of northern Arabia. 
 HISTORIC AND MODERN DIVISIONS 
 Locations in ancient Arabia had diff erent names in the past. One must therefore 
rely on historians to ascertain exactly which area was being discussed. Historians 
rimth Haloxylon salicornicum
rubahla Scorzonera papposa
samh Mesembryanthemum forskahlei
shary Citndlus colocynthis
thumam Panicum turgidum
‘ushar Calotropis procera
Source: James Mandaville, “Flowers in the Sand.” Aramco World, January/Febru-
ary 1968, 23–25.

Historic and Modern Divisions | 13
have disagreed about the country’s divisions but generally present the peninsula as 
having been divided into the Tihamah lowlands, along the Red Sea coast; the Hijaz 
region; the al-‘Arudh region, which included al-Yamamah   and Bahrayn; Najd, al-
Yaman ; the Rub‘ al-Khali; and Oman. These were the names used by the historian 
al-Mada’ini, the genealogist Ibn Kalbi (d. 213 h./828 CE), and the religious scholar 
Ibn Abbas (d. 688). However, some historical sources diff erentiate only the Hijaz and 
Najd, as in the work of the geographer Ibn Hawqal (d. 977). Others wrote of the areas 
of Mecca, Medina, and al-Yamama as representing the three major regions of Ara-
bia, as did al-Shaf’i (d. 810), the founder of an important school of Islamic law. For 
religious reasons, al-Yamama was included in discussions of the Hijaz because it had 
acknowledged the Islamic conquest under Muhammad. However, some geographers 
included al-Yamama within Najd, as that is its actual location (al-Askar 2002, 7–10). 
 Contemporary Saudi Arabia is divided into 13  manatiq idariyya h (administrative 
districts or emirates), and each of these is divided into  muhafazat , or governates. 
There are 118  muhafazat , which include the regional capitals considered municipali-
ties that have mayors and councils. The 13  manatiq idariyya h are Riyadh (159,074 
square miles), al-Qasim (25,097 square miles), and Ha’il (40,111 square miles) in 
Najd in the center of the country; Tabuk (16,100 square miles), al-Madinah (66,796 
square miles), Makkah (Mecca) (63,321 square miles), and al-Bahah (3,831 square 
miles) in the Hijaz in the western part of the country; al-Hudud al-Shamaliyyah 
(49,035 square miles) and al-Jawf (39,387 square miles) in the northern part of the 
country; Jizan (4,506 square miles), Asir (31,313 square miles), and Najran (45,946 
square miles) in the southern part of the country; and al-Sharqiyyah (274,133 square 
miles) in the eastern part of the country. The regional capitals are Riyadh (in Ri-
yadh province), Ha’il (Ha’il), Buraydah (in al-Qasim province ), Tabuk (Tabuk), 
Medina (Madinah), Mecca (Makkah), al-Bahah (al-Bahah), Arar (al-Hudud al-
Shamaliyyah), Sakaka (al-Jawf), Jizan (Jizan), Abha (Asir), Najran (Najran) , and 
Dammam (al-Sharqiyyah). 
 Each region is known for its particular geographic features, natural resources, 
and speciﬁ c history and cultural traditions. In the past, travel through the Arabian 
Peninsula was arduous, but, today, air, train, and road travel links the country and 
enables internal tourism. For instance, al-Bahah in the southwest is a holiday des-
tination due to its mountains, valleys, forests, and agreeable climate. Asir is also a 
mountain region and the only area that features forests. Al-Abha also has a pleasant 
highland climate, and many national parks have been established here. Najran, in 
the southwest, has a desert climate, but heavy rains in the spring boost agriculture, 
as does the huge Najran Valley Dam. A great waterfall is located there. The Makkah 
region, including Jeddah and the holy city of Mecca, attracts the enormous annual 
pilgrimage, the  hajj . Jeddah’s port and airport are the gateways of the pilgrimage, 
and the city has long been a commercial center. Pilgrims also travel to the holy city 
of Medina in the Madinah region, which also includes the port and industrial city 
of Yanbu and the cities of Hanakiah, Badr, Khayber, and al-Mahd. Al-Ha’il in the 
Ha’il region in the north served as the transit point for pilgrimage caravans traveling 
overland. Other cities in this region expanded from smaller settlements due to their 
wheat, date, and other agricultural outputs. The Jizan region features plains, forests, 

 Chapter 1 Geography
14 |
and mountains, including the 11,000-foot Fifa Mountain. The region runs along the 
Red Sea coast and so includes at least 100 islands. 
 In al-Jawf in the north, the city of al-Jawf is famous for date and olive production. 
Tabarjal and Suwair, long agricultural centers, and the pre-Islamic city of Duma 
 al-Jandal are also located in al-Jawf. The Northern Border (al-Hudud al-Shamali-
yyah  ) region produces phosphates, and its residents raise and breed livestock. The 
Qasim region includes Buraydah , Unayzah, Bakariyah, and Darya. Buraydah and 
Unayzah were important agricultural centers, and the Ikhwan were settled here. 
(See Chapter 2, History.) The Eastern Province (Sharqiyyah) holds the heart of 
the petroleum industry at Dhahran, with the port of Ra’s Tanura to the north and 
Dammam to its south; it is home to the industrial city of al-Jubayl  , the historic area 
of al-Ahsa, and the oasis cities of Hofuf and Qatif. The Riyadh region is made up 
of plateaus and river valleys (wadis) and contains the huge capital city, Riyadh, the 
political and cultural center of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Tabuk, to the north-
west, has rich mineral deposits, and its cities relied on ﬁ shing, pearling, agriculture, 
and trade; and today, tourism is also important.   Among the greatest challenges to 
Saudi Arabia has been the forging of a national identity from the many regional 
identities and loyalties that exist. 
 REFERENCES  
 Bjurstrom, Eric. “Dreaming of Farasan.”  Aramco World 51, no. 1 (January/February 2000), 
18–26. 
 Bjurstrom, Eric. “Diving in the Desert.”  Aramco World , July/August 1997. 
 Doughty, Charlies M.  Travels in Arabia Deserta . Abridged by Edward Garnett. Gloucester, 
MA: Peter Smith, 1968. 
 Doumato, Eleanor. “Saudi Arabia, The Society and Its Environment.” In  Saudi Arabia: A 
Country Study , edited by Helen Chapin Metz, Federal Research Division, Library of Con-
gress. Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1993. 
 Greg Croft, Inc. “The Ghawar Oil Field.” n.d. http://www.gregcroft.com/ghawar.ivnu 
 Harrigan, Peter. “Volcanic Arabia.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 2006, 2–13. 
 Hopper, Matthew. “Pearls, Globalization and the African Diaspora in the Arabian Gulf in the 
Age of Empire.” Paper presented at the 124th Annual Meeting of the American Historical 
Association, San Diego, January 9, 2010. 
 Hopper, Matthew. “Slavery and the Slave Trades in the Indian Ocean and Arab Worlds: 
Global Connections and Disconnections.” Paper presented at 10th Annual Gilder Leh-
rmann International Center Conference, Yale University, November 7–8, 2008. 
 Larsen, Torben B. “In the Alps of Arabia.”  Aramco World , July/August 1983, 16–21. 
 Lebling, Robert. “Natural Remedies of Arabia.”  Saudi Aramco World 57, no. 5 (September/
October 2006), 12–21. 
 Mandaville, James. “Flowers in the Sand.”  Aramco World , January/February 1968, 23–25. 
 Pint, John.  The Desert Caves of Saudi Arabia . London: Saudi Geological Survey and Stacey 
International, 2003. 

| 15
References
 Pint, John. “Saudi Arabia’s Desert Caves.”  Aramco World 51, no. 2 (March/April 2000), 
27–38. 
 Silsby, Jill.  Inland Birds of Saudi Arabia . London: Immel, 1980. 
 U.S. Energy Information Administration. Independent Statistics and Analysis. “Saudi Ara-
bia.” 2010. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/Saudi_Arabia/Oil.html 
 Vincett, Betty A. Lipscombe.  Wild Flowers of Central Arabia . N.p.: Author, 1977. Distributed 
by E.W. Classey Ltd., Faringdon, Oxon, UK. 
 Vincett, Betty A. Lipscombe.  Animal Life in Saudi Arabia . Cernusco, Italy: Garzanti Editore, 
1982. 


17
 CHAPTER 2   
 History 
 TIMELINE 
 3200–1600 BCE—Dilmun civilization in modern-day Bahrain and nearby coastal 
areas. 
 900 BCE–542 CE—Sabaean civilization in southern Arabia. 
 420 BCE–105 CE—Nabataean kingdom in northern Arabia. 
 570 —Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah, the Prophet of Islam, is born in Mecca (Makkah). 
 610 —Muhammad receives the First Revelation at Mount Hira. 
 622— In the Hijrah (emigration) the Prophet Muhammad and the Muslims leave 
Mecca for Yathrib, renamed Medina (Madinah). The Islamic calendar is 
dated from this event. 
 624 —Battle of Badr. 
 625 —Battle of Uhud. 
 627—Battle of the Ditch. 
 630 —Muslim conquest of Mecca. 
 632—Death of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 632–661—The Rashidun (Rightly Guided) Caliphate. 
 661–750 —Ummayyad Caliphate; capital in Damascus. 

 Chapter 2 History
18 |
 750–1258 —Abbasid Caliphate; capital in Baghdad. 
 930 —Qarmatians attack Mecca and steal the Black Stone. 
 ca. 967— Ashraf ( sharifs ) gain control over Mecca. 
 1107–1291—The Crusades. 
 1170 —Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi sends his brother to Mecca. 
 1182—Reynald de Châtillon, lord of Oultrejourdan, leads his knights on a raid in 
Taymah in the Hijaz. 
 1425 —Mamluks have authority over Mecca. 
 1446 —Al-Sa‘ud ancestors establish Dirriyah, the capital of the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state. 
 1507—Portuguese capture Hormuz and set up Arabian outposts. 
 1517—Ottomans defeat Mamluks and assume authority over the Hijaz. 
 1541—Portuguese attack Jeddah (the date is given as 1542 in some sources). The 
town of Buraydah is founded. 
 1591—Ottomans gain authority in Hasa. 
 1631—Ottoman troops defeated in the Yemen revolt; they loot and brutalize popula-
tion of Mecca and Medina. 
 1669 —Banu Khalid uprising; they drive the Ottomans out of Hasa. 
 1744 —Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab moves to Diriyyah. ‘Abd al-Wahhab and 
Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud form alliance. Founding of the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state. 
 1744 –1800 —Sa‘udi-Wahhabi forces battle to control Najd. 
 1794 —Al-Sa‘ud’s forces capture Hasa. 
 1798 —Ottomans begin off ensive against the Sa‘udi forces. Napoleon invades 
Egypt. 
 1801–1802—Sa‘udi forces attack Karbala and expand into the Hijaz. 
 1803—Al-Sa‘ud’s forces conquer Mecca. 
 1813–1814 —Egyptian forces end Sa‘udi-Wahhabi rule in the Hijaz. 
 1818 —Egyptian forces sack Diriyyah, ending the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state. 
 1824 —Turki ibn Abdullah imposes Sa‘udi rule in Riyadh, initiating the second 
Sa‘udi state. 
 1830 —Sa‘udi authority spreads to Hasa. 
 1834 —Turki assassinated; his son Faysal succeeds him and appoints ‘Abdullah ibn 
Rashid governor of Ha’il the next year. 
 1837–1838—Faysal captured by Egyptians and sent to Cairo. 

Timeline | 19
 1840 —Egyptians withdraw from Najd. 
 1843—Faysal returns to Riyadh and recovers control of Najd. 
 1868 —Ottomans expand into Arabian Peninsula after Midhat Pasha becomes gov-
ernor in Baghdad. 
 1871—Muhammad ibn Rashid takes Hasa from the al-Sa‘ud. 
 1889 –1891—Abd al-Rahman ibn Faysal ejects al-Rashid from Riyadh. Then the 
Rashidis defeat the al-Sa‘ud, putting an end to the second Sa‘udi state. 
 1893—The al-Sa‘ud obtain sanctuary in Kuwait. 
 1901—A British ﬁ rm obtains a concession to explore southwestern Persia for oil 
deposits. 
 1902—‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Ibn Sa‘ud) conquers Riyadh and brings the Sa‘udi family back 
from their exile in Kuwait. 
 1906 —Ibn Sa‘ud conquers Qasim. 
 1908 —First major oil strike in Persia. 
 1912—The Ikhwan (Brotherhood) forms and Ibn Sa‘ud establishes their ﬁ rst 
settlement. 
 1913—Ibn Sa‘ud annexes al-Hasa and al-Qatif. 
 1914 —The Sykes-Picot Treaty signed. The secret treaty assigned certain areas of the 
Middle East to British, French, and Russian control. 
 1915 —Great Britain recognizes Ibn Sa‘ud as ruler of Najd and Hasa in an Anglo-
Sa‘udi treaty. Lord McMahon corresponds with Sharif Husayn of Mecca, 
promising him an independent Arab nation if he aligns with the British 
against the Ottomans. 
 1916 —Sharif Husayn of Mecca announces the Arab Revolt waged against the Otto-
man forces and names himself king of the Arabs. 
 1917—Balfour Declaration issued by the British, promising the Zionists a Jewish 
state in Palestine. 
 1918 —Ottoman Empire surrenders. 
 1920 —The Treaty of Sèvres signed, formalizing the Mandatory Authority of Great 
Britain over Palestine, Iraq, and the Transjordan, and that of France over 
Syria and Lebanon. 
 1923—Transjordan becomes independent under Amir Abdullah, the son of Sharif 
Husayn. Major Frank Holmes obtains an oil concession for al-Ahsa. 
 1924 —Ibn Sa‘ud conquers Mecca. 
 1927—Ikhwan raids into Iraqi territory. 

 Chapter 2 History
20 |
 March 29, 1929 —Ibn Sa‘ud defeats the Ikhwan in the Battle of Sibillah. Ajman 
tribal federation revolts. Pearl exports sharply decline, as do date exports to 
the United States. 
 1930 —Faysal al-Duwaysh  , Ikhwan leader, gives himself up to the British in Kuwait, 
ending the Ikhwan revolt. 
 1932—Uniﬁ cation of Najd and the Hijaz; creation of the modern nation of 
Saudi Arabia. Discovery of oil in Bahrain by Standard Oil Company of 
California. 
 1933—Kingdom grants oil concession in al-Ahsa to California Arabian Standard Oil 
Company (CASOC, then known as SOCAL). 
 1934 —Border war with Yemen; treaty of Ta’if ends that war. 
 May 1935 —Assassination attempt on Ibn Sa‘ud by three Yemeni former soldiers 
during the  hajj in Mecca. 
 1936 —Palestinians protest British support of the Zionist movement in Palestine with 
a major strike and three years of unrest known as the Great Revolt. 
 1938 —Large-scale oil strike at Well Number Seven at Dammam Dome; commercial 
oil production begins. 
 1944 —CASOC is renamed the Arabian American Oil Company (Aramco). 
 1945 —Saudi Arabia becomes a member of the League of Nations. 
 1946 —The Ministry of Defense is founded in Saudi Arabia. 
 1947—A British military mission is sent to Ta’if. 
 1948 —State of Israel is declared; ﬁ rst Arab-Israeli War fought. 
 1949 —Creation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. 
 1950 —Jordan annexes the West Bank. 
 1952—Free Offi  cers revolt in Egypt ends Egyptian monarchy. Gamal abd al-Nasser 
(Jamal abd al-Nasir) becomes president by 1954. Saudi Arabian occupation 
of a village in the Buraymi Oasis. 
 1953—Death of Ibn Sa‘ud. His son Sa‘ud succeeds him and rebuilds Nasiriyah Pal-
ace. Council of Ministers established. First strike by Aramco workers. 
 1954 —King Sa‘ud signs treaty with Nasser of Egypt. 
 1955 —Egyptian military mission arrives to train the Saudi Arabian army. The U.S. 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) with help from Stavros Niarchos stir up 
news of a Saudi Arabian contract with Aristotle Onassis to build oil tankers 
to be controlled by the Sa‘udi-Arabian Maritime Tanker Company, which 
would have taken over shipping from Aramco. International arbitration de-
cides in Aramco’s favor. 

Timeline | 21
 1956 —Suez (also known as the Tripartite) War; Israel, France, and Great Britain 
attack Egypt. 
 1957—Riyadh University established; later named King Sa‘ud University. 
 1958 —Sa‘udi plot against Nasser is made public. Prince Faysal takes over ﬁ nances 
and administration of Saudi Arabian government. 
 1960 —Formation of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Companies (OPEC). 
 1961—Free Princes Movement begins; these princes go into exile. 
 1962—Slavery in Saudi Arabia is abolished. 
 September 19, 1962—Imam Ahmad ibn Yahya of Yemen dies. An army-led rebel-
lion overthrows his eldest son, al-Mansur Billah Muhammad al-Badr, a week 
later, touching off  the Yemeni Civil War. 
 October 1962—Four Saudi Arabian aircraft crews defect to Egypt carrying arms 
for the rebels. 
 1963—Buraydah riots in response to establishment of a school for girls. 
 1964 —King Sa‘ud abdicates; Faysal becomes king. 
 1966 —A series of bombs is set off  by the opposition in Saudi Arabia. 
 1967—Second Arab-Israeli War; Israel takes over the West Bank, Gaza, East Jeru-
salem, and the Golan Heights. 
 1968 —Saudi Arabia’s Central Planning Organization created. 
 1970 —Saudi Arabia’s First Five-Year Development Plan  begins. 
 1971—As Great Britain withdraws from the Gulf states, Iraq threatens Kuwait. 
Saudi Arabia helps negotiate a secret agreement to contain Iraq. 
 1972—Saudi Arabia gains 20 percent control of Aramco. 
 1973—Workers from the Philippines begin to travel to Saudi Arabia for employment. 
 March 13, 1973—Arab oil ministers agree in Tripoli to lift the embargo against the 
United States and to continue the embargo against the Netherlands and Den-
mark. However, Libya and Syria plan to continue the embargo. 
 October 6, 1973—Third Arab-Israeli (Ramadan or October) War. 
 October 8, 1973—OPEC demands price increase at Vienna meeting. 
 October 16, 1973—OPEC delegates in Kuwait announce unilateral price increase 
from $3.01 to $5.12 per barrel. After this, producers set price. In response to 
President Nixon’s airlift to Israel and proposed $2.2 billion to Israel, King Fay-
sal freezes oil shipments to the United States and other countries aiding Israel. 
 November 8, 1973—Secretary of State Henry Kissinger visits Riyadh and asks for 
an end to the embargo, but Faysal refuses. 

 Chapter 2 History
22 |
 November 21, 1973—Kissinger threatens countermeasures to a continuing embargo, 
and Oil Minister Yamani says that if the West takes countermeasures, Saudi 
Arabia would cut production by 80 percent. 
 1974 —Construction of King Khalid Military City begins. 
 1975 —King Faysal assassinated by Faysal ibn Musaid; Khalid becomes king. 
 1976 —Saudi Arabia seeks to purchase U.S.-made F-15 ﬁ ghter aircraft. 
 1978 —U.S. Congress approves the sale of the F-15 aircraft to Saudi Arabia. 
 1979 —Followers of Juhayman al-‘Utaybi seize the Grand Mosque. Umm al-Qura 
University established. Soviets invade Afghanistan. Islamic Revolution of 
Iran. Khomeini returns there from France. Fifty-two Americans are taken 
hostage in U.S. embassy in Tehran. 
 March 1979 —Camp David Accords signed. In response, Saudi Arabia severs rela-
tions with Egypt. 
 1979 –1980 —Shi‘a unrest in the Eastern Province. 
 1980 —The Fundamental or Basic Law is announced. Aramco converts to full Saudi 
Arabian ownership. 
 1981—The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) is formed on May 25. 
 1982—King Khalid dies; King Fahd succeeds him. 
 1983—Stock market created in Saudi Arabia. Bandar ibn Sultan is appointed ambas-
sador to the United States. 
 1984 –1985—Saudi Arabian government provides aid for the contras in Nicaragua. 
Muhammad ibn Fahd becomes the governor of the Eastern Province. Poet 
and minister Ghazi al-Ghosaybi (Qusaibi)   is sacked after he publishes a poem 
critical of the king and his subordinates. 
 1985—Al-Yamamah arms deal with the United Kingdom is signed. Prince Sultan ibn 
Salman is part of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administrations 
(NASA)  Discovery ﬂ ight orbiting the earth. 
 1986 —Oil prices drop. 
 1987—Diplomatic relations with Egypt restored. Deaths of 402 pilgrims in incidents 
sparked by Iranian demonstrations during the  hajj . 
 1988 —Osama bin Laden (Usama bin Ladin) and other Arab supporters of the  mu-
jahidin  are active in Afghanistan; Saudi Arabian Oil Company, known as 
Saudi Aramco, is established. Explosions occur at reﬁ nery at Ra’s Tanura 
and in plant in Jubayl. 
 1989 —Soviet forces withdraw from Afghanistan. 
 1990 —Saddam Hussein (Husayn)’s Iraqi forces invade Kuwait, threatening Saudi 
Arabia. 

Timeline | 23
 1991—First Gulf War begins. U.S. and coalition troops arrive in Saudi Arabia. Poet 
Sadiq Mellalah is beheaded in Qatif for the crimes of blasphemy and apos-
tasy. Saudi Arabian women protest the unwritten rule disallowing women 
from driving automobiles by staging a public demonstration in which they 
drove their own vehicles. 
 1992—Memorandum of Advice issued as part of “petition” movements. 
 1993—The liberal reform movement and the opposition group Committee for De-
fense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR) are declared illegal. Osama bin Laden 
and his followers are based in the Sudan. 
 December 1993—Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Council) is created. 
 1994 —Uprising in Buraydah against government corruption. Saudi Arabian gov-
ernment strips Osama bin Laden of his citizenship. 
 1995—Osama bin Laden writes a letter to King Fahd complaining of waste and 
corruption, Saudi Arabia’s reliance on Westerners for defense, and its lack 
of commitment to Islamic principles. He calls for ﬁ ghters to expel Western 
military forces. Car bombing at National Guard facility in Riyadh kills ﬁ ve 
Americans and two Indians. King Khalid suff ers a debilitating stroke, and 
Crown Prince ‘Abdullah takes over de facto rule. 
 1996 —Attack on Khobar Towers, Dhahran, by Saudi Arabian Hizballah, killing 
19 military personnel and wounding 515. 
 1998 —Bin Laden and al-Zawahiri issue a  fatwa against foreign occupation of the 
Arabian Peninsula. Al-Qa’ida operatives bomb the U.S. embassies in Dar 
al-Salaam and Nairobi. Taliban refuse to extradite bin Laden to Saudi 
Arabia. 
 April 1999 —Saudi Arabia has 112,500 Internet users and 45,000 online subscribers. 
Inauguration of the Shayba oil ﬁ eld in the Rub‘ al-Khali desert. 
 January 3, 2000 —An al-Qa’ida cell fails in an attempted attack on the USS  The Sul-
livans as it refuels in Yemen. 
 March 2000 —Shots ﬁ red at a guard at the Russian embassy. 
 October 4, 2000 —Saudi Arabian dissidents hijack an airplane to Iraq. 
 October 12, 2000 —Al-Qa’ida bombs the USS  Cole in Yemen, killing 17 and wound-
ing 30. Treaty of Jeddah resolves the demarcations of the border between the 
Republic of Yemen and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
 May 2, 2001—A parcel bomb seriously injures a U.S. physician at a medical center 
at Khobar. 
 September 11, 2001—Suicide attacks in the United States kill 2,976. Fifteen of the 
19 terrorists are said to be Saudi Arabian nationals. Operation Enduring 
Freedom is launched against the Taliban in Afghanistan. 

 Chapter 2 History
24 |
 October 6, 2001—A suicide bomber in al-Khobar kills two foreigners, including an 
American, and injures four. 
 October 11, 2001—A Molotov cocktail is thrown at a car carrying two Germans in 
Riyadh. 
 October 31, 2001—Saudi Arabian government freezes the assets of 66 persons and 
organizations believed to be sponsoring terrorism. 
 2002—Crown Prince ‘Abdullah issues a plan for Arab peace with Israel. Fire in a 
girl’s school kills 15 who are unable to escape due to interference by the HAIA 
(Hay’at al-Ma‘ruf wa al-Nahaya ‘an al-Munkar, or the Committee for the 
Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, known popularly as  mutawa’in , 
or the religious police) because they did not want girls leaving the building 
without wearing their  abayas . Three Saudi Arabian nationals are arrested 
in Morocco for planning an attack on ships in the Strait of Gibraltar. Then, 
seven Moroccans are arrested in connection with the same plot. Twenty are 
arrested in connection with a plot to attack Ra’s Tanura. 
 April 2002—A demonstration by at least 2,000 in Dhahran against the Israeli attacks 
on the West Bank. 
 2003—The Saudi Arabian government recognizes poverty in the kingdom and begins 
a plan to address it. 
 February 5, 2003—Gunmen ﬁ re at a British employee of British Airways. 
 February 7, 2003—Eight gunmen ﬁ re on police in Riyadh, killing a Kuwaiti. 
 February 20, 2003—A gunman kills a British employee of an engineering company 
in Riyadh as he stops at a stoplight. 
 February 25, 2003—A bomb thrown at a Dammam McDonald’s restaurant fails to 
explode. 
 March 2003—Operation Iraqi Freedom begins. 
 April 29, 2003—U.S. secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld announces that the 
United States will withdraw military forces from Saudi Arabia except for a 
small training mission. 
 May 12, 2003—Terrorist bombings of three residential compounds that primarily 
housed foreigners in Riyadh kill 35 and wound 200. Later, the terrorists are 
identiﬁ ed as being part of al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyya (al-Qa’ida on the 
Arabian Peninsula, abbreviated as QAP or AQAP). 
 June 2003—First National (Meeting for Intellectual) Dialogue convenes. 
 July 21, 2003—Saudi Arabian security forces raid farms and houses in Riyadh and 
Qasim , capturing 16 suspected terrorists. 
 November 6, 2003—Two suspected terrorists blow themselves up in Mecca. 

Timeline | 25
 February 2004 —244 pilgrims die in a stampede during the  hajj . 
 April 21, 2004—Car bombing in Riyadh kills 5 and wounds 148. Council of Ministers 
issues an edict forbidding military and civil servants from protesting govern-
ment policy. 
 May 1, 2004 —Four gunmen attack the offi  ces of ABB-Lummus (a contractor for 
ExxonMobil) in Yanbu, killing 5 (including 2 Americans, 2 Britons, and an 
Australian) and wounding 3 other employees. In a battle with security forces, 
3 terrorists are killed and one is taken into custody; several police are killed 
and 19 wounded. Shooting also takes place at a Holiday Inn and a McDon-
ald’s. Terrorists also throw a pipe bomb at the International School in Yanbu. 
 May 22, 2004 —Gunmen kill a German national in Riyadh. 
 May 30, 2004 —Militants attack two housing compounds in Khobar (22 killed, 25 
wounded). 
 June 2004—Third National Dialogue convenes and concerns Saudi Arabian wom-
en’s issues. 
 June 6, 2004 —Gunman kills a BBC journalist and wounds another. 
 June 8, 2004 —Gunmen kill U.S. contractor for Vinnell Corporation in Riyadh. 
 June 12, 2004 —Three militants kill a U.S. employee of Advanced Electronic Com-
pany in Riyadh. Militants abduct and later behead Lockheed employee Paul 
M. Johnson. 
 August 3, 2004 —Militants kill an Irish civil engineer in his offi  ce in Riyadh. 
 September 15, 2004 —Two gunmen kill a British employee of Marconi Communica-
tions in Riyadh. 
 September 26, 2004 —Gunmen kill a French defense electronics worker in Jeddah. 
 December 2004 —Two car bombs are set off  in Riyadh. Security forces kill seven. 
 December 6, 2004 —Attack on U.S. consulate in Jeddah kills ﬁ ve staff  and ﬁ ve 
attackers. 
 February–April 2005 —Nationwide municipal elections held. 
 August 2005 —King Fahd dies. Crown Prince ‘Abdullah becomes king. 
 September 2005 —Clashes in Dammam result in deaths of ﬁ ve militants and three 
police offi  cers. 
 November 2005 —World Trade Organization agrees to admit Saudi Arabia as a 
member after 12 years of discussions. 
 January 2006 —363 pilgrims die in a stampede during the stone-throwing ritual. 
Seventy-six pilgrims die in the collapse of a hostel in Mecca. 
 February 2006 —Saudi Arabian forces foil attack at Abqaiq oil facility. 

 Chapter 2 History
26 |
 June 2006 —Shoot-out between Saudi Arabian forces and militants kills six militants. 
Three Saudi Arabian detainees in Guantanamo commit suicide. 
 November 2007—A young woman known as the “Girl from Qatif,” who was kid-
napped and gang-raped by seven men (her male companion was also raped), 
is sentenced in the retrial of the case to six months in jail and a 200-stroke 
lashing, and her lawyer, Abd al-Rahman Lahem, had his license suspended. 
After international outcry over the case, King ‘Abdullah issued a royal par-
don for her. Founding session of the Allegiance Council. 
 February 4, 2007—French tourists are killed in a militant attack near the ruins of 
Mada’in Saleh. 
 April 2007—Large-scale terrorist plot is foiled and some 176 alleged terrorists are 
arrested. 
 May 30, 2007—A Saudi Arabian detainee in Guantanamo commits suicide. 
 July 2007—The HAIA are ordered not to detain suspects themselves but to turn 
them over to police. 
 November 2007—A gas-pipeline ﬁ re kills 40 workers. 
 December 2007—Another militant plot at the time of the  hajj  results in multiple 
arrests. 
 January 2008 —Leader of al-Qa’ida in Yemen announces a new organization named 
al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyya, made up of his organization, the earlier one 
by the same name (AQAP) that had been based in Saudi Arabia, and the 
Yemen Soldiers Brigades. 
 February 2008 —UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women, Yakin Ertürk, 
visits Saudi Arabia and makes recommendations concerning abuses against 
women. 
 April–July 2008 —British High Court rules that UK government unlawfully dropped 
a corruption inquiry in December 2006 into the 1985 al-Yamamah defense 
agreement. The House of Lords reverses the court’s decision. 
 July 2008 —King ‘Abdullah initiates the Interfaith Dialogue in Madrid. 
 December 2008 —Oil prices drop from $147 to $40 per barrel. 
 February, April 2009 —Interpol issues alerts for 85 men suspected of plotting at-
tacks in Saudi Arabia. King ‘Abdullah removes several conservatives from 
 government—the head of the HAIA (religious police), the most senior judge, 
and a central bank head—and appoints the ﬁ rst woman deputy minister (of ed-
ucation), Norah al-Faiz. Saudi Arabian   offi  cials arrest 11 al-Qa’ida militants. 
 June 2009 —U.S. president Barack Obama visits Saudi Arabia. 
 July 2009 —A Saudi Arabian court issues verdicts for 330 on trial for terrorism, one 
of whom is sentenced to death. Prince Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz is named the 
 second deputy prime minister. The  al-Nasr al-Sa‘udi  ship is hijacked by Somali 

Timeline | 27
pirates, and the crew suff ers from torture and exposure until arrangements 
are approved by the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) to pay the 
ransom. Pirates have hijacked at least 83 ships in the Gulf of Aden since 2005. 
 August 2009 —Saudi Arabian authorities arrest 44 with suspected ties to al-Qa’ida. 
Prince Mohammad bin Nayif, 27th deputy interior minister for security af-
fairs, is lightly wounded in a suicide attack when a militant claimed he wanted 
to meet with him to discuss an amnesty. 
 September 2009 —King Abdullah University for Science and Technology is 
inaugurated. 
 October 13, 2009 —Two terrorists and one policeman are killed at a checkpoint. 
 November 2009 —Following clashes at the Yemeni border, Saudi Arabian troops 
move in to hold a buff er zone in Yemen. The  Sirius Star , a Saudi Aramco 
ship, is hijacked in the Indian Ocean. The worst ﬂ oods in 27 years hit Jed-
dah, which has no sewage system, in late November. Offi  cial ﬁ gures listed 122 
deaths and 350 missing. 
 January 2010 —Bombing attacks against Yemeni targets, described by government 
sources as the work of al-Qa’ida (meaning AQAP) but actually carried out 
against the Houthi rebels.  
 August 2010 —Arrests of 44 militants. 
 September 2010 —Thirteen women are permitted to attend ‘Id al-Fitr   festivities at the 
Prince ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Musaid Sports Pavilion in Ha’il for the ﬁ rst time; a 
concrete boundary is erected to separate them from men. 
 October 2010 —Militants operating in Qassim  . U.S. offi  cials conﬁ rm plans to sell 
about $60 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia. 
 November 2010 —Arrests of 149 alleged members or conspirators with al-Qa’ida, 
including 124 Saudi Arabian nationals. Wikileaks reveals U.S. State Depart-
ment offi  cials’ comments on Saudi Arabian leaders’ desire for the United 
States to attack Iran and U.S. claims that Saudi Arabia sponsors global ter-
rorism. King ‘Abdullah spends two months in the United States undergoing 
back surgery and another month in Morocco for further recovery and physi-
cal therapy, returning to Saudi Arabia on February 23, 2011. 
 January 2011—Saudi Arabians must now apply for a license to start a blog, a per-
sonal website, or any form of e-publishing. They must be over 20 years of age, 
with a good high school or higher-education record. Tunisian revolutionaries, 
with the agreement of the army, overturn the regime of President Zine al-
Abedin Bin Ali, who takes refuge in Saudi Arabia. In February, the Egyptian 
revolution of January 25th forces Hosni Mubarak to step down. 
 March 2011—A Saudi Revolution Facebook page set up in February calls for pro-
tests in March to demand a constitutional monarchy, legislative elections, and 

 Chapter 2 History
28 |
other changes. Protests take place in the eastern cities of Qatif and Dhahran, 
but heavy police presence discourages protesters in Riyadh, although one is 
arrested. On March 14, Saudi Arabian troops and police arrive in Bahrain 
to help the government suppress protests.  On March 18, King ‘Abdullah 
announced a package of cash grants, loans, raises, apartments and reforms 
meant to prevent political protests. He also announced 60,000 new jobs in 
the security forces.
 May 1, 2011—U.S. Special Forces kill Osama bin Laden at a compound near Abot-
tabad, Pakistan. 
 May 15, 2011—Pakistani Taliban take credit for shooting Hassan Khatani of the 
security department of the Saudi Arabian embassy in a revenge slaying in 
Karachi following the assassination of Osama bin Ladin. 
 May 23, 2011—Manal Sharif is arrested after she posts a video on the Internet show-
ing herself driving in Khobar in protest of the ban on women drivers. Other 
women join in a driving protest.
 Arabia’s history predates Islam. Yet the Arabian Peninsula was the cradle of Islamic 
civilization, which radiated outward and was synthesized with other cultures and 
civilizations. Islam’s roots in Arabian history and culture have inﬂ uenced Muslims 
far beyond the boundaries of the peninsula. The modern nation of Saudi Arabia is 
named for the family of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, known as Ibn Sa‘ud, who recaptured 
Riyadh and led his warriors to establish a modern state in the twentieth century. 
The term  Arabia  derives from  ‘arab , or Arab, which speciﬁ cally meant the Arabic-
speaking tribes and more generically those who had a nomadic lifestyle. 
 The Arabian Peninsula linked Africa and Asia through an isthmus at the Red Sea, 
traversed by various species. In ancient times, the climate was less arid, featuring 
grasslands and bush. At the end of the last Ice Age, some 15,000 years ago, the penin-
sula began to undergo desertiﬁ cation due to multiple causes, including changes in the 
currents of the oceans, mountain formation in the Middle East, monsoon patterns, 
and, since then, global warming. The ﬁ rst inhabitants of the Arabian Peninsula were 
Neolithic hunters and gatherers who left petroglyphs of animals on rocks throughout 
the country. As the area became increasingly drier, scientists believe that these people 
retreated to the oases and were succeeded by Semitic tribes who settled ﬁ rst in south-
ern Arabia. The inscriptions and art on rock in Saudi Arabia are still being studied, 
for instance, at al-Jubbah, where settlements were already in place during the Middle 
Paleolithic period some 80,000 to 25,000 years ago (Harrigan 2002). By the middle of 
the third millennium BCE, the cultures of Arabia were in contact with Mesopotamia, 
and the west coast of Arabia was linked to Egypt (Bowersock in Hayes, ed., 1992, 19). 
 In the interior of Arabia, life changed sometime between 3000 and 2500  BCE when 
the camel was domesticated and could be employed as a pack animal on the trading 
routes, and when irrigation for agriculture began. Trade provided income for early 
merchants, while agriculture sustained others. The third major group were nomadic 

Timeline | 29
herders. The Arabian Peninsula was the crossroads of several ancient cultures. To its 
north, the Sumerian civilization developed in the Tigris-Euphrates Valley. The Sa-
baean Empire was located in what is today Yemen. Biblical references to the Queen 
of Sheba pertain to the ruler of this empire, but these are thought to be apocryphal, 
as Saba existed somewhat later in history. Saba was at its height from 900  BCE to 542 
 CE ; it possessed a strong army and produced frankincense and myrrh. The Sabaeans 
constructed the Ma‘rib Dam, which constrained the Adhannah River. The Romans 
referred to this area as Arabia Felix (happy Arabia) for its prosperity, contrasting 
with the perilous, dry Arabia Deserta of the interior. When the dam collapsed in 542, 
Saba’s inhabitants began to leave the area. 
 Archaeologists believe the civilization of Dilmun was located on the islands of 
Bahrain and Falaika, and along the eastern coast of Arabia between Kuwait and 
Bahrain. Dilmun, referred to as the “place where the sun rises” or the “land of the 
living” in early texts, was thought to be the Garden of Eden and was identiﬁ ed as 
such in the “Archaic Texts” of Uruk-Warka in Iraq (from the late fourth millennium 
 BCE) , in Akkadian as “Tilmun”, and also in texts from Ebla in Syria. A tablet found 
at Dilmun refers to it as Elysium, whose inhabitants supposedly possessed the secret 
of eternal youth. It is referred to in the Mesopotamian saga of Gilgamesh (Zuhur in 
Melis, ed., 2004). Dilmun thrived between 2100 and 1600  BCE and became a burial 
site, or necropolis. Thousands of burial mounds remain today (Wynbrandt 2004, 10). 
The northwestern walled towns of al-Tayma, al-‘Ula, and al-Jawf, and an irrigation 
system at al-Qurayyah, were built by the later second millennium (Bowersock 1992, 
Ruins of the ancient civilization of Dilmun in contemporary Bahrain. (Arthur Thévenart/
Corbis)

 Chapter 2 History
30 |
29). Other relics, such as the stone pillars, which are in line with the rising and setting 
sun at Rajajil, date to about 4000  BCE . Literary references to early peninsular civi-
lizations called ‘Ad and Thamud, and to their destruction, are found in the Qur’an. 
According to some accounts, Thamud was a tribe of giants, and like ‘Ad, its people 
were early monotheists who wavered from that faith and were killed when they re-
jected a miracle shown to them by their prophet, Saleh. In the interior of the Arabian 
Peninsula was Qaryat al-Fau, the capital of the Kingdom of Kinda, an urban and 
literary society where texts in the South Arabian language, written in the Musnad 
script’s separate, block-like letters (see Chapter 6, section on language), have been 
discovered (Bowersock 1992, 26; al-Ansary 1982). 
 The Nabataeans, Arabs who spoke Arabic but used an Arabicized form of Ara-
maic as their written script (Bowersock 1992, 28), were established in the northern 
Arabian Peninsula with their capitals at Petra and Bosra in Syria. The Nabataeans 
moved into the Hijaz, the Negev, and Transjordan from elsewhere in the peninsula 
and became vassals of Rome after the Romans conquered their allies, the Parthians. 
The Nabataeans constructed buildings and tombs at Mada’in Saleh in the Hijaz, a 
site that has recently been excavated further (Harrigan 2007), and minted their own 
coins. The Roman annexation of the Nabataeans’ area is also preserved in the relics 
of the caravan city at the oasis of Palmyra in Syria (Tadmur). This stood as a buff er 
against the Sassanians, who moved in after the death of Queen Zenobia (Az-Zabba) 
of Palymra in 272. Marcus Julius Philippus, who had become the Roman emperor in 
244  CE,  was an Arab and is variously described as being from the Syrian Hawran or 
the Lajah (the volcanic area close to the Hawran). His actual name was Elagabalus 
(for the god al-Jabal) (Bowersock 1992, 32; Ruedy in Hayes, ed., 1992, 43). 
 The Arabian Peninsula was also invaded by the Ethiopians and was inﬂ uenced 
by the struggle between the earlier Arabian rulers of southern Arabia and these in-
vaders, along with the Arabs’ Sassanian allies, and also by the struggle between the 
Romans, or Byzantines, and the Sassanians. The Ghassanid tribal confederation, 
made up of the Saleh and the Bani Ghassan, allied itself with Byzantium, whereas 
the Lakhmid confederation was allied with the Sassanians. The other important al-
liance was the linkage of the Nabataeans with the Romans, as already mentioned. 
 In 30  CE , the Roman Gallus led an army to conquer Arabia, but his army retreated 
two years later. The Sassanian king, Aradashir, invaded Arabia in 225  CE , and King 
Shapur II invaded in 310  CE . After that, the Sassanians relied on their clients, the 
Lakhmids, to battle the client tribes of the Byzantines, who ruled the eastern half 
of the Roman Empire. Around 300  CE , Christianity was established in Abyssinia 
(Ethiopia), and the Abyssinians invaded southern Arabia in 525  CE  and then sent 
an army by sea to conquer Yemen, ruled by the Himyarites, the dominant group in 
South Arabia (110–525  CE ). Following their conquest of Yemen and the Himyarites, 
the new Abyssinian rulers established Christianity there and tried to discourage the 
tribal pilgrimage to the Ka‘ba (a holy site devoted to the worship of the local pan-
theon of gods and goddesses), aiming to divert it to Sana‘a (this ancient fortiﬁ ed city 
is the capital of contemporary Yemen). The second Abyssinian (Negashi) viceroy, 
Abraha, declared war. Abraha, mounted on a giant white elephant, and his army 
marched on Mecca in 570  CE . The Meccans ﬂ ed, but during the rule of Abraha’s 

Timeline | 31
successor, the people in the area suff ered. Eventually, the Himyarites convinced the 
Sassanians, a Persian dynasty, to invade Arabia. The Sassanians extended their rule 
through Yemen, Oman, and Hadramaut, although their ruler Maadi-Kareb was 
killed by the Abyssinians, who took over and then once again were defeated by a 
Sassanian invasion (Simon 1998, 87–89). During this period, the Quraysh tribe con-
tinued to dominate Mecca. While the Sassanians ruled the peninsula, Christianity, 
Judaism, and Arab polytheism were all permitted and practiced. 
 The Lebanese scholar Kamal Salibi has postulated that the biblical Judaic king-
dom of Israel was actually located in Arabia, speciﬁ cally in the Asir region, as evi-
denced by place-names in the ancient Hebrew language. As Jerusalem (in Palestine) is 
referred to as the “daughter of Jerusalem,” this would imply the existence of a Jerusa-
lem in Arabia (Salibi 1985, 2007). Salibi, a well-respected scholar, does not comment 
on the implications for the modern states of Israel and Saudi Arabia, although some 
of his readers and critics have done so. If correct, his thesis might explain the large 
numbers of Jews in the Arabian Peninsula, speciﬁ cally in Yemen, generally thought 
to have migrated from the north. Certain scholars of the ancient period have also 
refuted Salibi’s theories for other reasons, arguing that if the Assyrians conquered 
the ancient Hebrew state, there should be geohistorical evidence in neo-Assyrian 
sources supportive of Salibi’s thesis; that evidence has not been found (Hjelm 2009). 
 Mecca had become a religious and trading center prior to the rise of Islam. Its 
religious signiﬁ cance in Islam is traced back to Ibrahim (Abraham), who, according 
to Islam, is the forefather of the Muslims and the Jews. Ibrahim brought his Egyptian 
slave and wife Hajar (Hagar) and his son Isma‘il (Ishmael) to the area. When Ibrahim 
left them and returned to his wife Sarah, Hajar set out to look for water. She ran 
back and forth seven times between the two hills of Safa and Marwah, looking for 
water. Her thirsty son, Isma‘il, scraped his foot on the land, and the water sprang 
forth that is known as the well of Zamzam, or simply Zamzam (Muslim pilgrims try 
to reenact Hajar’s movements and to drink from Zamzam in the ritual known as 
 sa’y .) The waters of Zamzam attracted nomads, who settled there. Ibrahim became 
a monotheist and a prophet according to both Judaism and Islam, and he rejected 
the polytheists’ idols erected to their deities. He returned to the area where Mecca is 
now located and was instructed to build a shrine to the one God. According to one 
Muslim tradition, the Ka‘ba, which houses the Black Stone at Mecca, was built by 
the ﬁ rst human, Adam; or (according to some other traditions), it was built by angels. 
Ibrahim and his son Isma‘il rebuilt the Ka‘ba on its original foundations. Violence 
was forbidden in a 20-mile area surrounding the Ka‘ba, making it a sanctuary, or 
 haram , for traveling pilgrims. However, early peoples forsook the one and only God 
and again worshipped stone idols representing the ancient divinities at the Ka‘ba. 
In the pre-Islamic era, the pilgrimage to the Ka‘ba was held in the month of Dhu 
al-Hija. Fighting was forbidden then; in fact, it was prohibited during three sacred 
months, including the month of Ramadan. 
 The Prophet of Islam, Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-Mutallib, was born 
in 670  CE , and descended from the clan of Hashim of the Quraysh. The Quraysh 
tribe arrived in Mecca sometime in the ﬁ fth century and came to control the area 
and its pilgrimage following their leader Qusay’s conquest of the region. Trade routes 

 Chapter 2 History
32 |
 traversed the Arabian Peninsula, connecting it to Syria in the north and Mesopo-
tamia. The population consisted of nomadic and settled peoples, the  badu and the 
 hadhar . The  badu often engaged in warfare over their rights to obtain water for their 
herds or for territorial control. The  hadhar concluded treaties to prevent the  badu 
raids, paying them off  in produce. The Arab tribes in the Hijaz, Saudi Arabia’s west-
ern province, were primarily polytheistic, although some had converted to Judaism 
and to Christianity. As well, there were individuals identiﬁ ed by the word  hanif , who 
preached the worship of one God only. 
 THE RISE OF ISLAM 
 The Qur’an, the holy text of Islam, was revealed to Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah, the 
prophet of Islam, and the seal of prophecy (meaning that he bore the ﬁ nal divine 
message). His father had died before his birth, and his mother died when he was a 
young child. He traveled with his uncle along the trade routes. Muhammad was later 
employed by a wealthy woman, Khadija, and handled her caravans and aff airs. She 
married him when he was about 25 years old; she was 15 years his senior. Years 
later, when he had retreated to meditate on Mount Hira, a common custom of the 
men of Mecca, he received an oral revelation delivered by the angel Gabriel while 
meditating. He feared initially that this experience signaled the onset of madness, but 
Khadija convinced him otherwise and became his ﬁ rst convert to Islam, supporting 
his mission to recite and spread these revelations publicly, which he began to do in 
613. The revelations called for worshipping the one God, Allah, exclusively; ending 
the practice of female infanticide and immoral customs; and living according to a 
code of social justice and reverence for Allah. 
 As Muhammad’s followers increased in Mecca, the leaders of the Quraysh grew 
angry because the strict monotheism he preached threatened their dominance and 
the lucrative pilgrimage to the Ka‘ba. The Meccans persecuted the early Muslims 
(literally, “those who submit to Allah”), who had no family protectors highly placed 
among the Quraysh. Muhammad sent some of his followers to Ethiopia for their 
safety. 
 When Muhammad’s uncle, Abu Talib, died in 619, Muhammad became more 
vulnerable to persecution or even death at the hands of the Quraysh leaders. He and 
his followers emigrated from Mecca in 622  CE in the Hijrah (emigration), which is 
counted as the ﬁ rst year in the Muslim calendar, to the oasis of Yathrib. The people 
of Yathrib had invited him to come there to help settle the battles between those 
allied with the warring tribes of al-Khazraj and al-‘Aws, as they could not resolve 
the dispute themselves. Yathrib came to be called Madinat al-Nabi (the city of the 
Prophet), known as Medina. At Medina, Muhammad led the Muslims religiously 
and politically, as a lawmaker and arbiter, and in a series of wars against the Meccans 
and their tribal allies. He continued to receive revelations, which were later collected 
into the Qur’an, Islam’s holy book. The Ansar (helpers), Medinan nonemigrants, 
pledged to help the Muslims defend the city together with the  muhajirun (emigrants) 
against the Quraysh. Also in Medina were three Jewish tribes: the Banu Qaynuqa, 

The Rise of Islam | 33
Banu al-Nadir, and Banu Qurayza. A commonly held view is that the Jews of the 
Hijaz traveled there following their expulsion from the Holy Land by the Romans 
more than 500 years previously, in contrast with Salibi’s thesis mentioned earlier. 
 Initially, Muhammad hoped the Jews of Medina would welcome his message. 
Accounts show that his prophecy was foretold by certain ﬁ gures and that the two 
monotheistic traditions shared many principles, both ethical and symbolic. A docu-
ment known as the Treaty or Constitution of Medina speciﬁ ed that the Muslims—
emigrants and Ansar—as well as the Jews would be loyal and engage in war together, 
and that the Jews would maintain their religion and the Muslims theirs (Guillaume 
1955, 231–235). Nonetheless, the Jewish religious leaders rejected Muhammad and 
his claim to prophecy according to Ibn Ishaq (Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Yasar ibn 
Khiyar, ca. 704 –767 CE; Guillaume 1955, 242). Jewish-Muslim relations disinte-
grated primarily due to political tensions. The Meccans were determined to defeat the 
Muslims at Medina, and the Jewish tribes conspired with them. In the spring of 624, 
the Meccans learned that the Muslims planned to raid a caravan led by Abu Sufyan. 
Abu Sufyan was among the Prophet Muhammad’s ﬁ ercest opponents in Mecca and 
was responsible for the initial extreme cruelty toward and attacks on Muslims and 
for their exile. 
 At this time, the Qur’anic revelations ordered the Muslims to engage in jihad 
(struggle) “on the path of God” yet also counseled peace when possible (Aboul-Enein 
and Zuhur 2004). The ensuing Battle of Badr, between a Meccan army of 1,000 men 
and a force of only 313  sahaba, other  muhajirun  (emigrants) and Ansar of Medina, 
Depiction of a scene in the Battle of Badr (624 CE) as rendered by a Persian painter. 
(Bilkent University)

 Chapter 2 History
34 |
was a great victory for the Muslims. Under Muhammad’s leadership, the Muslims 
also fought in the Battle of Uhud (625) and the Battle of the Ditch (627), a siege of 
Medina. 
 The Prophet Muhammad expelled the Banu Qaynuqa in response to a series of 
events. These included an incident in which a Jewish man tripped a Muslim woman 
or tore her garments so that her private parts showed. He was killed in an ensuing 
melée. Then, in revenge, a Muslim was killed by the Jewish crowd. When the Prophet 
Muhammad went to ask for the blood money ( dhiyya , the payment due according 
to ‘ urf , customary law) for the life of the Muslim man from the tribe who had killed 
him, the tribe stalled. As the tribesmen stalled and delayed, they planned to assassi-
nate the Prophet. Another issue was an attempted poisoning of Muhammad and the 
treachery of a Jewish poet who went to meet with the Quraysh and incited them to 
war with Muhammad (through his poetry). After this period of friction, Muhammad 
expelled the Banu al-Nadir (Ibn Ishaq  , 1964, 2000 or 2009 437–439). The third tribe, 
the Banu Qurayza, allied themselves with the Meccans just prior to the Battle of the 
Ditch. Muhammad tried to communicate with the Banu Qurayza to keep them on his 
side but to no avail. Following the siege of Medina, the Meccans retreated, leaving 
the Banu Qurayza on their own. Their punishment was put to an arbiter who had 
been fatally wounded. The arbiter demanded revenge, ruling that all the men were 
to be killed and the women and children enslaved. After this, war was waged on the 
Jews of Khaybar in 628, although they were permitted to remain there and pay a tax 
in crops from their lands. Muhammad’s Jewish wife, Saﬁ yya, a captive of the battle 
of Khaybar, retained privileges for her family. Some challenge the accounts given by 
Ibn Ishaq via others writing a century or more later (the Muslim historian Muham-
mad ibn Jarir al-Tabari [d. 923] also gives his version of Ibn Ishaq’s biography), in 
part because one source was interviews with the descendants of those massacred by 
the Muslims, who are thought to have been embittered by these events. Also, Ibn 
Ishaq’s account is second-hand through the work of Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Malik 
ibn Hisham, known as Ibn Hisham (d. 833), who edited and recensed Ibn Ishaq’s 
biography or  sira  of the Prophet Muhammad (and/or Tabari; Guillaume marks the 
sections from Tabari with a T, which he appends to Ibn Hisham’s account). The 
Prophet Muhammad’s agreement with the Jews was overturned by the caliph ‘Umar, 
who expelled the Jews from the Hijaz, but accounts diff er on their dispersal, and 
whether it was complete. Some indicated that the Jews of Khaybar relocated to Jeri-
cho and later Tiberias, or to Kufa (probably an incorrect thesis), and some sources 
indicated that at least some Jews remained in the area (Bornstein-Makovetsky 2008 
[based on Braslavi’s stance in the publication’s ﬁ rst edition]; Pirenne 1958, 33, 76, 
215ff  ). 
 In Medina, Muslim ritual and practice was established; whereas the Muslims had 
initially prayed toward Jerusalem, their  qibla (prayer direction) shifted to Mecca 
(Ibn Ishaq, 2000, 258  ). A chanter gave the call to prayer (‘ adhan ), in contrast to the 
Christian ringing of bells (and the Jews’ use of the ram’s horn). The ﬁ rst ‘ adhan was 
Bilal, an Ethiopian born in Mecca, a former slave freed by Abu Bakr (see the follow-
ing) and one of the  sahaba (Companions of the Prophet) considered extremely loyal 
to Muhammad and his nephew ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib. Bilal possessed a beautiful voice. 

Muslim Dynasties | 35
 After the Meccans broke the truce of Hudaybiyya they had previously signed 
with the Muslims, the latter marched on them and retook Mecca. Muhammad or-
dered the cleansing and removal of the idols from the Ka‘ba. After the capture of 
Mecca in 630, Abu Sufyan, the Muslims’ most vociferous foe, converted to Islam. 
By that time, many other tribes and groups had recognized Muslim authority or 
converted to Islam. In 632, Muhammad performed the  hajj (pilgrimage) to Mecca. 
Islam thereafter spread in all directions, as the Muslim armies fought and defeated 
the Sassanians, the allies of the Eastern Roman Empire, and moved northward and 
westward into Egypt. 
 MUSLIM DYNASTIES 
 The Prophet Muhammad died in 632. By then, nearly the entire Arabian Peninsula 
recognized Muslim authority. A council of leaders in Medina met to choose a suc-
cessor to the Prophet, who was known as the  khalifa (caliph; literally, “successor” 
[of the Prophet]). They could not agree on a candidate. Some supported a leader 
from the powerful house of Ummayya from within the Quraysh clan, while others 
preferred ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, the Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law, because he was 
the closest male relative of the Prophet, who had no living sons. The council settled 
instead on Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, Muhammad’s father-in-law, who ruled as caliph 
until his death in 634. During this period, several tribes renounced Islam, and the 
Muslims battled and defeated them in the Wars of Ridda (apostasy). The caliph 
‘Umar succeeded Abu Bakr and ruled until 644, a period of military victories over 
Damascus and Jerusalem, as well as triumph over the Sassanians in the Battle of 
Nahavand in 641. ‘Umar was killed by a Persian Christian captive. The next caliph, 
‘Uthman, further expanded the Muslim Empire and was responsible for the recen-
sion and arrangement of the Qur’an. Caliph ‘Uthman became unpopular with some 
of his subjects. Accused of nepotism, he was murdered by a group led by Muhammad 
ibn Abu Bakr. ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib was then named the caliph in Medina, although his 
rule was contested by Mu‘awiyya, governor of Syria and cousin to ‘Uthman. ‘Uth-
man’s murderers had been supporters of ‘Ali, whereas the Prophet Muhammad’s 
wife ‘A’isha opposed ‘Ali. This issue of succession ignited the ﬁ rst Muslim civil 
war, or  ﬁ tnah , from 656 to 661. Eventually, the two sides agreed to arbitration, but 
when the tribunal decided neither should rule, ‘Ali refused to abide by that decision 
and assumed the offi  ce of caliph in Kufa in southern Iraq. Meanwhile, Mu‘awiyya 
declared himself caliph in 661, ruling over a much larger swath of territory than did 
‘Ali. One group, the Khawarij, or seceders, had supported ‘Ali, but they contended 
that he had been mistaken to agree to arbitration in the ﬁ rst place, and one of them 
assassinated ‘Ali in 662. Mu‘awiyya  , who established the Ummayyad Caliphate, 
eventually controlled the Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina and, with his main 
power base in Syria, insisted on recognition of his designated successor. 
 This shifted the center of Muslim imperial power away from the Arabian Pen-
insula to the Fertile Crescent region: ﬁ rst to Syria and later, under the Abbasid 
caliphs, to Baghdad. However, as a result of the conﬂ icts in the Ummayyad period, 

 Chapter 2 History
36 |
 regionally and religiously motivated movements arose in Arabia. The Khawarij 
(Kharijite) movement, which had espoused strong opposition to or death for those 
who failed to uphold the Prophet’s teachings, was adopted in Yamama in 680, when 
the Khariji leader Najda bin ‘Amr of the Banu Hanifa drove out the Ummayyad of-
ﬁ cials (al-Askar 2002, x, 133). However, this Khariji state collapsed about 10 years 
later, although the sect survived on the coast of the Arabian Gulf, evolving, some-
what moderated, into the Ibadi sect of Islam (Smyth in Metz, ed., 1993  , 11–12). 
 When Mu‘awiyya died in 680, his son Yazid claimed the caliphate. His succession 
was contested by Husayn, the son of ‘Ali, who went from Medina to Iraq, where he 
had more support, in order to organize his followers, known in English as the ‘Alids 
and later as the Shi‘a Muslims (Shi’at ‘Ali, or party of ‘Ali). An Ummayyad army 
massacred Husayn and 70 of his followers at Karbala in 680. This event is com-
memorated by today’s Shi‘a Muslims as the religious holiday of ‘Ashura on the 10th 
day of the month of Muharram. When Husayn was killed, a revolt began in Medina, 
which Yazid suppressed. Then he besieged Mecca. Yazid died during this siege, and 
his son, Mu‘awiyya II, died only 40 days later. 
 Two claimants to the Ummayyad Caliphate arose. One of them, ‘Abdullah 
ibn Zubayr, established his rule in Mecca. The Arabs had long been divided be-
tween the Qays tribal confederation and the Kalb confederation. Their enmities 
remained a part of politics during the Muslim expansion. In this case, the Qays 
backed Ibn Zubayr; however, the Kalb tribal confederation supported the other 
claimant, Marwan ibn al-Hakam (622–685). The Kalb prevailed, and Marwan was 
named caliph in 684, solidifying control of the Ummayyad Caliphate in other new 
areas of conquest. Nevertheless, Ibn Zubayr continued to rule in Arabia, and he 
defeated another rebel in Iraq, Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi ‘Ubayd al-Thaqaﬁ  (622–687). 
Al-Mukhtar was born in Ta’if, grew up in Medina under the Prophet Muham-
mad’s rule, and sought to avenge Husayn ibn ‘Ali until he was killed. Marwan’s 
son, ‘Abd al-Malik, ﬁ nally defeated Ibn Zubayr at Mecca, reportedly destroying the 
Ka‘ba. As caliph, ‘Abd al-Malik made Arabic the offi  cial language of the empire 
and built the Dome of the Rock and rebuilt the al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem (al-
Haram al-Sharif), intending to siphon away pilgrimage traffi  c to Mecca. Under ‘Abd 
al-Malik and Walid I (r. 705–715), the Islamic conquests resumed; parts of Egypt 
were reconquered, and Carthage was taken. The Muslim armies crossed the Straits 
of Gibraltar in 711 and had conquered Spain by 716. Under the caliph Hisham 
(r. 724 –743), the Muslim armies reached Tours in what is now France. To the east, 
the Muslim armies reached the Indus River by 710. 
 The Ummayyad caliphs were eventually overthrown by the Abbasids, follow-
ers of a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad’s uncle. The Abbasid Caliphate 
lasted in name from 750 to 1258  CE . However, the Abbasid Caliphate was limited 
in practice by decentralization and the growing power of its own army command-
ers, resulting in the growth of independent dynasties from about the 10th century. 
In addition, the Abbasids faced serious economic problems and two invasions by 
Mongol armies. The Abbasids built their own new capital at Baghdad. Medina 
remained important as a center of Islamic learning and jurisprudence for some 
time. The various dynasties coterminous with the Abbasids sought to show their 

Later Muslim Dynasties and the Arabian Region | 37
authority over the pilgrimage to and local rulers of Mecca. This was true of the 
Fatimid dynasty, ruling from Egypt, which inﬂ uenced, or controlled, the Hijaz in 
western Arabia until its demise. 
 LATER MUSLIM DYNASTIES AND 
THE ARABIAN REGION 
 During the Crusades, a period when European leaders battled to establish and hold 
small states in the Near East, Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (known as Saladin in the West), 
the great Muslim general, who was half Kurdish, reestablished Muslim rule through-
out historic Syria and farther down into the Sinai Peninsula and Egypt. He replaced 
the governor of Mecca with his brother. However, Reynald de Châtillon , the lord of 
Oultrejourdan, one of the previously mentioned small Crusader states, moved into 
the Hijaz in 1182 and attacked an Arab caravan. Reynald then ordered ships to be 
carried overland from the Dead Sea to the Gulf of Aqaba. With a force of 1,000 men, 
he attacked Muslim pilgrims traveling by ship along the Red Sea coast, thus threat-
ening Mecca and Medina and their Muslim supervision. This was a great off ense to 
Salah al-Din, who canceled his truce with the Crusaders. Without the truce, Reynald 
was impelled to withdraw from the Hijaz in order to defend Oultrejourdan (Sabini 
1981, 18–19), thus removing the threat to the Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina. 
 Salah al-Din and his descendants, the Ayyubids, reigned over the Holy Cities from 
Egypt. Local leaders who claimed descent from the Prophet, known as the  ashraf 
(singular,  sharif ), competed with each other to obtain local control over the Hijaz. 
The ruler of Yanbu, Sharif Qitada, sent forces to Mecca in 1201, while that city’s 
 amir    (prince, or leader) was making the ‘ umrah  (the lesser pilgrimage; it is briefer than 
the rites of the  hajj and may be performed at other times of the year). He and his 
descendants held authority over the Holy Cities thereafter, although they acknowl-
edged foreign rulers as needed, ﬁ rst acquiescing to the rulers of Cairo and later the 
Ottomans. Over time, the Ayyubids were replaced in Egypt by the Mamluk ruling 
dynasties. The Mamluks maintained a representative in Mecca and, like the  ashraf , 
were responsible for ensuring that the Holy Cities were accessible to the pilgrims. The 
Hijaz beneﬁ ted from the trade and cultural diversity of the pilgrim traffi  c. 
 The Ottoman Turks fought against and defeated the Mamluk armies in Egypt 
and Syria in 1517 during the reign of the Ottoman sultan Selim I (1513–1520). Selim, 
known as the Grim, claimed to be the protector of the Holy Cities of Mecca and 
Medina, and like other important Muslim rulers, his authority was acknowledged 
by the mentioning of his name in the Friday public prayers. The grand  sharif ( sharif 
being the title given at that time to the  ashraf , or descendants of the Prophet, who 
were guardians of the Holy Cities) dispatched his son to give Selim the keys to the 
Ka‘ba. 
 The Ottomans stationed troops in the Hijaz and refurbished the Holy Cities. The 
Ottomans wanted greater control over the Arabian Peninsula and attempted to at-
tain it through the  ashraf . They appointed their own  ashraf  to that end. After con-
quering Baghdad in 1534, the Ottomans were able to move into and occupy Hasa, 

 Chapter 2 History
38 |
installing their own governor, Fatih Pasha, after 1591 (Wynbrandt 2004, 101–102); 
they thereby gained more control over eastern Arabia. 
 In the 15th and 16th centuries, the Portuguese attacked the Arabian coastline, 
landed there, and built their own fortresses. At that time, inﬂ uenced by the phi-
losophy of the Inquisition, they considered the Arabs to be heretics. The Ottomans 
were supposed to defend the peninsula against such conquests. Some adventurers, or 
 captives, called  renegados , found their way to the Arabian Peninsula. One such ﬁ gure 
was Ludovico de Varthema, who described the Hijaz, Khaybar, the Holy Cities, and 
the pilgrimage (Sabini 1981, 24 –25). The Portuguese (like the English) became inter-
ested in the goods and possibilities of the East and the Arabian Peninsula. 
 Frequently, friction arose between the indigenous and foreign powers in the Hijaz. 
For instance, because the Ottoman troops were often paid late, they revolted in 
Mecca and Medina in 1631 after returning from a defeat in Yemen, looting the 
shops and attacking local residents. It has been observed that over the years, thanks 
to the pilgrimage and the connection of Muslim rulers to it, the Hijaz was always 
more inﬂ uenced by external forces than was Najd, to the east. The Hijaz represented 
a larger economy, again because of the pilgrimage, but it was more vulnerable to 
foreign or syncretic inﬂ uence. That became a signiﬁ cant rationale for the political 
and religious reform movement that was to develop from the teachings of the Najdi 
reformer Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab. 
Al-Musmak Fort in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2009. (Dreamstime.com)

Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and the First Sa‘udi State | 39
 MUHAMMAD IBN ‘ABD AL-WAHHAB 
AND THE FIRST SA‘UDI STATE 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (1702–1792), who was born in Uyaynah in 1702 
or 1703, came from a distinguished family of Hanbali religious scholars and judges 
(following the religious “school” or teachings of Ahmad ibn Hanbal al-Shaybani) 
and was a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad (de Corancez 1995, 5). His father 
was the  qadi ( judge) of ‘Uyaynah . He had to leave his hometown after local leaders 
became concerned with his public preachings and admonishments to strive for a true 
 tawhid , or absolute monotheism. He studied in Medina, with Shaykh ‘Abdullah ibn 
Ibrahim ibn Sayf and Shaykh Muhammad Hayat al-Sindi. These two scholars em-
phasized the content of hadith,  ijtihad , and the need for social reform, and they were 
admirers of Taqi al-Din ibn Ahmad Ibn Taymiyya’s (1263–1328) work (Voll 1975, 
32–39). Ibn Taymiyya, a scholar and teacher of Hanbali law, lived during the Mongol 
attacks on the Mamluks and was famous for supporting jihad against them since they 
followed their own legal code, the  yasa , and not  shari‘ah . He was also known for 
his opposition to  kalam , rational, philosophical argumentation of points of religion, 
and for his theological positions, including opposition to the belief in the intercession 
( shafa’ ) of saints and holy ﬁ gures. ‘Abd al-Wahhab is often accused of establishing an 
extreme sect of Islam and of being a devotee of Ibn Taymiyya; however, at least one 
scholar, Natana Delong-Bas (2004, 17–21), has countered that Ibn Taymiyya would 
have been but one of the sources ‘Abd al-Wahhab read. Even more important, his 
mission was a reform movement rather than the formation of a new sect (Commins 
2006; de Corancez 1995, 5). ‘Abd al-Wahhab also traveled to Basra to study. His 
preaching against wrongful rituals may derive instead from that experience (Com-
mins 2006, 12). He was, according to the chroniclers who supported the Wahhabi 
reform movement, exiled from Basra and struggled in the summer heat to reach 
al-Zubayr; he then returned to Huraymila, his father’s home (Ibn Ghannam 1961). 
There he wrote his seminal essay,  Kitab al-Tawhid , which attacked Muslim practices 
he considered heretical or polytheistic. His ideas spread widely, but he refrained 
from preaching until after his father’s death in 1740 (Delong-Bas 2004, 22–23). 
From these ideas arose the reform movement, known outside of Saudi Arabia as 
Wahhabiyya (Wahhabism), which owes its importance to the successful political 
fortunes of the Sa‘udi family. Information about ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s life and reform 
movement came from his supporters, Husayn ibn Ghannam (d. 1810) and ‘Uthman 
ibn Bishr (d. 1873) (Ibn Ghannam 1381; Ibn Bishr, n.d.; also see Facey 1997, 33–45). 
He denounced sexual immorality and held that syncretic practices such as tomb or 
grave visitation, occasions when Muslims prayed for their holy men or women to 
intercede on their behalf with Allah, and also the traditions of other Islamic sects 
were innovations, or  bid‘a . These innovations lacked precedents in the tradition of 
the ﬁ rst Islamic generations. While others had protested against syncretism in Islam, 
‘Abd al-Wahhab further argued that these practices or beliefs were sinful and had 
to be punished because they granted importance to ideas or persons other than the 
Qur’an and Allah and so constituted  shirk (polytheism). His rulings were strict, usu-
ally classical interpretations of the  shari‘ah (it is not true, as some claim, that the 

 Chapter 2 History
40 |
followers of ‘Abd al-Wahhab reject all previous interpretations and schools of legal 
thought, only that they consider the possibility of creating new positions in  ﬁ qh , or 
jurisprudence, where necessary), and he called for active, militant jihad, ﬁ ghting of 
Islam’s enemies. His views gained admirers and detractors; his followers called them-
selves  muwahiddun    (monotheists). His enemies and those outside of his movement 
dubbed them Wahhabis  . 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab began a preaching campaign in support of the ruler of al-
‘Uyaynah , ‘Uthman ibn Hamid ibn Mu‘ammar, whose aunt ‘Abd al-Wahhab mar-
ried. ‘Abd al-Wahhab then initiated a campaign of chopping down trees considered 
sacred by the locals. He then destroyed a monument over the tomb of Zayd ibn al-
Khattab, a Companion of the Prophet Muhammad. He condemned a woman who 
admitted committing adultery to death by stoning. In response to his growing appeal 
in the area, the religious scholars attacked him, attempting to defame him. His protec-
tor, Ibn Mu‘ammar, was forced to expel him, so he traveled to the town of Diriyyah 
(Delong-Bas 2004, 24 –35). After the wife of Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud, the leader of the 
al-Sa‘ud tribe and ruler of Diriyyah, became acquainted with ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s ideas, 
Ibn Sa‘ud invited him to become that town’s  qadi in 1744. The two swore an oath that 
they would strive to create an Islamic state (Smyth in Metz, ed., 1993, 15; al-Tihami 
in al-Sammari, ed., 2010). This alliance of the al-Sa‘ud and ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s family, 
later known as the al-Shaykh, has endured from the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi realm until today. 
 Al-Sa‘ud began to expand his territory soon after ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s arrival in 
Diriyyah. He challenged other tribes in Najd, as his forces called for an end to popu-
lar syncretic and Shi‘a observances. They attacked the town of Riyadh, farther into 
Najd. In 1764, the lords of Hasa and Najran mounted a combined resistance to the 
Sa‘udi warriors, but the leaders from Najran decided to come to terms with al-Sa‘ud. 
Ibn Sa‘ud died in 1865 and was succeeded by his son ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (r. 1765–1803). 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz would send an emissary to the tribes carrying a Qur’an and a sword, 
and his message, according to de Corancez (1995, 9), read: 
 Abd el Aziz to the tribe of ***. Hail! Your duty is to believe in the book I send 
you. Do not be like the idolatrous Turks, who give God a human intermediary. 
If you are true believers, you shall be saved; otherwise, I shall wage war on you. 
 Under his command, the Sa‘udi-Wahhabi forces captured Qatif, and then Hasa and 
Bahrain, and forced the sultan of Muscat to pay tribute. They reached the Rub‘ al-
Khali (the Empty Quarter) and then tried moving into Hadhramaut without success. 
Tribes in Asir joined them, and they took the Tihamah  lowlands and points on the 
coast of Yemen. They also moved to the north through the Iraqi and Syrian deserts 
and sacked Karbala with its important shrine to Husayn ibn ‘Ali in 1801 (Safran 
1985, 10–11). That shrine was guarded by a  mutasallim  (assistant governor) sent by 
the pasha of Baghdad. The slaughter of all the townsmen and pregnant women in the 
town, and the plunder of the shrine, greatly disturbed the authorities in Baghdad and 
Fath ‘Ali, shah of Persia (de Corancez 1995, 21). The Sa‘udi-Wahhabi forces then 
began advancing toward the cities of Mecca and Medina to the west. Those resist-
ing them at the town of Ta’if were massacred in 1802. Mecca surrendered in 1803, 

The Second Sa‘udi Realm (1824 –1891) | 41
although not Jeddah, which withstood a siege (de Corancez 1995, 29 –30). Sharif 
Ghalib retook Mecca when ‘Abd al-‘Aziz retreated. The Sa‘udi-Wahhabi forces had 
attacked shrines and images in Mecca and rejected the pilgrims from Egypt and 
Syria, calling them idol worshipers. Meanwhile, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was assassinated by a 
Persian who sought revenge for the massacre of his sons in Karbala. 
 The Sa‘udi uniﬁ cation of rule in the Arabian Peninsula under the banner of ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab’s followers, with its emblem of the  shahada   , or proclamation of the faith, 
challenged the authority of the Ottoman Empire, whose sultan obtained tribute from 
the peninsula, and rights over the Holy Cities. However, the Ottomans were too 
militarily weak to mount a campaign to the Hijaz, so they called on Muhammad ‘Ali 
Pasha, their commander and viceroy in Egypt. 
 Muhammad ‘Ali Pasha sent a force to the peninsula under his son Tusun in 1816, 
and these troops gained Mecca and Medina. The al-Sa‘ud moved back to Najd. 
Then, Muhammad ‘Ali sent forces to defeat them conclusively, a process that took 
two years before al-Dirriyah surrendered in 1818. Muhammad ‘Ali sought recogni-
tion from the Ottoman Porte that he and his descendants would be permanent rulers 
of Egypt and so involved himself in other reconquests of Ottoman territories, notably 
Syria. The Egyptian forces sent several of the al-Sa‘ud family into exile and forced 
‘Abdullah ibn Sa‘ud ibn Muhammad to go to Istanbul, where he was executed. They 
destroyed the settlement of Dirriyah, sent troops to diff erent parts of the peninsula, 
and set up a garrison at al-Qatif. In the Hijaz, they reestablished the rule of the 
 ashraf , who had exercised authority over Mecca and the surrounding area prior to 
the Sa‘udi-Wahhabi victory there. 
 THE SECOND SA‘UDI REALM (1824 –1891) 
 Muhammad ‘Ali Pasha believed his Egyptian forces had completely routed the 
Sa‘udis and withdrew from Najd. However, an escaped member of the Sa‘udi  family, 
Turki ibn ‘Abdullah, who hid for two years, recaptured al-Dirriyah in 1821, then 
Riyadh and the rest of Najd by 1824, ruling until 1834. This revival owed much to 
the tenacity of tribal loyalties, aptly manipulated by the al-Sa‘ud leadership. Their 
followers demonstrated their dedication to ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s teachings as well. By 
acknowledging the Sa‘udi ruler as imam, they collected the tribute demanded by 
Islam and described their forays as jihads (Smyth in Metz, ed., 1993, 18). 
 Muhammad ‘Ali and the succeeding khedives of Egypt could not retake the pen-
insula and were defeated in 1827 by British and French forces. However, they insti-
gated another member of the Sa‘ud family, Mishari, to assassinate Turki in 1834. 
Mishari was then defeated by Faysal ibn Turki. He then confronted opposition 
from the Banu Khalid, and the rulers of Bahrain and Qatar refused to recognize the 
Sa‘udis. The Ottomans, backed by the Egyptians, continued to press for income, 
which they received through the  ashraf . The Egyptians also tried to manipulate the 
al-Sa‘ud against each other, doing so successfully when they marched on Najd in 
1836 and supported a pretender, Khalid, a cousin of Faysal, and eventually shipped 
Faysal off  to Cairo. The Egyptians’ hopes of ﬁ rmly ruling the peninsula were dashed 

 Chapter 2 History
42 |
by the Europeans, who in 1839 forced Muhammad ‘Ali to agree to hereditary rule 
solely of Egypt. 
 Khalid was edged out by ‘Abdullah ibn Thunayyan from the family of Muham-
mad ibn Sa‘ud, who became the imam of Riyadh but was then jailed and poisoned 
by Faysal ibn Turki, who had returned from Egypt. Faysal then reigned from 1843 
to 1865 over a smaller area than the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi “kingdom” but this area was more 
cohesive and accepted by other forces and more ﬂ exible (Safran 1985, 16). Faysal 
unsuccessfully attempted to convince the British to ally with him against the Otto-
mans, and he then tried to advance into Oman, but the British bombarded Dammam 
and Hofuf in response. This second Sa‘udi realm came to an end due to quarrels 
between Faysal’s heirs, ‘Abdullah and Sa‘ud. The Ottomans were able to claim the 
province of Hasa in 1871, imprisoning ‘Abdullah, who then escaped but had to rec-
ognize Turkish authority over the Eastern Province. After losing control of Asir, and 
numerous changes in authority between these brothers and their other two brothers, 
‘Abd al-Rahman and Muhammad, Muhammad ibn Rashid (originally from Ha’il) 
sent a force against Riyadh to free ‘Abdullah and then set up a Rashidi governor 
there. The Rashidi governor quelled an attempt by the nephews of ‘Abdullah to raid 
Kharj in 1888. Nevertheless, Ibn Rashid dismissed that governor (Salim ibn Subhan) 
and appointed ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Sa‘ud in his place, but ‘Abd al-Rahman revolted 
in 1890. Unable to withstand a siege of Riyadh by Ibn Rashid, ‘Abd al-Rahman was 
conﬁ rmed governor of Riyadh and some nearby areas (but was not independent of 
Ibn Rashid). In a second revolt, Ibn Rashid crushed the rebels in 1891 in the battle 
of Mulayda, and ‘Abd al-Rahman ﬂ ed to the desert and eventually to Kuwait. 
 In the next resurgence of the al-Sa‘ud family, some historians observe that the 
British, concerned over their own dominance in the Persian Gulf, accommodated 
the al-Sa‘ud, even while supporting other allies like the al-Rashid family and the 
 sharif of Mecca. 
 ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ (IBN SA‘UD) AND THE 
FORGING OF SAUDI ARABIA 
 The creation of Saudi Arabia is attributed to the determination and leadership of Ibn 
Sa‘ud, or ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ‘Abd al-Rahman Faysal al-Sa‘ud (ca. 1876–1951), the son 
of ‘Abd al-Rahman and the ﬁ rst king of Saudi Arabia. No record of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s 
birth was kept. Some historians estimate it occurred 1876, while others proff er 1880 
or 1882, in Riyadh, probably on November 26 (Hamza). His mother was Sara bint 
Ahmad al-Sudayri  , the daughter of a powerful tribal leader. While he was a boy, his 
family, the rulers of Riyadh in the central province of Najd, ﬂ ed from their rivals, the 
al-Rashid family, in 1891. His family spent about two years with the Murrah bedouin 
at Yabrin, a period that acquainted ‘Abd al-‘Aziz with the lifestyle, language, and 
skills of the bedouin. In 1894 or 1895, the al-Sa‘ud clan took refuge in Kuwait. 
 ‘Abd al-‘Aziz married for the ﬁ rst time when he was 16 or 17. At that point, the 
al-Sa‘ud were so poor they could hold his wedding only when its costs were covered 
by a friendly merchant. He later married many times and sired at least 43 sons and 

‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Ibn Sa‘ud) and the Forging of Saudi Arabia | 43
20 daughters. His sons succeeded him as the kings of modern Saudi Arabia, and his 
other family members comprise such a large group with special privileges that they 
are like an entire elite social class rather than merely a family. 
 In ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s youth, Arabia was not united. The Hashemite (Hashimite) 
family, the sons of Sharif Husayn of Mecca, came to control the Hijaz, to the west, 
and the al-Rashid family battled the Sa‘uds in their original Najdi homelands. The 
Mubarak family of Kuwait fought the al-Rashid near Ha’il, along with their bedouin 
allies and the al-Sa‘ud, in 1901. The al-Rashid were involved in plans to counterat-
tack Mubarak when the young ‘Abd al-‘Aziz took advantage of their distraction 
to set out for Riyadh with a force of only 40 companions. That force swelled to 
200, then decreased to about 60, who rode off  with him into the Rub‘ al-Khali (the 
Empty Quarter) during Ramadan so that his enemies would think they had disap-
peared. He then rode back to Riyadh and attacked the Rashidi governor at the 
Musmak fortress, which served as the city’s garrison, thereby recapturing Riyadh in 
January 1902. 
 ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (who became known internationally as Ibn Sa‘ud) and his tribal war-
riors, the Ikhwan (literally, “the Brothers” or “Brethren”), then embarked on a series 
of conquests to regain his family’s territory, beginning with the territory of Najd. 
King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn ‘Abd 
al-Rahman Faysal al-Sa‘ud 
in 1949. Founder and ﬁ rst 
king of Saudi Arabia from 
1932–1953, he was also 
known as Ibn Sa‘ud. 
(Library of Congress)

 Chapter 2 History
44 |
He combined military advances with negotiations and also made alliances with key 
tribes and settled clans through marriages. By 1913, Ibn Sa‘ud was able to focus far-
ther east and pushed the Ottomans from al-Hasa Province. He aimed to make himself 
a key ally of the British, something that empire needed in order to carry out their 
military plans in Mesopotamia during World War I. The British signed a treaty of 
friendship with Ibn Sa‘ud on December 26, 1915, recognizing him as the ruler of Najd 
and its dependent territories. The British agreed to protect him and began paying him 
an annual subsidy of £5,000 in gold and money for arms, which he needed badly at 
that time. For his part, Ibn Sa‘ud agreed he would not oppose the British government 
in a war or attack the other Gulf sheikhdoms the British were supporting.  
 Sultan Abdulhamid of the Ottoman Empire had built a railway line into the Hijaz, 
connecting Damascus and Medina, which was inaugurated in that Holy City on Sep-
tember 1, 1908. This had been considered a diffi  cult, and nearly impossible, task, yet 
it began in 1900 and reached Maan in 1904 (Nicholson 2005, 2–46). The railway also 
extended into a Haifa-Dar‘a branch, with additional service to Bosra and Suwaida 
and from Haifa to Acre. The railway began to be a target for the tribes who opposed 
Ottoman control of the Hijaz. The British sought to manipulate these sentiments 
against the Ottomans and supported Sharif Husayn of Mecca in the Arab revolt 
against the Ottomans during World War I. Although ‘Abd al-‘Aziz did not ﬁ ght the 
Ottomans as Sharif Husayn and his son did, neither did he support the Ottoman 
sultan in the war, and he was able to ﬁ ght the al-Rashid clan, who had supported the 
Ottomans. In 1917, the British political emissary Harry St. John Philby arrived in 
Arabia to make certain that Ibn Sa‘ud would not attack Britain’s ally, Sharif Husayn 
of Mecca, and to convince him to attack the  sharif of Ha’il, who was an Ottoman 
ally (Brown 1999, 2–3). 
 At the close of World War I, Ibn Sa‘ud controlled central Arabia, and his advances 
on the al-Rashid at Ha’il resulted in their defeat in 1921. Then, since the war had 
ended, he moved against the Hashemites in the Hijaz. The Ikhwan defeated Sharif 
Husayn’s armies at Turabah, and that battle convinced some in the British govern-
ment that the  sharif was not suffi  ciently strong to be their mainstay. The  sharif , who 
had received a British subsidy during the Arab revolt, was now quite desperate for 
funds and had imposed various unpopular taxes on the Hijazis. On March 5, 1924, 
Sharif Husayn proclaimed that he was the caliph of the Muslims, another unpopular 
move. The Ikhwan were angered by the  sharif ’s claim, and although Ibn Sa‘ud had 
initially cautioned them against marching on the Holy Cities, he decided to attack 
Ta’if. Sharif Husayn’s eldest son abandoned the city on the night of September 4, 
1924 (Lacey 1981, 187); the Ikhwan took over and carried out a terrible massacre. 
Sharif Husayn appealed to the British, but they did not respond. So, the leaders of 
Jeddah proposed that Sharif Husayn would abdicate, and he did so on October 3, 
1924 (Lacey 1981, 189), leaving with a British escort to Aqabah and then to Cyprus. 
 The Ikhwan then moved on to Mecca. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz followed in December. Some 
resistance by Sharif ‘Ali bin Husayn continued, and while the merchants of Jeddah 
were opposed to Sa‘udi rule, they eventually had to accede. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz formed 
a  majlis al-shura , a consultative council, to rule Mecca with him, greatly facilitat-
ing his control over the pilgrimage. Medina then surrendered, and ﬁ nally Jeddah, 

‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Ibn Sa‘ud) and the Forging of Saudi Arabia | 45
CAPTAIN SHAKESPEAR AND IBN SA‘UD’S ARABIA
Captain 
William 
Henry Irvine Shake-
spear (1878–1915), 
a British political 
agent posted in Ku-
wait, was the ﬁ rst 
Briton to meet ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz 
al-Sa‘ud 
and impressed him 
in subsequent meet-
ings as “the greatest 
Englishman he had 
ever known” (Har-
rigan 2002, 20). 
Shakespear 
was 
born in Bombay, 
educated at Sand-
hurst, and served 
in the Devonshire 
Regiment and also 
the Bengal Lancers 
of the Indian Army. 
He had learned Ar-
abic by the time he 
met ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 
and he enjoyed ex-
ploring the country 
and 
photography. 
His photographs of 
Shaykh Mubarak of 
Kuwait and ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz were the ﬁ rst photographic images of the latter. Shakespear argued that 
the British should acknowledge ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud as the ascending force 
in the region, but the British were not at ﬁ rst prepared to do so. As Ibn Sa‘ud 
conquered more territory and drove the Ottomans from the Gulf region, Shake-
spear was authorized to meet with Ibn Sa‘ud ofﬁ cially and discuss a treaty. 
Shakespear then planned a long expedition in Arabia and met with Ibn Sa‘ud 
along his 1,200-mile route in Riyadh. After the onset of World War I, Shake-
spear returned on special assignment to ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and was killed in battle 
by the Shammar ﬁ ghters of Ibn Rashid, who were ﬁ ghting ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and 
his Ikhwan (Harrigan 2002).
Portrait of William Henry Irvine Shakespear. (Royal 
 Geographical Society )

 Chapter 2 History
46 |
whose leaders proposed that ‘Abd al-‘Aziz become the ruler of Hijaz and the Najd 
as a united entity (Lacey 1981, 200). By the 1930s, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz also controlled the 
Asir and Najran regions. Faysal, son of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, had led the challenge against 
Sharif Husayn and was made the governor of the Hijaz. 
 Ibn Sa‘ud faced serious challenges from his own supporters, the Ikhwan warriors, 
who continued to raid where they had opportunities and protested all innovations, 
from the telephone lines to the way that the  hajj  was observed in 1926, when their at-
tacks ended in 40 deaths. When they could not attack and plunder in the Hijaz, they 
returned to Najd and began to raid up into Iraqi territory in 1927. Ibn Sa‘ud had the 
political sense to realize that he must control the Ikhwan, despite their major role in 
his conquest of Arabia. In his attempts to communicate with them, he was stung by 
the contempt of the Ikhwan leaders. He met with one of their leaders in an eff ort to 
reach an agreement but to no avail. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was victorious over the Ikhwan in 
the Battle of Sibillah on March 29, 1929, and then in several more battles. After these 
defeats, the Ikhwan leader, Faysal al-Duwaysh, sought refuge for the women in his 
family, ﬁ rst in Kuwait and then in Iraq. At ﬁ rst, these requests were refused, but then 
H.R.P. Dickson, the British political agent in Kuwait, provided an escort (Powell 
1982, 77). Al-Duwaysh’s life was pardoned by ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, but he died in prison in 
Riyadh. The Ikhwan retreated to their  hudhur , or settlements, in Najd (Lacey 1981; 
Powell 1982, 77). In 1932, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was formally created.  
 After formally announcing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Ibn Sa‘ud faced many 
problems including a revolt in the northern Hijaz in which the Transjordanians and 
Egyptians had a hand, a revolt in Asir, and a border conﬂ ict with Yemen that led to 
war. Most pressing was a ﬁ nancial crisis due indirectly to the worldwide depression, 
which had caused a decrease in pilgrimage revenues (Safran 1985, 60). An American, 
Charles Crane, had off ered Ibn Sa‘ud a free geological survey and visited the King-
dom of Saudi Arabia in 1931. Another invitee, mining engineer Karl Twitchell, noted 
geological signs of oil in 1932. Standard Oil of California (SOCAL) had discovered 
oil in Bahrain, and their geologist, Fred Davies, met with Twitchell. In 1933, SO-
CAL’s lawyer and Saudi Arabia’s ‘Abdullah al-Sulayman, the minister of ﬁ nance, 
began to negotiate an agreement granting rights to explore and develop oil resources 
in return for rents and a loan (Chevron n.d. [ca. 2007]). SOCAL created California 
Arabian Standard Oil Company (CASOC) to carry out the concession granted by 
the king, and CASOC/SOCAL established a base at Jubayl, where they explored the 
Dammam Dome (Lacey 1981, 244 –245). In 1933, SOCAL paid a rent of $35,000, 
plus it off ered loans of $210,000 and $140,000 in the ﬁ rst and second years. Saudi 
Arabian  ‘ulama , religious leaders, bitterly protested Ibn Sa‘ud’s decision to permit 
inﬁ dels into the kingdom, who they believed would corrupt its citizens (Mumayiz 
1963, 229), but Ibn Sa‘ud overruled them. He was able to obtain some $700,000 when 
the war with Yemen was settled, but he still needed funds. 
 When the oil company discovered oil in 1938, Ibn Sa‘ud was able to collect $32 
million (Safran 1985, 61). However, this new source of income as well as the pilgrim-
age was once again impacted when the hostilities of World War II began. The United 
States off ered ﬁ nancial aid at CASOC/SOCAL’s urging, and the British sent food 
shipments. 

‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Ibn Sa‘ud) and the Forging of Saudi Arabia | 47
KINGS OF SAUDI ARABIA
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was created in 1932. Histories of Saudi Arabia 
refer to this period from 1932 as the Third State or the Third Realm, as it was 
preceded by two other periods of al-Sa‘ud dominance. What follows is a list 
of the kings:
* King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Faysal ibn Turki al-Sa‘ud
Born: January 15, 1876 (other sources list 1880)
Died: November 9, 1953
Son of Sara bint Ahmad al-Sudayri
Known as Ibn Sa‘ud
Reigned from 1932 to 1953
* King Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Born: January 12, 1902
Died: February 23, 1969
Became crown prince in 1933
Reigned from 1953 to November 1964, when he was deposed (his brother governed 
for a period in 1962)
* King Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Born: 1903
Died: March 25, 1975
Reigned from 1964 to 1975
* King Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Born: 1912
Died: June 13, 1982
Reigned from 1975 to 1982
* King Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Born: March 16, 1921 (other sources give the year of birth as 1922 or 1923)
Died: August 1, 2005
Son of Hussah bint Ahmad al-Sudayri
Reigned from 1982 to 2005
* King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Born: August 1, 1924
Crown prince from 1982 to 2005
King from 2005 to the present

 Chapter 2 History
48 |
 During World War II, King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz joined the Allied cause, as he had been 
an ally of Great Britain for decades and, thereafter, an ally of the United States. 
Other areas of the Middle East were heavily impacted by the Axis propaganda, 
mainly because of the desire for independence on the part of the Mandate popula-
tions (those ruled under the Treaty of Paris by French or British mandates in Syria, 
Lebanon, Palestine, Iraq, and Transjordan), Egyptians, and other North Africans. 
At the close of the war, oil revenues again accrued, reaching $10 million in 1946, $53 
million in 1948, and $212 million in 1952, but Saudi Arabian debt and budgetary 
problems continued for some time. Ibn Sa‘ud suff ered from painful arthritis, and his 
health declined quickly. 
 Ibn Sa‘ud pursued a greater alliance with the United States for other reasons; 
he distrusted Great Britain, which he believed had encouraged his enemies, the 
Hashemite rulers. He was concerned about the Greater Syria scheme proposed 
by King ‘Abdullah of Transjordan to unite Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, and 
also by the Fertile Crescent plan of Nuri Sa‘id Pasha (prime minister of Iraq), 
wherein Iraq, Syria, Transjordan, and Palestine would unite. He met with President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt on the USS  Quincy  on February 14, 1945, a meeting that 
marked the formal starting point of the long alliance between the United States and 
Saudi Arabia. In that meeting, the Americans had hoped to obtain ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s 
agreement to an increase in Jewish settlement in Palestine, a policy that ruler had 
outspokenly and consistently disputed. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz on the other hand, wanted 
arms and aid from the United States and promises that it would not support either 
Hashemite scheme. 
 On the question of Palestine, Saudi Arabia’s leaders argued for the rights of the 
Palestinians on the basis of self-representation even before Israel’s emergence. Ibn 
Sa‘ud and his sons Faysal and Fahd argued vociferously with U.S. offi  cials on this 
point, but they were confronted with a much stronger American commitment to 
Israel from President Truman’s time on (see Chapter 3, Government and Politics). 
Although Saudi Arabia resisted and fought communism, as did the United States, 
it greatly opposed the creation of the state of Israel in 1948 and what the Saudi 
Arabians considered an unfair American commitment to Israel at the expense of the 
Palestinians. Saudi Arabia shared its view of Israel’s creation and of the need for a 
just solution to the Palestinian refugee problem with other Arab governments. 
 In the post–World War II period, a U.S. military and training mission was launched 
and began to develop the Saudi   Arabian armed forces. This came about via Assistant 
Secretary of State George McGhee’s memorandum of April 1950, which off ered a 
friendship treaty; provided loans and technicians, military aid, and a military train-
ing mission; and included an agreement by which the Americans would lease the 
Dhahran air base. Ibn Sa‘ud did not immediately agree to the Dhahran lease but did 
so in June 18, 1951. 
 ‘Abd al-‘Aziz died in Ta’if on November 9, 1953. His eldest surviving son, Sa‘ud, 
succeeded him as king. Many of the histories of Ibn Sa‘ud focus on his personal cha-
risma, which waned only with his health, and include anecdotes concerning his gen-
erosity and the dependence of a large number of people on his largesse. This personal 
identiﬁ cation of the state with its leader and his own fortunes was a legacy somewhat 

King Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 49
at odds with the development of a government bureaucracy that continued to serve 
and represent the royal family but also a large and growing nation. 
 KING SA‘UD IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ 
 The reign of King Sa’ud was a troubled one. Problems emanated not only from the 
personal failings of Sa‘ud and his excesses but also from his enmeshment in regional 
and international tensions stemming from the rise of Arab nationalism as a response 
to Western colonialism. In addition, the lack of separation between Saudi Arabia’s 
state and its ruler, and between the ﬁ nances of each, was inherited by Sa‘ud, who 
came up against a younger generation determined to create more viable institutions 
for a growing country. As experts have pointed out, Saudi Arabia was reacting in this 
period to new Western policies toward the Middle East in general and to the conﬂ ict 
among Arab and Middle Eastern nations, which Malcolm Kerr (1971) has dubbed 
“the Arab cold war.” 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was born January 12, 1902, and died on February 23, 
1969, serving as king from 1953 until he was formally deposed in 1964. He became 
his father’s heir when his elder brother, Turki (1900–1919), died in the inﬂ uenza 
pandemic of 1918–1919. Following King Sa‘ud’s rule, the order of royal succession 
shifted to a brother-to-brother pattern rather than passing from father to son. 
 In 1952, the year prior to his accession, the Egyptian Free Offi  cers revolted and 
overthrew the Egyptian monarchy, establishing a republic. At ﬁ rst, the Free Offi  cers 
were headed by General Muhammad Naguib, a senior offi  cer, but within two years, 
Colonel Gamal Abd al-Nasser (Jamal ‘abd al-Nasir) bested Naguib. Over the next 
several years, Nasser presented new ideas of populism and Arab solidarity to Egypt 
and the Arab world. If Arab nations united, they could defeat the forces that sought 
to exploit them. Later, he proposed ideals of Arab socialism. To some degree, King 
Sa‘ud was caught up and enamored with the Arab nationalist ideals, or their popular-
ity, although he eventually realized that Nasser’s goals also involved opposition to 
monarchies such as his own. Nasser garnered great disapproval from Great Britain 
because he wanted to liberate Egypt and the entire region from the British strategic 
and economic sphere. Some American, British, and other Western offi  cials also took 
a dim view of Nasser because of his populism and because he obtained weapons and 
support from the Soviet bloc when he could not get them from the West. Nasser’s 
own voice could be heard over Radio Cairo, but his ideas also entered the Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia through foreign educators and workers in Saudi Arabia and through 
the military cooperation established between the two countries. In 1955, an army 
mutiny broke out in Ta’if, and it was suspected that Egypt was involved in some 
way (Lacey 1981, 313). King Sa‘ud crushed the mutineers and set up a Royal Guard 
as well as a force known as the White Army (for their white  thobes [long garments]), 
which became Saudi Arabia’s National Guard. The same year, the U.S. Central 
Intelligence Agency, with some assistance from the Greek shipping tycoon Stavros 
Niarchos, spread news about a Saudi   contract with Aristotle Onassis to build oil 
tankers to be controlled by the Saudi-Arabian Maritime Tanker Company, which 

 Chapter 2 History
50 |
would have taken over shipping from Aramco. International arbitration decided in 
Aramco’s favor. 
 Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal in 1956 and ﬂ ew to consult with King Sa‘ud 
only a few days before Great Britain, France, and Israel launched the Tripartite, or 
Suez, War, against Egypt. Huge crowds greeted Nasser, ﬁ rst at Dhahran and then 
in Riyadh, which concerned King Sa‘ud, as did the ensuing war. The conﬂ ict made 
Nasser even more popular with the Arab masses. Although Sa‘ud supported Nasser, 
he realized the war placed Saudi Arabia’s foreign relations with the West on a tenu-
ous plane. Arab nationalists in Saudi Arabia were critical of the American lease of 
Dhahran’s air base, and Sa‘ud terminated that arrangement. 
 American Point Four economic aid had been extended to certain developing coun-
tries under the 1950 Act for International Development with the intent of discour-
aging communism, or at least encourage neutral or nonaligned development. (The 
Nonaligned Movement of Third World Nations, formed in Belgrade in 1961, which 
called for no binding alliances with Western- or Eastern-bloc nations, was the cre-
ation of Yugoslavian president Josip Tito, Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, 
Egyptian president Nasser, Ghana’s president Kwame Nkrumah, and Indonesian 
president Sukarno. The U.S. government, deeply engaged by that time in the Cold 
War, was actually rather hostile to the Nonaligned Movement, but, at this earlier 
stage, it hoped to bring Middle Eastern countries into its orbit or create neutrality 
suffi  cient to encourage aid proposals that might lead to ﬁ rmer alliances.) Point Four 
aid was implemented through the Technical Cooperation Administration, it brought 
technicians to Saudi Arabia and Saudi Arabian students to the United States. How-
ever, Point Four aid to Saudi Arabia had ceased in 1954. The U.S. Secretary of 
State, John Foster Dulles, had already toured the region, promoting the Northern 
Tier agreement since the Egyptians and Israelis had opposed an Arab regional al-
liance with the United States. Dulles’s goal was also to stave off  Soviet inﬂ uence, 
ideally through strengthening a “northern tier” of anticommunist states—Turkey, 
Iran, Iraq, and Pakistan. He wanted the United States’ Arab allies to join in as well, 
but the United States was not to be a direct member of the alliance, making it more 
problematic for Saudi Arabia. Nasser greatly opposed this proposal (later known 
as the Baghdad Pact and signed by Great Britain, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, and Pakistan 
in 1955). He and King Sa‘ud exerted eff orts to discourage Jordan from signing the 
pact, which angered Dulles. 
 When Great Britain, France, and Israel attacked Egypt in the Suez War of 1956, 
Sa‘ud off ered a loan to Egypt equal to $10 million and severed relations with Great 
Britain and France (Smyth in Metz, ed., 1993, 209). The United States condemned 
the attack on Egypt, even though they were concerned by Nasser’s populism and 
increasing inﬂ uence in the region. 
 Later, after his country’s relations with Egypt had become more tenuous, King 
Sa‘ud agreed to the renewal of the Americans’ lease of the air base at Dhahran in 
a meeting with President Eisenhower in the United States in 1957 (Smyth in Metz, 
ed., 1993, 29). On this ﬁ rst visit of a Sa‘udi   ruler to the United States, Sa‘ud was 
denounced by Mayor Robert F. Wagner of New York for being anti-Catholic and 
anti-Jewish. However, President Eisenhower honored him by meeting him person-

King Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 51
ally on the airﬁ eld and pitching his “Eisenhower Doctrine”—that the king would 
serve as a force of moderation and support American aims in the region. For this, 
King Sa‘ud received an additional $180 million in economic aid. 
 The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia had a long way to go in terms of human develop-
ment. Health, education, and social welfare were all impacted by low literacy rates 
(only 15 percent for men and 2 percent for women by 1970). Public secondary schools 
for males had been set up in 1951. Sa‘ud’s government had established a Ministry of 
Education in 1954, and the ﬁ rst nonreligious college, Riyadh University, was started 
in 1957 and later named King Sa‘ud University. 
 By 1957, Sa‘ud was widely accused of overspending on his palace’s construction, 
payments to the tribes, personal luxuries, and the establishment of his new forces. 
The riyal, Saudi Arabia’s currency, had to be devalued by 1958. The royal family also 
disliked the way he had promoted his own supporters and sons instead of his brothers 
in the royal family. He had made his son Fahd chief of his private offi  ce and by 1957 
made him minister of defense. His son Muhammad was in charge of his bodyguard, 
his son ‘Abdullah headed the royal farms and gardens, his son Musa’id was given 
the command of the royal palace guards, his son Khalid was put at the head of the 
National Guard, and his son Sa‘ad was in charge of the Private Guard. In making 
these appointments, he passed over many more senior qualiﬁ ed family members. 
Sa‘ud and his most powerful and intellectual brother, Faysal, were in disaccord over 
the structure of the government and Faysal’s role. Sa‘ud had done away with the 
offi  ce of prime minister and was acting as his own prime minister, although Faysal 
was deputy prime minister (al-Rasheed 2002, 108; Safran 1985, 91). 
 Along with the ﬁ nancial crisis and concern over Sa‘ud’s impact on succession, 
there was a huge scandal as a result of the king’s falling out with Nasser. In May 1957, 
Saudi Arabian authorities discovered evidence of an assassination plot being planned 
by the Egyptian military attaché in Jeddah. Even though Nasser sent a representative 
who swore that the leader knew nothing of the plot, Sa‘ud planned a counterassas-
sination (Lacey 1981, 317). Syria and Egypt had established a union in 1958 that was 
to last only three years. Colonel Abd al-Hamid Sarraj of Syria revealed in March 
1958 that Sa‘ud had paid for Syrian inﬂ uence within this new government and for 
Sarraj to carry out a coup that was to destroy the union known as the United Arab 
Republic; he was also supposed to arrange Nasser’s assassination. He off ered proof 
in the form of photocopies, checks, and details in a news conference. Nasser began 
blasting the Saudi Arabian government over Radio Cairo. Due to all of the preceding 
problems, King Sa‘ud was forced to turn over foreign, ﬁ nancial, and internal aff airs 
to Faysal by his brothers’ decision, although he remained king. 
 Faysal assumed these responsibilities but faced a ﬁ nancial crisis with only 317 
riyals in available cash, and the National Commercial Bank refused him a loan. He 
did his best to resurrect the government’s ﬁ nances and administration. Still, Sa‘ud 
continued to maneuver in an eff ort to regain his kingly authority. There was also op-
position from a group of young princes headed by Talal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, who had 
insisted on constitutional reforms that Faysal had not enacted, and also from young 
nonroyal reformers. Sa‘ud manipulated this group to support him but then did not 
follow through on reforms. In 1960, the king refused to sign a budget that Faysal 

 Chapter 2 History
52 |
had prepared, and Sa‘ud decided to represent a note that Faysal had written in pro-
test as being his resignation. Faysal’s control over ﬁ nances was given over to Prince 
Talal. Sa‘ud eventually got rid of the liberal princes, and soon after that, Egypt’s 
propaganda against Saudi Arabia (and all monarchies) became even more strident 
with the failure of the United Arab Republic, the union between Egypt and Syria. 
 In this period, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was 
created in 1960. In 1959, the ﬁ rst Arab Petroleum Congress had convened in Cairo. 
Following the Suez Crisis, in February 1959, the oil companies known as the Seven 
Sisters (Standard Oil of New Jersey, later Esso; Royal Dutch Shell; British Petro-
leum, later BP; Standard Oil of New York, later ExxonMobil; Texaco; Gulf Oil; and 
Standard Oil of California) had decided to cut oil prices from the $2.12 per barrel 
they had risen to. No consultation was held with the oil-producing countries whose 
incomes were thus sharply hit. When this scenario repeated itself in 1960, as Esso 
(Standard Oil of New Jersey) decided to cut prices and the rest of the Seven Sisters 
followed suit, the producing nations decided to act. Saudi Arabia’s participation in 
the cartel was approved by Prince Faysal, and the initiative owed much to ‘Abdul-
lah al-Tariki, who became oil minister. Al-Tariki had carefully studied the ways that 
Aramco extracted proﬁ ts in a theoretical 50/50 split, although what the Aramco side 
paid Saudi Arabia was tax deductible for the Americans as a so-called local income 
tax. Al-Tariki traveled to Venezuela to observe a diff erent production model, and he 
urged his government to engage Saudi Arabians at every stage of production, for they 
had been heretofore excluded from management, including the senior level. He and 
the other oil-producing members protested the oil companies’ decision to slash prices 
in 1960 without any consultation with the oil-producing countries. The oil compa-
nies initially refused to deal with OPEC, headed by Fu’ad Rouhani (Lacey 1981, 
328–333). However, the solidarity of the cartel held and eventually empowered the 
member countries. Saudi Arabia’s participation was viewed with nationalist pride. 
 At this still politically delicate stage, one of the previously active liberal princes, Prince 
Talal, defected and caused embarrassment to the al-Sa‘ud when he broadcast his opposi-
tion to his brothers from exile, calling for a constitutional democracy under a monarchy 
in Saudi Arabia. Some of his brothers supported him, but his passport was revoked. 
 In 1962, Faysal formed a cabinet while Sa‘ud was overseas for medical treatment. 
Faysal brought his half brothers and allies, Fahd and Sultan, into the government 
but not the sons of his brother Sa‘ud. He proposed a reform program that included 
a new Basic Law, the abolition of slavery, and the formation of a judicial council. 
There were large numbers of slaves in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states. Accord-
ing to Bernard Lewis (1990) and others, the British had pressed the Ottomans to 
end slavery, and in an 1857  ﬁ rman  (royal decree), the Ottomans had prohibited the 
trade in black slaves (an order to emancipate Christian slaves was issued in 1830), 
excluding the Hijaz from the prohibition. The exception came about due to a revolt 
against the Ottomans that was unleashed when a leader of the ‘ ulama issued a  fatwa 
against the Ottomans for this decree (Lewis 1990, 80–81). It seems curious that many 
of the British sources characterized Arabian slavery as not being linked to production 
(instead, they either attributed it to Islam or attempted to unify descriptions of the 
forms of slavery that provided military personnel [like the  mamalik or Janissaries] 

The Reign of Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 53
along with household and agricultural slavery), yet slaves played a crucial role in date 
and pearl production on the Arabian Peninsula (Hopper 2006, 2010). Abolition came 
in Saudi Arabia just a few weeks after a similar prohibition in Yemen. Faysal paid 
for the manumission of some 4,000 slaves. The various reforms Faysal intended were 
 challenged and took time, and when Sa‘ud returned, he rejected the entire reform 
plan. Nevertheless, Faysal eventually proceeded with these plans with the support of 
U.S. president John F. Kennedy’s administration. 
 A complicating factor was the outbreak of the Yemeni Civil War in northern 
Yemen. The Egyptians supported the republicans against the traditional religious 
leader and monarch of Yemen, the imam, and they made a claim to the Saudi Ara-
bian province of Asir. The republicans had about 30,000 troops, and they countered 
royalist advances by bombing Saudi Arabian territory. The Saudi Arabian strategy 
in this war was in part to involve the Americans and British as opponents of Egypt, 
along with the Jordanians. After the Egyptian bombings, President Kennedy ordered 
U.S. ﬁ ghter planes to ﬂ y over Riyadh and Jeddah. The war continued as Egypt was 
unable to best the royalists, even with a buildup to 40,000 troops. Yet Saudi Arabia 
was equally incapable of ousting the Egyptians and the republicans. 
 Sa‘ud threatened to mobilize the Royal Guard against Faysal in 1963, after Fay-
sal ordered that receptions in Sa‘ud’s honor in the Hijaz be scaled down due to 
cost. Faysal, in turn, ordered that the National Guard be deployed. Senior princes 
demanded compromise; the ‘ ulama were called in and backed Faysal, ordering that 
he should take over power due to Sa‘ud’s poor health. Nonetheless, Faysal agreed 
that Sa‘ud should represent his country and travel to a 1964 Arab summit meeting 
in Cairo. When Sa‘ud returned, he wrote to Faysal demanding that his rights as king 
be restored as his health had improved. However, senior members of the family had 
reached the limits of their patience, and Faysal’s supporters approached the mufti 
of Jeddah and then met with the ‘ ulama . The Jeddah ‘ ulama met with other clerics 
from elsewhere in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, who issued a  fatwa to fully empower 
Prince Faysal to rule and yet retain Sa‘ud as king. King Sa‘ud mobilized his personal 
guard and the Royal Guard, while Faysal ordered the National Guard to surround 
the royal palace. However, the Royal Guard refused to leave. The group of senior 
princes of the al-Sa‘ud, who are known as the  ahl al-hal wa al-‘aqd (the people who 
bind and loose), met and signed a petition that alluded to the  fatwa . However, Sa‘ud 
declined a ceremonial position and was then forced to agree to abdicate on March 
28, 1964. Sa‘ud left Saudi Arabia for Switzerland. He was invited to live in Egypt in 
1966 and died in Athens, Greece, in 1969. 
 THE REIGN OF FAYSAL  IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ
 Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1903–1975), the fourth son of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn 
Sa‘ud, became king on November 2, 1964, after Sa‘ud was ﬁ nally induced to abdi-
cate. Faysal introduced various plans for Saudi Arabia’s economic, social, and indus-
trial development. From the outset of his rule, when Saudi Arabia’s ﬁ nances were still 
limited, revenue rose enormously. During his rule, Saudi Arabia’s oil  revenues grew 

 Chapter 2 History
54 |
from $334 million in 1960 to $22.5 billion in 1974, allowing the king to institute gen-
erous beneﬁ ts to Saudi Arabian citizens, including free medical care and education 
through the postgraduate level. The government was also able to subsidize utilities, 
certain food items, water, and rents (Willbanks 2008; Beling 1980). 
 Faysal began a program to modernize the army and establish a more extensive air 
defense system under his brother Sultan, who became defense minister and minister 
of aviation. His other modernizations and reforms encompassed the educational 
sector, industry, and governmental administration, through the revamping of cen-
tralized planning, utilization of the oil revenues, and the introduction of various 
infrastructures and technologies. Doing so brought about very negative reactions at 
times from the conservative  ‘ulama and equally conservative elements of the popula-
tion.  Conservative is not a suffi  ciently evocative term to convey the mix of former 
Ikhwan, those opposed to Westernizing inﬂ uences,  salaﬁ sts (who call for a return to 
the spirit of the ﬁ rst three generations of Islam), and a more contemporary, ardent, 
and politicized iteration, now dubbed  neosalaﬁ sts . Such elements had protested the 
introduction of the radio under Ibn Sa‘ud, and others were adamant against the es-
tablishment of television, including one of the king’s nephews, Khalid ibn Musa’id 
King Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz, who reigned from 
1964 to 1975. King Faysal 
made many improvements in 
the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment, infrastructure, and 
education. (National 
Archives and Records 
Administration)

The Reign of Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 55
al-Sa‘ud. Khalid was killed in 1966 when, according to some accounts, he and his 
cohorts attacked a television studio or participated in a riot or demonstration (Smyth 
in Metz, ed., 1993). His father claimed he was merely a bystander and asked for 
vengeance against the authority who had killed his son, but Faysal denied it. Prince 
Musa’id bitterly attacked the king, and he and his family left the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia (Powell 1982, 276–277). 
 Under Faysal, spending on education rose to 10 percent of the total budget. He 
increased support to King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz University in Jeddah, established the Uni-
versity of Petroleum and Minerals in Dhahran, and opened and funded vocational 
centers and elementary and secondary schools. Faysal, in support of the initiatives 
of his wife, Iff at al-Thunayan, did a great deal to introduce and expand education 
for women. Because of opposition to female education and any deleterious eff ects it 
might have on women’s morals, the schools were placed under religious supervision 
instead of the education ministry. Conservatives were highly opposed to the educa-
tion of women outside their homes, and even though the monarch and his wife also 
found support for women’s education, they had to accommodate interference by the 
‘ ulama and public opposition. In 1963, strong opposition to the education of girls 
broke out in Buraydah, and forces were sent to dispel it (Lacey 1981, 364; Hamdan 
2005, 48). According to Robert Lacey (1981, 369), the headmistress, installed “by 
force,” had only her own daughter as a pupil in the ﬁ rst year of the school (see Chap-
ter 5, section on education). 
 Security was threatened in the Eastern Province in 1967 by bomb attacks that 
were thought to emanate from an underground political opposition that had taken 
the name the Union of the Arabian Peninsula. Seventeen Yemeni citizens were tried 
and executed in March 1967 on terrorism charges. The Yemeni government and the 
exiled former king Sa‘ud protested these executions (Powell 1982, 278). 
 Following a deadlock at a 1965 conference at Harad in Yemen, hostilities had 
resumed between the Yemeni republicans and the royalists and, therefore, between 
the Egyptian and the Saudi Arabian forces. The Egyptian troops remained in Yemen, 
and this war eff ort was detrimental to Egypt, which was ill prepared for the outbreak 
of war with Israel in 1967; Yemen was even regarded as its Vietnam (Aboul Enein 
2004). King Faysal and President Nasser signed an agreement in Khartoum on Au-
gust 31, 1967, to peacefully resolve the conﬂ ict in Yemen. The settlement involved 
an aid payment to Egypt, whose military infrastructure had been badly damaged 
during the 1967 war. Saudi Arabia, responsible for about £50 million (out of £135 
million), would make payment after Egyptian troops were withdrawn from Yemen 
(Fraser 1980, 115–116). 
 The Saudi Arabian government was also concerned by other leftist movements 
in southern Arabia and border conﬂ icts. Meanwhile, the Egyptians supported 
Yemen nationalists who began a terrorist campaign against the British in Aden 
(later South Yemen) in 1963. The British withdrew in 1967. A new Marxist faction 
of South Yemen’s National Front regime announced the creation of the People’s 
Democratic Republic of Yemen in 1969. The border conﬂ icts with Qatar were 
solved in 1965; conﬂ icts with Iran over rights in the Gulf were concluded in 1968 
in the Continental Shelf Agreement (Smyth in Metz, ed., 1993, 33). A dispute over 

 Chapter 2 History
56 |
the Buraymi Oasis meant that Saudi Arabia did not recognize the formation of the 
United Arab Emirates in 1971. That particular dispute was solved after Faysal’s 
death in 1975. 
 Saudi Arabia supported the Arab states in the Six-Day, or June War of 1967, and 
Faysal was extremely troubled by Israel’s victory and subsequent occupation of the 
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Even before the war, three bombs exploded near 
the U.S. embassy and the U.S. Military Training Mission in Riyadh on June 2 to 
protest U.S. support for Israel, and anti-Israeli and anti-American demonstrations 
were held at Ra’s Tanura  and Dhahran. The Saudi Arabians arrested many protest-
ers and exiled several hundred Palestinians. Sources disagree about Saudi Arabia’s 
stance; some claim that Faysal’s strong statements in support of jihad for the Muslim 
cause in 1967 were simply face-saving rhetoric in the Arab arena (Ciorciari 2005, 
1), whereas others describe the aims of supporting Palestine and yet maintaining as 
amicable relations as possible with the United States as consistent themes in Saudi 
Arabian foreign policy. A short-lived eff ort at an oil boycott following the conﬂ ict 
foreshadowed the far more eff ective eff ort in 1973. 
 In his regional policy, Faysal while still crown prince had supported Nasser’s 
Arabism, but with the increase of Saudi Arabian–Egyptian hostilities, he moved in 
a diff erent direction once he was king, calling on Islamic leaders worldwide to unite. 
His idea of Islamic leadership was almost counterintuitive in an era when socialist 
and leftist philosophies had taken hold in many parts of the Arab world, and it pre-
dated the massive religious revival that began in the mid- to late 1970s. He convened 
an important meeting following widespread Muslim alarm when Michael Dennis 
Rohan, an Australian, set ﬁ re to the al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem in August 1969. 
This galvanized country representatives to meet in Rabat in September 1969 as a 
pan-Islamic body. 
 King Faysal appointed his brother Khalid as crown prince and ﬁ rst deputy prime 
minister. Khalid’s elder brother, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, and other princes 
gave up their claim to succession in order to support this move to stabilize the leader-
ship. However, Khalid was not thought to be politically ambitious, as Faysal himself 
had been under the rule of his brother Sa‘ud. In 1967, Faysal created the position 
of second deputy prime minister for Prince Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, who was the 
minister of the interior, since Faysal needed more assistance than Khalid, who suf-
fered from a heart condition, could provide. Faysal was able to avoid the factional 
schisms that had occurred under King Sa‘ud, but some clashes were still inevitable 
between the two stronger leaders in this triad. When Faysal and Fahd had disputes in 
the aftermath of various unsuccessful plots against the government, Fahd left Saudi 
Arabia for over six months from October 1969 to May 1970. 
 The increasing hostilities in the War of Attrition concerned Saudi Arabia, with 
Israel and Egypt exchanging air strikes. There was a coup in Sudan, a foiled coup 
attempt in Saudi Arabia, and, in Faysal’s view, Arab radicalism was only growing 
stronger. People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY, also known as South 
Yemen) was ideologically opposed to Saudi Arabia, and a radical movement in 
Oman was making headway. Faysal had been arguing that the United States should 
support the United Nations (UN) Resolution 242, which called for Israeli with-

The Reign of Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 57
drawal from the occupied territories of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. But his 
eff orts, and U.S.-Soviet eff orts to reach an agreement, had been rejected by Nasser. 
The United States issued a very similar plan, the Rogers Plan, which Israel rejected. 
Soon after, Nasser called for an Arab summit in Rabat and for the use of an oil 
boycott against the supporters of Israel. Nasser criticized the Saudi Arabian rulers 
for their close relations to the United States (Safran 1985, 140–141). After further 
superpower negotiations, a ceaseﬁ re in the War of Attrition was arranged and went 
into eff ect on August 7, 1970. The next month, Nasser died, and Saudi relations with 
Egypt improved when Anwar al-Sadat became president. 
 King Faysal had established the Central Planning Organization in 1968, and, as 
the Ministry of Planning, it orchestrated the ﬁ rst Five Year Plan and oversaw enor-
mous changes in the economy brought about by oil income. The king had realized 
that the country must modernize, create more infrastructure, and educate its citizens 
so they could be productive rather than relying on the state for income. The plan 
focused on urban areas where more skilled labor was to be found—Riyadh, Jeddah, 
and al-Khobar. The rural population was not greatly aff ected but, after 1973, began 
to migrate to the urban areas (Mackey 1987, 43–44). 
 When the United States strongly supported and assisted Israel in 1973, in the 
next war between Israel and the Arabs, Faysal withdrew Saudi Arabian oil from 
the world markets, with the support of other OPEC nations. This precipitated a 
rise in the price of oil and limited the supplies available to the American and Eu-
ropean markets. Many of the allocations of the ﬁ rst Five Year Plan could not be 
spent, and instead revenues were converted to gold or foreign reserves. With the 
launching of the Second Economic Development Plan in 1975, the country was 
still facing huge challenges with its signiﬁ cant port congestion, underdeveloped 
infrastructure, and citizenry requiring education and job training (Mackey 1987, 
44 –45). 
 Saudi Arabia encountered new currents in regional politics. Following challenges 
to its authority, the Jordanian government battled the Palestinian militias, forcing 
them out in 1969 in what was known as Black September. The Palestinian comman-
dos resolved to continue battling to regain their land, resorting to hijackings and 
hostage seizures in the early 1970s after many had ﬂ ed to Lebanon. This spurred the 
Arab countries to rein them in, which was basically accomplished by 1974. Haﬁ z 
al-Asad assumed power in Syria and ameliorated relations with Saudi Arabia, per-
mitting the repair of the Tapline (the Trans-Arabian Pipeline, the largest oil pipeline 
when it was constructed, which transported Saudi Arabian oil to Sidon, Lebanon, 
was intended to go through Palestine, but once Israel was established, a diff erent 
route went through Jordan and the Golan Heights of Syria; see Chapter 3, Govern-
ment and Politics), ceasing support of revolutionary organizations elsewhere in the 
peninsula, opposing Iraq, and signing a trade and economic treaty with the Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia (Safran 1985, 144). Meanwhile, in July 1972, Sadat ordered the 
21,000 Soviet advisers and military in Egypt to leave and retreated from a planned 
union with Colonel Mu‘ammar Qadhdhaﬁ  of Libya. In addition to strengthening 
its hand vis-à-vis radical forces in the region, Saudi Arabia had become a regional 
and even a world leader when confronting the United States for the ﬁ rst time during 

 Chapter 2 History
58 |
the oil embargo. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia chose to not signiﬁ cantly reduce the 
increase in oil prices set at Tehran. Oil prices would continue to increase, even though 
the country has since deliberately acted to control prices for the beneﬁ t of Western 
economies time and time again. 
 Following a dramatic series of meetings and U.S. and Saudi Arabian counterstate-
ments, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger’s comments that he would not rule out 
the use of military force against oil producers were they to engage in “strangulation” 
were published in  Business Week  in January 1975 (Safran 1985, 174). Arab states 
responded harshly, but, meanwhile, the United States signed a contract to send 60 
F-5E/F ﬁ ghters to Saudi Arabia, and plans to train the Saudi Arabian National 
Guard were undertaken. 
 On March 25, 1975, King Faysal was shot and killed by his nephew, Prince Faysal 
ibn Musa’id, an event that shocked and traumatized the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
Some claimed that the young prince had some involvement in drugs (he was arrested 
when a student in Colorado for selling LSD and hashish), but another common 
explanation in Saudi Arabia was that he sought revenge for the death of his elder 
brother who had been killed by security forces back in 1966. The assassin was found 
guilty and was executed in Riyadh in June 1975. 
 THE REIGN OF KHALID IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ 
 King Khalid, born in 1912, ruled from 1975 until his death in 1982. The collec-
tive leadership of the al-Sa‘ud family resumed under his reign, whereas King Fay-
sal had, for the most part, exercised power far more on his own, while balancing 
diff erent factions within the royal family. Khalid became king immediately after 
Faysal’s death; Fahd was appointed crown prince and ﬁ rst deputy prime minister, 
while Prince ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, the commander of the National Guard, 
became second deputy prime minister. Khalid’s brother, Muhammad, was among 
his key advisers. In the ﬁ rst several years of Khalid’s reign, Saudi Arabia witnessed 
some continuity to the policies set by King Faysal. The Second Economic Plan was 
implemented, although with a much larger and more ambitious scope than the First 
Five-Year Economic Plan. Other elements of policy were responsive to changes in 
regional relations; for instance, Iraq, which Saudi Arabia had viewed with suspicion 
and some animosity in the 1960s and 1970s, due to its regional designs, moderated its 
behavior toward Saudi Arabia to some degree after 1975. On the other hand, during 
Khalid’s rule, the Islamic Revolution in Iran brought in a government that at ﬁ rst 
broadcast its intent to mount challenges to other regimes and that broadcast verbal 
challenges to the Sa‘udi royal family in its role as guardian of the Holy Cities. 
 Saudi Arabia, along with Syria and Egypt, took a role in attempting to intervene 
in the Lebanese Civil War, which had broken out in 1975 and was initially waged 
between the forces of the Lebanese National Movement and the Palestinians versus 
the Lebanese Front, which was made up of Maronite militias including the Phalan-
gists and the National Liberal Party. Following Syria’s military intervention into the 
conﬂ ict to bolster the Christian militias, a peace conference was convened in Riyadh 

The Reign of Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 59
in October 1976. This announced an end to the war, which nevertheless continued 
on until its formal end with the Ta’if Accords (when Lebanese politicians and others 
convened in Saudi Arabia to negotiate and ﬁ nalize the agreement), although ﬁ ghting 
and assassinations continued on informally into the early 1990s. 
 Saudi Arabia remained supportive of the Palestinian cause and was a funder of the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Signiﬁ cantly, the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment had reconciled with President Sadat of Egypt as the leftist, or radical, threats in 
the region appeared to decrease. The Saudi Arabian government supported Egyptian 
participation in peace negotiations so that Israel would return Egyptian and Syrian 
land that had been seized since 1967, including the Sinai Peninsula, and provide 
justice to the Palestinians. Unfortunately, of these goals, only the return of the Sinai 
was agreed to, and, without the threat of the large Egyptian army facing it, Israel 
would not off er the Palestinians anything for many years. Sadat traveled to Israel 
on November 19, 1977, and addressed the Israeli Knesset the next day, declaring 
his intention for peace with that country. The Saudi Arabian government and its 
people were not supportive of a separate peace between Egypt and Israel but had 
rather hoped for terms conducive to a comprehensive peace that were not so limited 
in their prospects for Palestinian sovereignty. On December 5, 1977, Algeria, Iraq, 
Syria, and South Yemen had condemned Sadat’s visit to Israel. The incoming Israeli 
government under Menachem Begin by no means supported any eff orts for Palestin-
ian sovereignty, and Begin had an essentially diff erent approach and demeanor than 
Sadat. President Jimmy Carter was determined to exploit this opportunity for peace, 
and Israel and Egypt accepted the terms of the agreement at Camp David. Saudi Ara-
bia, however, opposed this initiative and severed relations with Egypt following the 
1979 Camp David Accords (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 225). Apparently, Fahd 
was not supportive of the decision to sever relations with Egypt but did not prevail 
in the leadership’s decision on the matter. Saudi Arabian aid to Egypt was cut off , 
the Arab League offi  ces in Cairo were closed, and Gulf tourism to Egypt decreased 
for some years. 
 The Gulf region was impacted by the Islamic Revolution in Iran in 1979. The 
movement against the shah had strengthened in the previous year, and the shah left 
Iran in mid-January 1979. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, an Iranian religious leader 
who had been exiled to Iraq and then France, returned in February, and the shah’s 
government soon collapsed. A group of Khomeini’s followers seized the American 
embassy staff  on November 4, 1979, and held them hostage for more than a year. 
Soon after this, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was shaken by a violent seizure of the 
Masjid al-Haram, the Grand Mosque at Mecca. 
 On November 20, the ﬁ rst day of the Hijrah year 1400, Juhayman ibn Muham-
mad ibn Sayf al-‘Utaybi captured the Grand Mosque with a force of armed followers 
(various sources claim there were anywhere from 200–300 to 1,300–1,500 followers). 
He had planned to seize the king and other royals at prayer, but they were not pres-
ent. Some of the many individuals attending the morning prayers were released, but 
130 were held hostage. Despite a news blackout at the time, quite a few hostages 
have written accounts of the event. Juhayman al-‘Utaybi called for all present to 
recognize his brother-in-law Muhammad al-Qahtani as the Mahdi, the leader who 

 Chapter 2 History
60 |
is supposed to appear prior to the Day of Judgment according to Muslim belief. He 
attacked the al-Sa‘ud family for its corruption and called for an end to foreign inﬂ u-
ence (Mackey 1987, 230–231; Troﬁ mov 2007). Juhayman had been inﬂ uenced by the 
 salaﬁ  movement, al-Jam’a al-Salaﬁ yya al-Muhtasiba, which called for a return to the 
spirit of the righteous ancestors ( salaf ) and rejection of  bid‘a and corruption. There 
have been peaceful  salaﬁ s as well as violent activists; however, Juhayman al-‘Utaybi 
and his ‘Utaybi cohorts (many but not all of the renegades were from this tribe) were 
militant. The incident took everyone by surprise; Crown Prince Fahd was in Tunis, 
and King Khalid appeared utterly shocked. The  ‘ulama  were convened to issue a 
 fatwa permitting force to be used in the sanctuary, because it is forbidden to ﬁ ght in 
a  haram (protected place). A siege began. The rebels were ﬁ nally ousted, and at least 
63 (according to other sources, 68) were executed. The incident deeply troubled the 
nation’s rulers as it highlighted their vulnerabilities. Also, the antiroyalist claims of 
the rebels could be likened to those of the anti-shah Iranians (Smyth in Metz, ed., 
1993, 40) and reminded everyone of the  salaﬁ   Ikhwan’s previously muzzled violence. 
Moreover, Juhayman’s tribe, the ‘Utayba, were a very large group and a source of 
recruits for the National Guard. 
 About two weeks after the siege, Shi‘a riots and demonstrations took place in 
Qatif in the Eastern Province. Many were arrested and some were killed as 20,000 
National Guard troops moved in to deal with these disturbances. In response to 
the charges of unﬁ t government levied by the ‘Utaybi rebels, the Saudi Arabian 
government promised to install a  majlis al-shura , a consultative council (although its 
establishment came much later). Also, the Shi‘a disruptions caused the government 
to acknowledge discrimination and discontent in the eastern provinces and set about 
addressing them (see Chapter 3, Government and Politics). 
 Saudi Arabia’s Shi‘a comprise about 40 percent of the population of al-Sharqi-
yyah, the eastern oil-rich province of the kingdom, and make up 10 to 15 percent 
of the indigenous Saudi Arabian population. The claim of Wahhabi preachers that 
the Shi‘a were renegade-apostates has led to discrimination against them in Saudi 
Arabia, or measures intended to limit public outrage or persecution against them. 
Their public rites were restricted; for example, the tradition of holding a lamenting 
parade on Ashura, which commemorates the death of Husayn, son of ‘Ali, at the 
hands of the Ummayyads, was not permitted (Zuhur 2005, 15). The Shi‘a usually 
repeat the ﬁ nal line of the  adhan , the call to prayer, and other minor diff erences with 
Sunni practice drew the ire of Sunni purists in Saudi Arabia. Shi‘a Saudi Arabian 
were excluded from the military and government service until recently. Yet they have 
been employed by Aramco since its early days in the Eastern Province, and many 
have risen in status through their positions in the company. 
 The Soviet deployment of the 40th Army into Afghanistan took place on Decem-
ber 24, 1979. Saudi Arabia lent its support to an Islamic response to the Soviet inva-
sion, the  mujahidin , whose call for the primacy of jihad in the form of war ﬁ ghting, 
set the stage for Islamist jihadists like Osama bin Laden, who fought in Afghanistan 
and then began plotting against Saudi Arabia and the West. 
 Many observers of Saudi Arabia note that following the takeover of the Grand 
Mosque, stricter measures with respect to religious conservatives were adopted, par-

The Reign of Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz | 61
ticularly restrictions on women. In 1980, an uproar arose when a ﬁ lm about an al-
Sa‘ud family scandal was released in Europe. It covered the execution of Princess 
Mishael in 1977, when she was 19 years old. The princess was the granddaughter of 
Prince Muhammad ibn Abd al-Aziz. She had traveled to Lebanon for her studies 
and fell in love with Khalid Muhallal, nephew of the Saudi Arabian ambassador to 
Lebanon. They returned to Saudi Arabia, continued their relationship, and then at-
tempted to ﬂ ee the country. The princess faked her own death, but they were caught 
at the airport. She admitted to adultery although some accounts claim she need not 
have. According to the royal family, she was executed to demonstrate their honor 
and compliance with Islamic law, but there were complaints that she was shot (not 
an Islamic punishment), while her lover was decapitated. In the aftermath of the 
incident, travel restrictions were imposed on all women (Lacey 1981, 462). A British 
director and reporter, Antony Thomas, made a movie based on these events, entitled 
 Death of a Princess . Once it was screened, the British ambassador to Saudi Arabia 
was recalled, and the Saudi Arabian government pressured then-acting U.S. secre-
tary of state Warren Christopher to cancel broadcasts of the ﬁ lm on PBS. Thomas 
was told by some Saudi Arabians he should never have made the ﬁ lm, but he saw 
that the story had captivated the imagination of many Arabs. Crude pictures of 
dogs were printed in the Saudi Arabian newspapers and labeled as the dirty British 
in response to the controversy over the ﬁ lm, according to Ali al-Ahmed, himself a 
critic of the Sa‘udi   royal family. (Al-Ahmed and Thomas were interviewed in a PBS 
 Frontline retrospective on the impact of  Death of a Princess ; PBS 2005). The Saudi 
Arabians were especially off ended by a scene that showed other princesses picking up 
men, another smear on their cultural code of honor (Lacey 1981, 462–463); this was a 
commonplace circumstance reported to Thomas by a trusted respondent (PBS 2005) 
 In 1980, the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia, pertaining to governance, was created. 
King Khalid presided over other important Arab summits in Ta’if and Mecca and 
the creation of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), made up of the rulers of Bah-
rain, Kuwait, Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and 
the Sultanate of Oman. The GCC was intended to further cooperation and coordi-
nation on security issues, as well as economic and developmental aspects. Security 
experts believe that, in the decades since, the GCC has not developed interoper-
ability as it should have nor met its goal of collective security and that it continues 
to exhibit strong rivalries (Cordesman and Obaid 2004, 1). The GCC countries 
were concerned by Iran’s inﬂ uence or potential strategic threats, not only from 
outside their small countries but also from within them. They often regarded their 
Shi‘a population suspiciously, for instance, in Bahrain, which had a Shi’a majority, 
after the organization Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain was broken up 
by police in 1981. More recently, in the spring of 2011, the Bahraini government 
has claimed that demonstrators for democracy in Bahrain are a pro-Iranian threat, 
which may explain Saudi Arabia’s military support of the Bahraini eff ort to put 
down the demonstrations. 
 Four military cities were constructed with assistance from the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers in the 1970s and 1980s: Khamis Mushayt, Tabuk, Asad Military City at 
al-Kharj, and King Khalid Military City at Batin, which began functioning in 1985. 

 Chapter 2 History
62 |
 In September 1980, Iraq attacked Iran in the opening salvos of the Iran-Iraq 
War. This conﬂ ict shifted to the Gulf by 1986, and Iranian attacks impacted 
Saudi Arabian shipping from 1984 to 1987. Saudi Arabia remained neutral in the 
conﬂ ict but provided ﬁ nancial support to Iraq in loans and grants worth several 
billion dollars, and the Iranians viewed Saudi Arabia’s ﬁ nancial backing of Iraq 
as a basis for hostility. The Iranians also decried the system of monarchy in Saudi 
Arabia, calling it un-Islamic (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 192). Also, the two 
countries conﬂ icted over the numbers and behavior of the Iranian pilgrims on 
the  hajj . More than 400 pilgrims died in 1987 (about two-thirds of them Iranian) 
after Saudi Arabian security forces suppressed a demonstration. As a result, Saudi 
Arabia banned such demonstrations, and Iranians attacked the Saudi Arabian 
embassy and beat several diplomats there, one of whom died (Hooglund in Metz, 
ed., 1993, 217). Other important shifts under King Khalid’s reign were decisions 
to diversify Saudi Arabia’s economy and eff orts to build up industry and also 
agriculture. 
 In August 1981, Crown Prince Fahd proposed an eight-point plan for solving the 
Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict. This was based on Israeli withdrawal to the 1948 boundaries, 
the dismantling of post-1967 Israeli settlements, promises of freedom of worship 
for all religious groups at the holy sites in Israel/Palestine, guarantees of the right of 
return for Palestinians or compensation for those who did not want to return, and 
an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital, with a transitional 
UN authority over the West Bank and the Gaza Strip until that state was declared. 
Some suggest that Fahd’s proposal was aimed at securing the sale of airborne warn-
ing and control systems (AWACS) and F-15s by the United States, which a House 
of Representatives majority and 56 senators had opposed. Certainly the plan was 
unlikely to be accepted by either the United States or Israel (Safran 1985, 332–333), 
but perhaps this interpretation cynically misses the Saudi Arabian   commitment to 
Arab unity that was expressed in the Fahd Plan. 
 On October 6, 1981, an Islamist radical in the Egyptian army, Khalid Islambuli, 
assassinated President Sadat. Those opposed to the Camp David Accords, such as 
Syria, Libya, and the PLO, pressed Egypt to rescind its separate peace with Israel. 
Yet the Saudi Arabian leadership restrained these pressures on the new president of 
Egypt, Hosni Mubarak. 
 King Khalid died on June 14, 1982, after a brief illness and was succeeded by his 
brother Fahd, the crown prince. Fahd had already been responsible for many deci-
sions and had served as minister of education and minister of the interior. 
 SAUDI ARABIA UNDER KING FAHD 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud was king from 1982 until his death in 2005. His half 
brother Crown Prince and First Vice Prime Minister ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-
Sa‘ud served as regent for him from January 1996, when he suff ered a massive stroke, 
until his death. Major decisions were made by a group of senior princes under Fahd’s 
rule, and at least two princes other than ‘Abdullah weighed in signiﬁ cantly: his full 

Saudi Arabia under King Fahd | 63
brothers Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, minister of defense and civil aviation and 
second vice prime minister, and Prince Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, the minister of the 
interior. Fahd’s birth year is given as 1922 or 1923; he was the 11th son of Ibn Sa‘ud 
and the eldest of the Sudayri Seven, as the sons that Hussah bint Ahmad al-Sudayri 
had with King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz are sometimes called (see Chapter 3, Government and 
Politics). Another of his full brothers is Salman bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, the governor of 
Riyadh. Fahd had supported his elder half brother Faysal and had served as the 
minister of education from 1953 to 1960 and the minister of the interior from 1962 to 
1975. He was an active leader in King Khalid’s government and served as a de facto 
prime minister when King Khalid was in poor health. 
 The al-Yamama   arms deal, a huge long-term sale, was concluded in 1985, bringing 
in £43 billion to BAE Systems of the United Kingdom and its partners and providing 
aircraft and weapons to Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia had turned to the United King-
dom for weapons because such a large purchase would likely have been disapproved, 
King Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
al-Sa‘ud photographed 
January 1987. King Fahd 
reigned from 1982 to 2005. 
(Peter Turnley/Corbis)

 Chapter 2 History
64 |
or aircraft sales limited, by the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, due to 
many members’ support for Israel. Margaret Thatcher, the British prime minister, 
had lobbied hard for the deal. BAE Systems was later sued in the United States, and 
the Serious Fraud Offi  ce (SFO) in the United Kingdom launched an investigation 
into corruption and bribery in the deal in 2004, but the SFO dropped the case. The 
High Court ruled against the SFO, but the House of Lords backed the SFO’s decision 
in 2008, arguing that British citizens would be at risk if Saudi Arabia’s cooperation 
in counterterrorism was compromised ( Independent , July 31, 2008). Then in March 
2010, the SFO was barred from dropping the case, following action by two chari-
ties. Meanwhile, BAE agreed to a settlement with the U.S. Department of Justice, 
including a $400 million ﬁ ne for conspiracy to make false statements and payments in 
Saudi Arabia, Hungary, and other countries where it acquired arms sales contracts. 
The SFO dropped a separate case in 2006 that concerned payments made by Prince 
Bandar ( Independent , March 3, 2010). 
 Under King Fahd, Saudi Arabia experienced a drop in oil revenues in 1982 and 
then a steeper drop in 1986. This essentially resulted from overproduction, which had 
impacted the oil market, but the bust would over time yield to another boom in prices. 
 Several technocratic nonroyal reformers earned the wrath of some princes, like 
popular reformer Ghazi al-Ghosaybi, the minister of health, a nonroyal and a poet. 
Prior to his dismissal, al-Ghosaybi published a poem in protest in the newspaper 
 al-Jazirah ; the poem was implicitly directed at the king and began: “Why should I 
go on singing when there are a thousand slanderers and backbiters going between 
you and me” (Mackey 1987, 388; also see Chapter 6, section on literature). Then, 
Ahmad Zaki Yamani, the minister of oil since 1962, who had played a powerful 
role in the 1973 oil embargo, fell from power in 1986. Oil prices had declined, and 
when OPEC met in 1986, Fahd had called for more production and a price of $18 
a barrel, but Yamani had refused. Meanwhile, in 1983, the Saudi Arabian stock 
exchange was created. Foreigners could not invest, except for GCC members after 
1984. 
 In 1982 King Fahd formally adopted the honoriﬁ c title Custodian of the Two 
Holy Mosques, although the Sa‘udi royal family had been exercising this role for 
decades. In the 1980s, perhaps as a response to growing neosalaﬁ sm, or even to the 
attempted takeover at Mecca, stricter Islamic policies were followed. 
 Saudi Arabia continued to support the concepts of Arab unity and Islamic unity 
while still opposing the radicalism it had battled earlier in the century. Therefore, 
the disintegration of Lebanon in its lengthy civil war was of great concern to Saudi 
Arabia, which had now assumed a regional leadership role. In 1981, the Israeli air 
force’s attacks on Beirut killed 300 and injured some 800 people. Philip Habib, work-
ing with Saudi Arabia, managed to forge a deal between Israel and the PLO for a 
ceaseﬁ re (Safran 1985, 331). This did not hold, and in 1982, Israel again invaded the 
country. As Israel began cleansing Beirut of Palestinians, the terrible massacres by 
Christian militias, let into the Palestinian refugee camps, Sabra and Chatilla, by the 
Israeli army, horriﬁ ed the Saudi Arabian public. In 1989, Saudi Arabia hosted the 
surviving politicians of the Lebanese parliament at a summit in Ta’if, where formal 
accords ended the Lebanese Civil War. 

The Gulf War | 65
 THE GULF WAR 
 The Iraqi Republican Guard Forces Command invaded Kuwait on August 2, 1990, 
and Iraq claimed Kuwait as its 19th province. King Fahd agreed to permit U.S. and 
international coalition troops to stage operations from Saudi Arabia. During the 
initial campaign, Operation Desert Shield, forces began to assemble in the kingdom 
to defend the country if necessary and to enforce sanctions against Iraq (Freedman 
and Karsh 1993). The next phase of the engagement, Operation Desert Storm, began 
on January 17, 1991, and lasted for 43 days. During the war, Iraq ﬁ red SCUDS 
(ground-ﬁ red tactical missiles) at Saudi Arabia. After a concentrated air assault, a 
three-pronged ground attack began (initially called Desert Sword, then Desert Sabre), 
and Kuwait was retaken. Whether or not Iraq would really have invaded Saudi Ara-
bia, the threat to the oil ﬁ elds was certainly too great to withstand and the war greatly 
weakened Saddam Hussein. Saudi Arabia provided up to 100,000 personnel, and 
Prince Khalid ibn Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was named commander of the Joint Forces 
(co-commander with U.S. General H. Norman Schwarzkopf ) with the rank of lieu-
tenant general. The Joint Forces consisted of troops from 34 countries, including the 
Arab nations of Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt, Bahrain, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, and 
the United Arab Emirates. During the ground campaign of the war, Prince Kha-
lid commanded the Joint Forces Command North, composed of troops from Syria, 
Egypt, and Saudi Arabia, and the Joint Forces Command East, composed of units 
from the GCC member states. The Gulf War cost Saudi Arabia about $55 billion. 
Troops from the United Kingdom and other Coalition forces gather for review by King Fahd 
of Saudi Arabia during the First Gulf War. (Department of Defense)

 Chapter 2 History
66 |
 REACTIONS TO THE GULF WAR 
 Saudi Arabia was displeased by Yemen’s declared neutrality in the Gulf War and 
quite upset with Jordan. Jordan had close historic and economic ties with Iraq and 
would not join the coalition against Saddam Hussein. Aid was withdrawn from both 
countries following the war. Because the PLO had sided with Saddam Hussein, the 
Saudi Arabian government cut off  relations and aid to the organization, and the 
many thousands of Palestinians who had resided in Kuwait were expelled following 
the Gulf War. 
 Although Saudi Arabians did not support the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, many 
nevertheless opposed the use of Saudi Arabia as a staging ground for Western troops. 
Osama bin Laden, for one, complained vociferously. The Western presence also ag-
gravated the religious police ( mutawa‘in ). These employees and volunteers with the 
Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, the modern-day 
equivalent of the medieval  muhtasib (a state offi  cial who could enforce penalties at 
the level of  ta’zir , the second-most serious class of crimes; see the Glossary), had to 
be reined in by royal edict. Additionally, during the Gulf War, a group of 45 Saudi 
Arabian women staged a protest against the unoffi  cial ban on women’s driving. They 
drove off  together in their vehicles, leaving their male drivers behind. Many were 
ﬁ red from their jobs, and Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn al-Baz, the country’s most senior 
religious offi  cial, issued a  fatwa in response to this polarizing incident. The  fatwa of-
ﬁ cially banned women’s driving. 
 In this period, the sahwa   (Awakening, the local term that reﬂ ected the ongoing 
regionwide Islamic Awakening  movements and activities which some scholars at-
tribute to the Muslim Brotherhood as if the Saudi Arabian Islamists would not have 
become militant without their example (Lacroix, 2011)) preachers Salman al-Awda 
and Safar al-Hawali became increasingly popular for their criticism of the govern-
ment’s alliance with the West. They had become well known through the circulation 
of taped sermons and through live appearances. Shaykh al-Awda hailed from a vil-
lage not far from the city of Buraydah , once a hotbed of Ikhwan activity, where farm-
ers had protested the late delivery of subsidies. He preached about socioeconomic 
ills and decried normalization with Israel (al-Hawali 1991; Fandy 1991, 69 –113). 
Another ﬁ gure, Sa‘id al-Ghamidi, attacked liberals and liberal ideas in Saudi Arabia. 
The government encouraged a countermovement under diff erent preachers such as 
Shaykh Rabi‘ al-Madkhali (Zuhur 2005, 26). 
 A petition submitted to King Fahd in December 1990 called for the long-promised 
establishment of a consultative assembly, the revival of municipal courts, indepen-
dence of the judiciary, equality of the citizenry, greater media freedom, women’s 
participation, and educational reform (Kechichian 2001, 196–197). Some intellectu-
als and university students, attracted by the outspokenness of the Awakening move-
ment, were involved in a diff erent petition, the Letter of Demands, signed by more 
than 400 religious ﬁ gures calling for heightened observance of Islamic mores. These 
two initiatives displayed the highly divided Saudi Arabian society in the post–Gulf 
War period. In 1992, a group of clerics produced a Memorandum of Advice, which 
also called for stricter observance of Islamic law and the cutting off  of Saudi Arabia’s 

Reactions to the Gulf War | 67
relations with Western nations. Senior clerics were asked to decry the Memorandum, 
and al-Baz did so, but seven other senior clerics would not comply. The Awakening 
preachers were arrested and not released until later in the 1990s. In 1993 and 1996, 
two Islamist oppositionist groups emerged and then operated in exile, respectively, 
the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights and the Movement for Islamic 
Reform (Zuhur 2005, 27–28; Teitelbaum 2000, 63–65). 
 At least partly in response, King Fahd proclaimed the Basic System of Govern-
ment and promised to set up the long-awaited Majlis al-Shura, or Consultative 
Council. In 1993, he decreed the formal division of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
into 13 administrative districts, and in December of that year 60 members of the 
Majlis al-Shura and its chairman were appointed by the king. 
 In 1994, uprisings by several thousand protesters against government corruption 
took place in Buraydah  , once again expressing  neosalaﬁ  views. Hundreds or possibly 
thousands were arrested. In that same year, the Saudi Arabian government stripped 
Osama bin Laden of his Saudi Arabian citizenship, and bin Laden relocated his 
operations to the Sudan. A car bombing targeted the facility housing the U.S. Army 
Materiel Command’s Offi  ce of the Program Manager for the Saudi Arabian National 
Guard in Riyadh in 1995. Three of those executed for that crime were “Afghan” or 
“Bosnian” Arabs, identiﬁ ed as such because they had traveled to Afghanistan or 
Bosnia to ﬁ ght, part of the global jihad. Scholars have described the “global jihad” 
as the internationalization of jihad beyond any one single target whether one of the 
“near enemy” (co-opted Muslim rulers) or the “far enemy” (Western opponents of 
Muslims). 
 After King Fahd suff ered a stroke, Crown Prince ‘Abdullah took over the leader-
ship. Fahd later had gallbladder surgery, and ‘Abdullah was increasingly acting as 
regent. Fahd retreated for extended periods to his estate in Marbella, Spain. ‘Abdul-
lah reshaped the cabinet, appointing 15 new members out of 29 cabinet positions, 
many of whom had professional experience (Obaid 2000, 11). 
 In 1996, a massive truck bomb killed 19 Americans and injured 345 at the Khobar 
Towers in Dhahran. A group known as (Saudi Arabian) Hizballah was responsible, 
although the American inquiry and indictment emphasized suspicions of Iran and 
Lebanese Hizballah (one of its members was involved) to a greater degree than 
did the Saudi Arabian government (Clarke 2005; Cordesman 2003, 196–206; Unger 
2004). 
 Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy began to shift. The Taliban seized Kabul, Afghani-
stan, in 1996. In 1997, Saudi Arabia recognized them but, the next year, accused 
the Taliban of providing shelter to Osama bin Laden and broke off  relations with 
the Taliban in 2001. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia achieved a rapprochement with 
Iran after Muhammad Khatami was elected in May 1997. Crown Prince ‘Abdullah 
visited Tehran for the Organization of the Islamic Conference summit, and ﬁ rst 
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, the former Iranian president, and then Khatami visited 
Riyadh. Iran agreed to cooperate with an OPEC production cutback, which greatly 
increased Saudi Arabian revenues (Obaid 2000, 60–61, 80). Domestic reforms also 
continued, with the expansion of the Majlis al-Shura in 1997 to 90 members and then, 
in 2001, to 120 members. 

 Chapter 2 History
68 |
 THE WAR ON TERRORISM AND THE 
GLOBAL WAR ON TERROR 
 On August 7, 1998, bombs hit the American embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, which 
were traced to the far-ﬂ ung al-Qa‘ida network. According to some, it was clear that 
al-Qa’ida had declared war on the United States—if not in this attack, then in the one 
on the USS  Cole in Yemen. But the Saudi Arabian rulers disclaimed  responsibility for 
bin Laden, whom they had stripped of citizenship some years previously. The King-
dom of Saudi Arabia was startled by the news that 15 of the 19 terrorists who hijacked 
American airplanes on September 11, 2001, were Saudi Arabians. The American 
media, authors, and pundits launched attacks on Saudi Arabia’s purported sponsor-
ship of terrorism to an extent never before seen as the Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion (FBI) rounded up Saudi Arabian citizens in the United States (Eilts 2001). Saudi 
Arabians, and indeed most Arabs, were denied visas, and quite a few Saudi Arabians 
who had settled in the United States relocated back to their country. Saudi-bashing 
 continued in a political environment led by U.S. neoconservatives and was matched 
by Saudi Arabian antipathy to American policies. As the United States began to plan 
a war against Iraq, the Saudi Arabian foreign minister said that the kingdom would 
not allow the United States to launch strikes from its soil even if the United Nations 
approved an attack. 
 Beginning in 2003, Saudi Arabia’s citizenry was terriﬁ ed by a wave of vio-
lent attacks within the kingdom, which were attributed to al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-
‘Arabiyyah (al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula, a group separate from, although 
similar in aims, to al-Qa’ida in Afghanistan and Pakistan). A bomb exploded in a 
home in Riyadh on March 18, 2003. This premature explosion led authorities to 
discover an enormous arms stockpile. A gun battle between the police and extrem-
ists took place in Riyadh on May 6, following a raid. Six days later, 12 suicide 
bombers attacked residential compounds in Riyadh on May 12, just prior to a 
planned visit by Secretary of State Colin Powell, killing 35 people, wounding 200, 
and signaling a crisis on Saudi Arabian soil. Many clashes followed, suggesting 
the presence of 10 or more cells of al-Qa’ida ﬁ  jazirat al-‘arabiyyah (al-Qa’ida on 
the Arabian Peninsula). Hideouts were discovered in various parts of the country, 
and the leader of al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula, Yusuf al-‘Uyayri, was killed 
by security forces (Zuhur 2005, 35). Another suicide attack took place at the al-
Muhayya residential compound on November 8, 2003, killing 17. A group or cell 
identiﬁ ed as the Haramayn Brigades began battling security forces (see Chapter 7, 
Contemporary Issues). 
 At the same time, public protests against the Saudi Arabian government grew in 
September and October, resulting in arrests. Yet, in November, the Majlis al-Shura 
obtained greater legislative powers. The struggle between the Saudi Arabian citizenry 
and the government was not the cause of the ongoing reforms; rather, ruler-led, 
not citizen-sparked, reforms have been ongoing. Yet the latter popular movements 
continued and represented two camps—salaﬁ st and Islamist, and liberals, and some 
combinations (Lacroix 2005). 
 The terrorist groups pushed back against the counterterrorism campaign, killing 
some offi  cers in gun battles, others in a car bombing. In May 2004, the Yanbu offi  ces 

The Reign of King ‘Abdullah | 69
of a Swiss company were penetrated by militants, who moved freely around the instal-
lation, killing Westerners. On May 31, gunmen charged into an offi  ce and then through 
a housing compound in al-Khobar, killing 22 foreigners. In June, an Irish cameraman 
for the BBC, Simon Cumbers, was killed in Riyadh, and his colleague, Frank Gardner, 
was seriously wounded. Lone Westerners were attacked in Riyadh. For the ﬁ rst time 
since the drop in oil prices in the 1980s, many foreigners decided to leave the kingdom. 
An American employee of Lockheed Martin, Paul M. Johnson Jr., was beheaded by 
the self-proclaimed Falluja Brigade, of the al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula, hor-
rifying many Saudi Arabian citizens. The police reported that they had killed ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz al-Muqrin, a leader of that group, along with three other leading militants, on 
June 19, 2004, and then off ered a largely unsuccessful amnesty to militants. Another 
group of militants targeted the U.S. consulate in Jeddah, where ﬁ ve staff  and four at-
tackers were killed in December 2004, and more car bombs exploded in Riyadh. 
 Municipal elections were held countrywide from February to April 2005, spark-
ing interest in political participation. Women were not permitted to vote or stand 
for election, and the two most frequent excuses given were (a) that too many women 
lacked identity cards (identity cards were issued in 2001 with a guardian’s permis-
sion; however, many women decline to be photographed) and arrangements had not 
been made for female voting facilities; and (b) that the country was not yet ready for 
their participation as conservative protests against female suff rage might be over-
whelming (Zuhur, Personal Interviews, 2005–2008). The government launched an 
Islamic antiterrorist campaign. The campaign included billboard advertisements, 
poster conferences where religious ﬁ gures argued against militance using arguments 
based on Islamic precepts, and television dramas that addressed the background 
of militance and its presence in local communities. Also, the government began an 
experiment staff ed by psychologists, other social scientists, and religious experts in 
“reeducating” detainees suspected of being linked to the militants. The voluntary 
counseling program was intended to correct wrongful notions of jihad and  takﬁ r (the 
action of declaring a Muslim to be a non-Muslim, or inﬁ del, because of their sins) 
and antipathy to non-Muslims; to repatriate former militants alienated from their 
country, families, or communities; and to provide employment and other support to 
graduates of the program (Zuhur 2010). 
 King Fahd died of pneumonia in Riyadh on August 1, 2005. At the time of his 
death, Fahd was considered one of the richest men in the world, with a personal 
fortune worth more than $20 billion. Fahd was succeeded by his brother, Crown 
Prince ‘Abdullah. 
 THE REIGN OF KING ‘ABDULLAH 
 ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud was born in Riyadh in 1924 and educated at the 
Princes’ School at the royal court. His mother comes from the al-Rashid family of the 
Shammar tribe. He became the mayor of Mecca in 1950, deputy defense minister in 
1963, and the second deputy prime minister in 1975. He was the commander of the 
Saudi Arabian National Guard since 1963. He then became crown prince in 1982; 
the acting ruler of Saudi Arabia from 1995 to 2005 and then became king in 2005. 

 Chapter 2 History
70 |
 King ‘Abdullah led the campaign against the ongoing internal terrorist threat. Soon 
after his brother’s death, clashes with Islamist jihadists occurred in September in Dam-
mam, in which three police and ﬁ ve gunmen were killed. In February 2006, militants 
planned a suicide bomb attack at the oil-processing installation of Abqaiq, but author-
ities stopped them. Further shoot-outs took place, including one in June 2006. After 
months of surveillance, a large-scale plot involving 172 members of seven terror cells 
was disrupted at the end of April 2007. Saudi Arabian offi  cials said these  operatives 
planned to attack military bases and oil reﬁ neries and that some of those arrested had 
been training as pilots in an unspeciﬁ ed “troubled country” (Associated Press, April 
28, 2007). A large-scale plot timed to take place during the 2007  hajj (pilgrimage) 
season in December was also foiled, with arrests made in various Saudi Arabian cities 
( Al-Arabiyya , December 21, 2007;  Arab News , December 23, 2007; Zuhur 2010). 
 By 2008, Saudi Arabian offi  cials estimated that as many as 4,000 persons had been 
questioned and several thousand detained for suspicions of terrorist activity, many of 
whom had returned from jihad campaigns outside of Saudi Arabia. The offi  cials had 
frozen ﬁ nancial transfers to suspicious charities, and they mounted an Internet sur-
veillance and interactive project called the Sakinah (Tranquility) campaign in order 
to ferret out and actively debate Internet recruitment to violence online (Zuhur 2010). 
 In April 2008, another group of militants was captured, and, in July 2009, the 
courts issued verdicts against at least 330 persons on trial for terrorism. In August 
2009, 44 more persons were arrested or detained on terrorism charges. On August 28, 
2009, the deputy minister of the interior, Prince Muhammad ibn Nayif, survived 
a suicide bomber’s attack at his home in Jeddah that killed the bomber, Abdullah 
Hassan al-Asiri. Al-Asiri had previously ﬂ ed to Yemen but then pretended he was 
going to surrender himself to Prince Muhammad. Then, he set off  the PETN (plastic 
explosive) bomb hidden in his underwear (Bergen 2009). In 2009, al-Qa’ida on the 
Arabian Peninsula announced its membership in a new consortium based in Yemen, 
perhaps as a way of maintaining visibility outside of the kingdom. Saudi Arabia has 
supported attacks against al-Qa’ida in Yemen and has also engaged in aerial bomb-
ings against the Houthi movement, a tribal opposition to President Saleh (see Chap-
ter 3, Government and Politics), while allegedly acting against al-Qa’ida. However, 
the Saudi Arabian al-Qa’ida movement is still active, although the media have tended 
to downplay its presence in Saudi Arabia and have focused markedly on the threat 
in Yemen. Violent plots continued to be discovered through 2010. The arrests of 149 
al-Qa’ida suspects in three networks, as well as seizures of arms and $600,000 worth 
of cash, took place in late November 2010 ( Huffi  ngton Post , November 26, 2010). In 
early January 2011, the Saudi Arabian government identiﬁ ed 47 militants it wants 
to arrest, some of whom are in other countries, and sought assistance from Interpol 
( Bloomberg News , January 9, 2011). 
 On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces killed Osama bin Laden in a compound in 
the area of Abbotabad, Pakistan. Although the other al-Qa’ida movements are not 
directly controlled by the original movement, the assassination surely had a symbolic 
eff ect on militants elsewhere, including Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia was thought to 
be part of the security cooperation necessary to locating bin Laden, and the country 
was targeted soon after in attacks by Pakistani Taliban, one of which killed a secu-

The Reign of King ‘Abdullah | 71
rity offi  cial working for the Saudi Arabian embassy in Karachi. On May 5, Khalid 
Hadal al-Qahtani, who was on a list of most-wanted terrorists, surrendered to the 
Saudi Arabian security authorities. On that same day, a U.S. drone airplane killed 
two AQAP members in an attack in southern Yemen that was intended to eliminate 
a Saudi Arabian AQAP leader. 
 Despite the continuing concerns about terrorism, ‘Abdullah has initiated impor-
tant reforms in the kingdom. In 2005, Saudi Arabia joined the World Trade Orga-
nization, which has been opening the country to joint or conglomerate ventures. In 
2007, he ordered changes in the judicial system and stepped in to prevent miscar-
riages of justice in several high-proﬁ le cases, such as that of the rape victim known 
as the Qatif Girl and one in which a father married off  an eight-year-old child whom 
a judge then denied the right to divorce (see Chapter 5, section on women). In that 
same year, ‘Abdullah issued an order barring the religious police from carrying out 
their own detentions. 
 Saudi Arabia’s regional policies have importantly impacted Lebanon and the Pal-
estinians. Former Lebanese prime minister Raﬁ q al-Hariri, who had been close to 
Saudi Arabia’s rulers, was assassinated in 2005. Saudi Arabia backed the political 
party headed by his son Sa‘d al-Hariri, the Future Party, and helped to pressure Syria 
to withdraw from the country. Saudi Arabia was extremely disturbed by the 2006 Is-
raeli war on Lebanon, supposedly directed at Hizballah, and Prince Sa‘ud al-Faysal 
called for the United States to arrange a ceaseﬁ re, an entreaty that was not heeded 
nor supported by U.S. secretary of state Condoleezza Rice, U.S. ambassador to the 
United Nations John Bolton, or President George W. Bush. Saudi Arabia supported 
compromise measures aimed at resolving Lebanese factional disputes (see Chapter 3, 
Government and Politics). However, behind the scenes, it appears that Saudi Arabia 
exerted and called for a great deal of pressure against Hizballah, despite the party’s 
alliance with non-Muslims, that is, General Michel Aoun’s supporters. In 2011, the 
outbreak of protests against the government of Bashar al-Asad has been strongly 
supported by certain Lebanese elements and Syrian expatriates, and Saudi Arabia’s 
generally pro-American, anti-Hizballah policies may be important to both countries. 
 The Saudi Arabian stance on the lengthy division and conﬂ ict between the Pal-
estinian parties Hamas and Fatah has diff ered from the U.S. position. The Saudi 
Arabian rulers invited both Palestinian parties to Mecca to establish an agreement 
after fratricidal ﬁ ghting broke out. The agreement unfortunately did not solve the 
conﬂ ict, in part because Israel and the United States refused to accept the legitimacy 
of the elected Hamas government and encouraged, or even armed, Fatah and other 
elements against Hamas. The Saudi Arabian   position has been that the Palestinians, 
like the Lebanese, must achieve a national unity government. An agreement was 
forged between the two groups in the spring of 2011, encouraged by the army lead-
ership of the new Egyptian government, and many Saudi Arabians approve of this 
advent (although Israel and the United States have threatened Fatah that it must not 
continue its hard-won alliance with Hamas). 
 Under ‘Abdullah, Saudi Arabia has continued to strengthen its relationship with 
other Muslim nations and its support of Islamic causes. While the West has critiqued 
Saudi Arabia for spreading terrorism through bolstering Islamic identity (Hanley 

 Chapter 2 History
72 |
2003) or being a “problematic ally to the U.S. in the war on extremism” (National 
Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States 2004), the Saudi Arabian 
view is that educational, developmental, and peaceful aspects of Islamic alliances 
are possible and positive and that it has fully cooperated in suppressing the spread 
of terrorism. While relations with the United States have greatly improved since the 
attacks of September 11, the two countries did not see eye to eye on U.S. aims and 
tactics in Iraq or its stance toward Iran. They had strongly hoped President Barack 
Obama would recast these aspects of U.S. foreign policy as suggested during his 
political campaign, but some were dubious about the U.S. withdrawal from Iraq 
because of the potential for chaos there. However, the United States maintains a very 
strong proﬁ le in Iraq, and many Saudi Arabians (not necessarily the government) 
will also be relieved if a withdrawal with a similar continuing presence is arranged 
in Afghanistan. 
 Saudi Arabia has upheld goals for Saudization of the workforce throughout its 
economic planning. Nonetheless, a sizable foreign workforce remains in Saudi Ara-
bia, made up of Asians, Westerners, and Arabs, including about a million Egyptians. 
Numerous Asian world nationals have come from Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, 
Nepal, the Philippines, and elsewhere. International bodies have voiced consider-
able concern regarding the treatment of foreign workers in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia. The aim of Saudization is to educate and prepare Saudi Arabian employees 
and professionals to be employed in the place of foreign workers. However, foreign 
non-Western workers are far cheaper to house and less likely to demand higher 
incomes, due to the sponsorship system and the depressed labor conditions in their 
own countries. Overall, this situation and its defects remain an area for reform by 
King ‘Abdullah’s government. 
 ‘Abdullah’s own administration highlighted four main areas of accomplishment: 
(1) a stress on educational reform and the establishment of many universities; (2) 
his eff orts on behalf of Arab-Israeli peace, beginning with the Arab Peace Initiative, 
which he announced in March 2002, calling for a Palestinian state with the return of 
pre-1967 territory and eff orts to end inter-Palestinian strife as in the Hamas-Fatah 
agreement forged in Saudi Arabia in 2007, which unfortunately broke down when 
Hamas learned that a Fatah uprising was to be launched against them in Gaza; 
(3) economic development, the achievement of certain milestones in Saudization 
( jobs now acquired by Saudi Arabians), and the building of six economic cities; and 
(4) the fostering of dialogue. King ‘Abdullah has called for dialogue among Saudi 
Arabians as during the municipal elections, between Muslim religious sects, and 
concerning the issue of women, and with representatives of Christianity, Buddhism, 
Islam, and Judaism in an International Conference for Dialogue organized by the 
Muslim World League at the king’s initiative from July 16–18, 2008, in Madrid, 
Spain ( Ekklesia , July 17, 2008;  Sharq al-Awsat , July 22, 2008). In 2009, he inaugu-
rated the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology at Thuwal, about 
80 kilometers (approximately 50 miles) north of Jeddah. In February 2009, King 
‘Abdullah appointed the ﬁ rst woman cabinet member: a woman deputy minister of 
girl’s education, Norah al-Fayez . He dismissed the head of the Commission for the 

| 73
References
Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, known as the  mutawa‘in , and also ﬁ red 
the high-ranking judge Saleh al-Luhaydan, who had declared it  halal (Islamically 
permitted) to kill the owners of television programs whose content was not Islamic. 
Supporters believe these actions conﬁ rm Abdullah’s reforming mission, yet detrac-
tors were still critical (Jones 2009). 
 In November 2009, Saudi Arabian troops moved in to enforce a buff er zone in 
northern Yemen after a series of clashes with Yemeni groups. The Yemeni  government 
was cooperating with the United States, and apparently with the Saudi Arabian 
government, but had not defeated the Houthi rebels or the AQAP branch operat-
ing in Yemen with some coordination with the Saudi Arabia–based AQAP groups, 
as explained earlier (see also Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). With the release 
of classiﬁ ed embassy reports through Wikileaks, certain stances of the Saudi Ara-
bian, American, and Yemeni governments became public knowledge. For instance, 
Americans were conducting the bombings in Yemen, instead of the Yemeni air force 
(with coordination and approval from Saudi Arabia) but the Yemeni government 
publicly lied about this; and that the Saudi Arabian leadership had been extremely 
concerned by and hostile to Iran’s acquisition of nuclear technology despite vari-
ous conciliatory statements to the contrary by the Saudi Arabian Foreign Ministry. 
Overall, these disclosures underscored the close alliance between Saudi Arabia and 
the United States but also points of tension coming from diff ering prioritizations of 
national security. 
 At the time of writing, a wave of political oppositions has swept the Arab world 
in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Bahrain, Yemen, and Oman, and also in Morocco, 
Jordan, and to a much lesser degree Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia’s policies toward 
some of these countries will be aff ected, and it has witnessed large demonstrations 
in its eastern cities. Many observers believed that the huge package of cash grants, 
loans, raises, apartments, and reforms announced by King ‘Abdullah in mid-March 
2011 was intended to stave off  discontent in Saudi Arabia. The creation of 60,000 
new jobs in the security sector also indicates concern over political stability. Perhaps 
the potential for popular revolutions elsewhere will hasten the speed of political and 
social transformation in Saudi Arabia. For now, the royal family remains ﬁ rmly in 
control and a buff er between the more conservative elements of the population and 
those who would welcome swifter and more substantive reforms. 
 REFERENCES 
 Aboul-Enein, Youssef. “The Egyptian-Yemen War: Egyptian Perspectives on Guerilla 
Warfare.”  Infantry Magazine , January–February 2004. http://ﬁ ndarticles.com/p/articles/
mi_m0IAV/is_1_93/ai_n6123802/?tag=content;col1 
 Aboul-Enein, Youssef, and Sherifa Zuhur.  Islamic Rulings on Warfare . Carlisle, PA: Strategic 
Studies Institute, 2004. 
 al-Ansary, Abd al-Rahman.  Qaryat al-Fau: A Portrait of Pre-Islamic Civilization in Saudi 
Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Riyadh University Press, 1982. 

 Chapter 2 History
74 |
 Armstrong, H. C.  Lord of Arabia . London: Arthur Barker, 1934. 
 al-Askar, Abdullah.  Al-Yamama in the Early Islamic Era . Reading, UK: Ithaca Press, in 
association with the King Abdul Aziz Foundation for Research and Archives, KSA, 
2002. 
 Ayoub, Mahmoud.  The Qur’an and Its Interpreters: The House of Imran . Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1992. 
 Beling, William A., ed.  King Faisal and the Modernization of Saudi Arabia . Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1980. 
 Bergen, Peter. “Similar Explosive on Plane Used in Saudi Attack.”  CNN.com , December 27, 
2009. 
 Bornstein-Makovetsky, Leah (based on Braslavi, Joseph, from the 1st edition). “Khaybar.” 
In  Encyclopedia Judaica , 2nd ed., editor-in-chief, Fred Sko. Macmillan, Gale Group , 2008. 
 Bowersock, G. W. “The Arabs before Islam.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of 
Renaissance , edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 17–34. 
 Brown, Anthony Cave.  Oil, God, and Gold: The Story of Aramco and the Saudi Kings . Boston: 
Houghton Miffl  in, 1999. 
 Al-Bukhari (Muhammad ibn Isma‘il ibn Ibrahim ibn al-Mughira ibn Barizbah al-Bukhari). 
 Sahih Bukhari . Translated by M. Muhsin Khan. Vol. 5, Book 59 (Military Expeditions Led 
by the Prophet), nos. 285–749. Available online by the University of Southern California, 
Center for Muslim Jewish Engagement, 2007. http://www.usc.edu/schools/college/crcc/en-
gagement/resources/texts/muslim/hadith/bukhari/059.sbt.html 
 Chevron. “Chevron and Saudi Arabia/Chevron wa al-Mamlakah al-‘Arabiyyah al-
Sa‘udiyyah.” Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Arabian Chevron, n.d. [ca. 2007]. 
 Ciorciari, John D. “Saudi-U.S. Alignment after the Six Day War.”  Middle East Review of In-
ternational Aff airs 9, no. 2 (June 2005). http://meria.idc.ac.il/journal/2005/issue2/jv9no2a1.
html 
 Clarke, Richard. “Interview with Richard Clarke.” “The Man Who Knew.” Produced and 
directed by Michael Kirk.  Frontline . Public Broadcasting Service, March 20, 2002. http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/knew/interviews/clarke.html  
 Commins, David Dean.  The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Nawaf Obaid.  Saudi National Security: Military and Security 
Services—Challenges and Developments . Full Report. Washington, DC: Center for Strate-
gic and International Studies, Draft, September 29, 2004. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia Enters the Twenty-First Century: The Political, Foreign 
Policy, Economic, and Energy Dimensions . London: Center for Strategic and International 
Studies; Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 de Corancez, Louis Alexandre Olivier.  The History of the Wahabis from Their Origin until the 
End of 1809 . Translated by Eric Tabet. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1995. 
 De Gaury, Gerald.  Arabia Felix . London: George Harrap, 1947. 
 Delong-Bas, Natana J.  Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad . Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 Eilts, Hermann F. “U.S.-Saudi Relations after the September 11 Debacle.”  American Diplo-
macy , November 22, 2001. 

| 75
 Ekklesia . “Madrid Inter-Faith Summit Highlights Global Problems and Possibilities.” July 17, 
2008. 
 Facey, William.  Dir’iyyah and the First Saudi State . London: Stacey International, 1997. 
 Fandy, Mamoun. “Strategic Dimensions of the Interfaith Dialogue.”  Al-Sharq al-Awsat , 
July 22, 2008. http://www.aawsat.com/english/news.asp?section=2&id=13477 
 Fandy, Mamoun.  Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent . New York: Palgrave, 1991. 
 Farsy, Fouad.  Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques: King Fahd bin Abdul Aziz . New York: 
Knight Communications, 2001. 
 Fraser, T. G.  The Middle East 1914 –1979 . London: Edward Arnold, 1980. Contains a reprint-
ing of the Resolutions of the Khartoum Conference, September 1, 1967, 115–116. 
 Freedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh.  The Gulf Conﬂ ict, 1990–1991: Diplomacy and War 
in the New World Order . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993. 
 Guillaume, A.  The Life of Mohammed: A Translation of Ibn Ishaq’s Sirat Rasul Allah . Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press 1955; reissued Pakistan, 1967. 
 Hamdan, Amani. “Women and Education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges and Achievements.” 
 International Education Journal 6, no. 1 (2005), 42–64. 
 Hanley, Delinda. “Saudi Bashing: Who’s behind It and Why.”  Washington Report on Middle 
East Aff airs , March 2003, 20–21. 
 Hawali, Safar al-.  Haqa’iq hawl ‘Azmat al-Khalij . Cairo: Dar Makka al-Mukarrama, 1991. 
 Harrigan, Peter. “New Pieces of Mada’in Saleh’s Puzzle.”  Saudi Aramco World 58, no. 4 (July/
August 2007), 14 –23. 
 Henderson, Simon.  After King Fahd: Succession in Saudi Arabia . Washington, DC: Washing-
ton Institute for Near East Policy, 1994. 
 Hjelm, Ingrid. “The Assyrian Evidence: A Reply to Salibi’s Questions Regarding Assyrian 
Sources for Their Campaigns in Palestine and the Existence of a Bît Humria in Palestine 
in the Iron II.”  Scandinavian Journal of the Old Testament 23, no. 1 (May 2009), 7–22. 
 Hodgson, Marshall.  The Venture of Islam: The Classical Age of Islam . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1974. 
 Holden, David, and Richard Johns.  The House of Saud . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Win-
ston, 1982. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “Pearls, Globalization and the African Diaspora in the Arabian Gulf in 
the Age of Empire.” Paper presented at the 124th Annual Meeting of the American Histori-
cal Association, San Diego, January 9, 2010. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “The African Presence in Arabia: Slavery, the World Economy, and the 
African Diaspora in Eastern Arabia, 1840–1940.” PhD diss., University of California, Los 
Angeles, 2006. 
 Hoyland, Robert.  Arabia and the Arabs: From the Bronze Age to the Coming of Islam . London 
and New York: Routledge, 2001. 
 Ibn Bishr, ‘Uthman.  ‘Unwan al-majd ﬁ  tarikh Najd . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Maktabah al-
Riyadh al-Hadithah, n.d. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Rawdat al-afkar wa al-afham li-murtad hal al-imam wa-ta ‘ dad ghaza-
wat dhawi al-Islam . Riyadh, 1381h. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Tarikh Najd . Cairo, 1961. 
References

 Chapter 2 History
76 |
 Ibn Ishaq.  The Life of Muhammad, Apostle of Allah . Translated by Edward Rahatsek. 
Abridged and introduced by Michael Edwards. London: The Folio Society, 1964. 
 Ibn Ishaq.  al-Sira al-nabawiyya . Edited by Ahmad Farid al-Mizyadi. 2 vols. 2nd ed. Beirut: 
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2009. 
 Ibn Ishaq.  Sirat Rasul Allah li-Ibn Ishaq/Ibn Hisham: al-fatrah al-Makkiyah: tahlil qaqdi lil-
nass. Edited by Mahmud Ali Murad. Dar al-Hilal, 2000 . 
 Ibrahim, Mahmood. “Social and Economic Conditions in Pre-Islamic Mecca.”  International 
Journal of Middle East Studies 14, no. 3 (1982), 343–358. 
 Jones, Toby. “Saudi Arabia’s Silent Spring.”  Foreign Policy , February 2009. http://www.
foreignpolicy.com/story/cms.php?story_id=4718 
 al-Juhany, Uwaidah M.  Najd before the Salaﬁ  Reform Movement: Social, Religious and Politi-
cal Conditions in the Three Centuries Preceding the Rise of the Saudi State . Reading, UK: 
Ithaca, 2002. 
 Kechichian, Joseph.  Succession in Saudi Arabia . New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
 Kerr, Malcolm.  The Arab Cold War: Gamal Abd al-Nasir and His Rivals 1958–1970 . London: 
Oxford University Press, 1971. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “Regulating Arab Politics (Part I): The War of the Summits.”  Tel Aviv 
Notes , March 26, 2009. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle for 
Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . London: Hutchinson, 1981. 
Lacroix, Stéphane. Awakening Islam. Translated by George Holoch. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 2011.
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Islamo-Liberal Politics in Saudi Arabia.” In  Saudi Arabia in the Balance , 
edited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 2005, 35–56. 
 Lewis, Bernard.  Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry . New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1990. 
 Lings, Martin.  Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources . Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions International, 1983. 
 Mackey, Sandra.  The Saudis: Inside the Desert Kingdom . New York: New American Library, 
1987. 
 al-Mumayiz, Amin.  Al-Mamlakah al- ‘ Arabiyyah kama ‘ ariftuha: Mudhakkirat diblumasiyyah. 
Beirut, Lebanon, 1963. 
 National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States. “Executive Summary.” In 
 The 9/11 Commission Report.  National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United 
States, 2004. http://www.9 11commission.gov/report/911Report_Exec.htm 
 Nicholson, James.  The Hejaz Railway . London: Stacey International; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: 
Al-Turath, 2005. 
 Obaid, Nawaf E.  The Oil Kingdom at 100: Petroleum Policymaking in Saudi Arabia . Washing-
ton, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 Philby, H. St. J. B.  Arabian Jubilee . London: Robert Hale, 1952. 
 Pirenne, J.  A la découverte de l’Arabie . Paris: Le livre contemporaine, 1958. 

| 77
 Powell, William.  Saudi Arabia and Its Royal Family . Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart, 1982. 
 Public Broadcasting Service. “2005 Update: Death of a Princess: Interview with Ali al-Ahmed” 
and “Interview with Antony Thomas.” Producers, Jim Gilmore and ?Greg Barke; associate 
producer, Catherine Wright; editor, Shady Hartshorne.  Frontline , April 19, 2005. http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/princess/interviews/ 
 Ramadan, Tariq.  In the Footsteps of the Prophet . New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 
 al-Rasheed, Madawi. “Saudi Arabia and the Palestine War: Beyond Offi  cial History.” In  The 
War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948 War , edited by Eugene Rogan and Avi 
Shlaim. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 228–247. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi.  A History of Saudi Arabia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2002. 
 Rentz, George, and William Facey.  The Birth of the Islamic Reform Movement in Saudi Ara-
bia: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab 1703/4 –1792 and the Beginning of Unitarian Empire in 
Saudi Arabia . London: Arabian Publishers, 2004. 
 Ruedy, John. “Philip the Arab.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renaissance , 
edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 42–44. 
 Sabini, John.  Armies in the Sand: The Struggle for Mecca . London: Thames and Hudson, 
1981. 
 Safran, Nadav.  Saudi Arabia: The Ceaseless Quest for Security . Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press, 1985. 
 Salibi, Kamal.  Who Was Jesus? Conspiracy in Jerusalem. London: Tauris Parke, 2007. 
 Salibi, Kamal.  The Bible Came from Arabia . London: Jonathan Cape, 1985. 
 Smyth, William. “The Historical Setting.” In  Saudi Arabia: A Country Study , edited by Helen 
Chapin Metz. Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1993. 
 Teitelbaum, Joshua.  Holier Than Thou: Saudi Arabia’s Islamic Opposition. Washington, DC: 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 Al-Tihami, Nuqra. “Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab and His Call for Monotheism.” In  A 
History of the Arabian Peninsula , edited by al-Fahd Semmari and translated by S. Jayyusi. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010, 91–104. 
 Troﬁ mov, Yaroslav.  The Siege of Mecca: The Forgotten Uprising in Islam’s Holiest Shrine and 
the Birth of Al Qa’ida . New York: Random House, 2007. 
 Unger, Craig.  House of Bush, House of Saud: The Secret Relationship between the World’s Two 
Most Powerful Dynasties . New York: Scribner, 2004. 
 Van der Meulen, Daniel.  The Wells of Ibn Saud . New York: Praeger, 1957. 
 Vassiliev, Alexei.  The History of Saudi Arabia . London: Saqi Books, 1998. 
 Voll, John. “Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi and Muhammad b Abd al-Wahhab.”  Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies 38 (1975), 32–39. 
 Willbanks, James H. “Faysal, King of Saudi Arabia.” In  The Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Con-
ﬂ ict , edited by Spencer Tucker. 4 vols. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2008, Vol. 2, 435–436. 
 Wynbrandt, James.  A Brief History of Saudi Arabia . New York: Facts on File, 2004. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Radicalization and Deradicalization in Saudi Arabia.” In  Home-Grown Ter-
rorism: Understanding and Addressing the Root Causes of Radicalisation among Groups 
References

 Chapter 2 History
78 |
with an Immigrant Heritage in Europe , edited by Thomas M. Pick, Anne Speckhard, and 
Beatrice Jacuch. Amsterdam: IOS, with NATO Public Diplomacy Division, 2010, 74 –98. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. Personal interviews conducted in Riyadh, Diriyyah  , Jeddah, London, and 
Washington, DC, 2005–2008. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Saudi Arabia, Islamic Threat, Political Reform and the Global War on Terror . 
Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, 2005. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Arabs and Arab Culture.” In  Nazar, Photography and Visual Culture of the 
Arab World , edited by Wim Melis. Leeuwarden, the Netherlands: Stichting Fotograﬁ e 
Noorderlicht, 2004, 22–24 in English and 14 –16 in Arabic.   

79
 CHAPTER 3 
 Government and Politics 
 The Saudi Arabian government is a dynastic and hereditary monarchy headed by the 
al-Sa‘ud family. Sources critical of the kingdom claim it is an absolute monarchy be-
cause political parties are not permitted and it lacks an elected legislative body. Oth-
ers contend that the king’s power is limited, and the government relies on the creation 
of consensus, “not authoritarianism,” and on “pragmatism, rather than ideology” 
(Cordesman 2003, 132). Under the ﬁ rst three kings since the modern nation’s founda-
tion (‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, and Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz), 
ultimate power was wielded by the ruler and a group of senior princes, who weighed 
in on, or initiated, action. An informal structure, the  ahl al-hal wa-l- ‘ aqd , composed 
of the senior princes of the diff erent branches of the al-Sa‘ud family, sometimes met 
as a larger council, as they did during the crisis of 1964 (Lacey 1981, 354). This type of 
decision making still functions, but all areas of government have expanded, and the 
matter of succession was regulated and delegated to a new body, the Bay‘ah, or Al-
legiance, Council. Even with the rise of “royal technocrats”—junior princes serving 
in government and nonroyal professional advisers—Gerd Nonneman (2005, 337), a 
scholar of Saudi Arabia, believes that the senior royal princes exercise the strongest 
decision-making role in Saudi Arabia, including that of the king. 
 Since the creation of the Majlis al-Shura, the Consultative Council, the govern-
ment may be characterized as a consultative monarchy.  Shura (consultation) is an Is-
lamic requirement of government; it is also an Arab and bedouin tradition. Through 
consultation, the ruler better serves the ruled. Many key governmental positions are 
held by members of the royal family, and a primary root of political and governmen-
tal actions is to ensure the continuing primacy of the royal family. 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
80 |
 Prominent advisers to the king have offi  ces in the Royal Diwan (the King’s Court), 
as does the king. The Council of Ministers is the principal executive structure of 
government, advising the king, who must approve its decisions. He is also advised 
by the Majlis al-Shura. This body existed early in the modern state’s history and was 
revived under King Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, who also decreed a Majlis al-Shura law 
(08 27, 1412 h .) The Majlis al-Shura was expanded under King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz after 2005, and it includes a wide range of advisers and opinions. 
 Saudi Arabia proclaims it is governed by the Qur’an and the sunna  , or tradition 
of the Prophet Muhammad. The kingdom observes Islamic law. Saudi Arabia does 
not have a constitution per se, although it possesses a Basic Law. King Fahd promul-
gated the Basic Law following the First Gulf War in 1992. Consisting of nine chapters 
and 83 articles, it is similar to a constitution in that it sets out basic principles of 
government and explains the duties and rights of various bodies and of the state and 
its citizens. The Basic Law is constructed so as not to violate  shari ‘ ah , as do the man-
made laws of other Muslim states, according to the  salaﬁ yya (religious purists who 
call for a return to the spirit of the ﬁ rst three generations of Islam). The Basic Law 
explains that the two offi  cial holidays of Saudi Arabia are the religious feasts—the 
‘Id al-Fitr  , which concludes Ramadan, and the ‘Id al-Adha, the feast of the sacriﬁ ce. 
In addition, Saudi National Day is held annually. Because the kingdom follows the 
Islamic lunar calendar, which moves backward 10 days each year, this holiday was 
held on September 23 in 2010. 
 The Basic Law has been criticized by external observers because it does not grant 
key rights of individuals such as those guaranteed in the U.S. Constitution—rights to 
belief, expression, assembly, or political participation (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 
193). The law nevertheless issues various important guarantees to its citizens in the 
chapter “Rights and Duties”: 
 Article 26: 
 The State shall protect human rights in accordance with Islamic Shari‘ah. 
 Article 27: 
 The State shall guarantee the right of its citizens and their families in an emer-
gency or in case of disease, disability and old age. Likewise it shall support the 
social security system and encourage individuals and institutions to contribute to 
charitable pursuits. 
 Article 28: 
 The State shall provide job opportunities to all able-bodied people and shall enact 
laws to protect both the employee and the employer. 
 Article 29: 
 The State shall foster sciences, arts, and culture. It shall encourage scientiﬁ c re-
search, shall preserve Arab and Islamic heritage and shall contribute to Arab, 
Islamic and human civilization. 

The King | 81
 Article 30: 
 The State shall provide public education and shall commit itself to the eradication 
of illiteracy. 
 Article 31: 
 The State shall be solicitous for promoting public health and shall provide medical 
care to every citizen. 
 Article 36: 
 The State shall ensure the security of all its citizens and expatriates living within 
its domains. No individual shall be detained, imprisoned or have his actions re-
stricted except under the provisions of the law. 
 Article 37: 
 Houses are inviolable. They shall not be entered without the permission of their 
owners, nor shall they be searched except in cases speciﬁ ed by the law. (Basic Law 
1992; SAMIRAD 2010) 
 These passages serve as a vital covenant between the state and its people. 
 Saudi Arabian governance was nearly synonymous with the ﬁ rst king and his ad-
visers. This lack of structure and personal politics led to a dissolute and uncontrolled 
period in the 1940s, when overspending was rampant, according to the ﬁ rst American 
ambassador, J. Rives Childs (Childs 1969, 156, cited in Lippman 2004, 102). Thanks 
to the oil boom in the 1970s, a diff erent type of governmental dilemma emerged, 
as foreign entrepreneurs rushed to the kingdom, sometimes resulting in corruption 
or questionable developmental projects. Since then, the government has continued 
planning public policy and development and adjusting its goals as necessary. 
 THE KING 
 Saudi Arabia’s government is the administration and structure that serves and pre-
serves the Saudi Arabian citizenry and also the al-Sa‘ud family’s authority. The le-
gitimate governing rights of the al-Sa‘ud date back to the First Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia. That legitimacy is both religious and political, resting on the alliance struck 
between Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud (1710–1765) and the religious reformer Muhammad 
ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (1703–1787) (see Chapter 2, History). Ibn Sa‘ud vowed to sup-
port ‘Abd al-Wahhab and to impose his beliefs while expanding his tribe’s political 
power. He swore he would stand by him “even if the whole of Najd came tumbling 
down over us” (AbuKhalil 2004, 66). ‘Abd al-Wahhab preached loyalty and obe-
dience to Sa‘udi rule, as long as they did not order a “violation to Allah’s will” 
(AbuKhalil 2004, 62). ‘Abd al-Wahhab issued this support because of Ibn Sa‘ud’s 
leadership of the jihad and also because of his typically conservative reading of Is-
lamic law, in which sedition is a grave sin. Therefore, numerous sources mention 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
82 |
Saudi Arabia’s foundation resting on two “houses”—the House of Sa‘ud and the 
House of al-Shaykh. The al-Shaykh descendants have been important religious cler-
ics in the modern government of Saudi Arabia. All but one of the grand muftis (the 
highest religious offi  ce appointed by the government, a mufti is a religious scholar 
who can issue  fatawa , or legal responses—plural of  fatwa ) of Saudi Arabia have de-
rived from this family; that exception was Grand Mufti ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn ‘Abdullah 
ibn Baz (1912–1999), an extremely important and inﬂ uential religious scholar. 
 Tim Niblock has described a model for political power in Saudi Arabia in which 
policy processes, conditioning factors, and circles of support interact. Within it, he 
enlists diff ering possible types of legitimacy (Niblock 2006, 9). Besides the historical 
and religious claims for legitimacy, one may consider personal charisma as a source 
of legitimacy. This sort of legitimacy is often attributed to King ‘Abdullah, who has 
been called visionary, disciplined, and impatient with those who needlessly grovel. 
He is pro-reform and anticorruption and has overcome personal limitations. (Lacey 
2009, 180–203). The king, whom Robert Lacey has described as “an old man in a 
hurry,” was frustrated with the delays in the construction of the new King Abdullah 
University of Science and Technology (KAUST), which would beneﬁ t his citizens 
(Lacey 2009, 330–332). This shows how the king’s dedication to his country is a part 
of his personal legitimacy and ﬁ ts what Niblock terms “eudaenomic legitimacy,” that 
which meets the popular needs of citizens. 
 The Saudi Arabian monarchs cannot claim legitimacy on democratic/struc-
tural grounds as they are not elected (Niblock 2006, 12–13). When I interviewed 
or conversed with many Saudi Arabians in the period between 2005 and 2008, they 
stressed the royal family’s ability to mediate between diff ering trends in society and 
prevent the more conservative and even radical groups from running over other 
constituents. The same observers noted that the royal family was adept at avoiding 
liberal demands by overemphasizing the threat that conservatives pose to their so-
ciety (Personal Interviews, Riyadh, Jeddah, Washington, DC, and other locations, 
2005–2008). The rulers have also been intolerant of overt demands with timetables, 
those that invoked previous enemies, or those that gave the impression of being dic-
tated by an external agenda, such as those of the reformers who called for a constitu-
tional monarchy in late December 2003 and were arrested in March 2004 (Glosmeyer 
in Aarts and Nonneman, eds., 2005, 228–229; Lacroix in Aarts and Nonneman, eds., 
2005, 54–55; and see Chapter 5, section on religion) .
 King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud returned the al-Sa‘ud family to political dominance as 
an ally of Great Britain. His political fortunes rested on foreign policy as much as on 
the foundational alliance with the Wahhabi religious reform movement. That basis 
of his legitimacy might have been eroded when he battled against his own Ikhwan 
warriors in the late 1930s (see Chapter 2, History). Since ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s reining in 
of the Ikhwan took place during the ﬁ nal stages of state consolidation and he pos-
sessed other strong allies, he was able, despite this disturbing experience, to retain 
his legitimacy. 
 King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz had named his son Sa‘ud as crown prince, but he had not 
established any protocol for royal succession. Severe problems did arise under King 
Sa‘ud’s rule, as a result of his ﬁ nancial management, his ouster of senior princes and 

The King | 83
recalcitrance to accept collective family decisions, his dalliance with Nasserist prin-
ciples, and his opposition to management by his brother Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. 
Hence, the coordination of the senior members of the royal family was crucial in the 
resolution of these problems. Sa‘ud also sowed seeds of discord in the royal family by 
promoting some of his 53 sons to positions of greater power than their seniority or 
expertise warranted, which led them to be referred to as “little kings” (see Chapter 2, 
History; also Kechichian 2001, 28). The other sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz were not content 
with this challenge to their status in the royal family. While the main rationale for 
actions against King Sa‘ud, culminating in the al-Sa‘ud’s 1964 decision to replace 
him with his brother Faysal (see Chapter 2, History) and resulting in his abdication, 
was mismanagement, these political tensions were also important. The general prin-
ciple established was that brothers would succeed each other, in preference to sons 
succeeding their fathers. Certain kings’ sons, such as those of King Faysal and King 
Fahd, were placed in prominent positions or worked their way upward in govern-
ment; other princes—the sons of Khalid—have not played such public roles. 
 Direct power has been held by the sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, but his nine brothers were 
on occasion deeply involved in family politics. For instance, ‘Abdullah (1900–1976) 
and Musa’id (b. 1922) initially attempted to mediate in the struggle between King 
Sa‘ud and his brother Faysal, and they later supported Faysal (Kechichian 2001, 32). 
 During King Faysal’s reign, the king’s role was expanded to include both head-
of-state and head-of-government functions. This had not been the case under King 
Sa‘ud because of the tensions he had created with his family; therefore, it was pos-
sible for much of his rule to describe Sa‘ud as the head of state, whereas Faysal had 
served as the head of government during certain periods. Faysal offi  cially declared 
this change in the king’s role in a royal decree. He made other decisions regarding 
succession, asking his brothers to observe birth order to help stabilize the succession, 
although some princes who were ahead in the birth order stepped out of the way or 
were asked to step out of the way of Faysal’s successor, Khalid. He also established 
the country’s national development plans and set up the Ministry of Justice to over-
see the religious courts. Faysal was responsible for many other aspects of expansion 
and modernization; he opposed communism and supported pan-Islamic positions 
and institutions. When King Faysal was assassinated in 1975, there might have been 
another political crisis, but he had already designated Khalid to follow him. Khalid 
was acknowledged by the senior princes, and his younger brother, Fahd, was desig-
nated crown prince.  
 Since 1986, the king of Saudi Arabia has been referred to as the Custodian of the 
Two Holy Mosques,  a title that emphasizes the Islamic duty of the monarch, which 
he fulﬁ lls for all Muslims, not only the citizens of Saudi Arabia. Gregory Gause has 
suggested that this title was taken at that particular time to “blunt the Iranian revo-
lutionary contention that monarchy is an un-Islamic form of government” (1994, 
30). The king again asserted Saudi Arabia’s particular Islamic leadership role after 
the Gulf War, perhaps because of the strong internal disapproval of hosting West-
ern troops on Saudi Arabian soil. Islamic opposition in Saudi Arabia became more 
widespread and was more active than liberal forms of opposition. It broke with the 
Saudi Arabian cultural preference for keeping dissension private with the issuance 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
84 |
LINE OF SUCCESSION IN SAUDI ARABIA
Succession to the throne in Saudi Arabia has passed from brother to brother 
among the sons of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud; however, certain princes have 
given up their right to succession in favor of others. King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz’s creation of new procedures for succession (see Government) would 
enable succession to pass to the next generation of princes. The most likely suc-
cessor to King ‘Abdullah is the current crown prince, Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 
born in 1928, minister of defense and aviation since 1962.
The deputy premier is Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, born in 1934, minister of the 
interior since 1975. There is no agreement on who might follow Prince Sultan 
in the line of succession, as it is not an automatic process. Still, Prince Nayif 
would likely become the next crown prince. The new Allegiance Council initi-
ated by King ‘Abdullah lends more formality to the process and acknowledges 
that the age of possible successors and poor health to the point of incapacity 
must be considered. Foreign observers believe other factors are tenure in gov-
ernment, acceptance by the ‘ulama, tribal afﬁ liations, support from the most 
powerful members of the al-Sa‘ud family, and support from the general public, 
including the powerful commercial elites. A selection from among the remain-
ing sons of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (shown in birth order) might include
‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1931 (vice minister of defense and aviation 
since 1979)
Muta’ib ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1931 (retired minister for municipal and rural affairs, 
1975–2009)
Badr ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1933 (deputy commander of the Saudi Arabian National 
Guard since 1968). Prince Badr was one of the Free Princes who went into exile 
but was rehabilitated by King Faysal.
Salman ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1939 (governor of Riyadh since 1962)
Sattam ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1941 (deputy governor of Riyadh since 1968)
Ahmad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1942 (vice minister of the interior since 1975)
Muqrin ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, b. 1945 (former governor of Ha’il and Madinah Province, 
director-general of Saudi intelligence since 2005)
Under the terms of the Allegiance Council, it is also possible that princes of 
the third generation could be selected, possibly:
Sa‘ud al-Faysal, b. 1941 (foreign minister since 1975)
Turki al-Faysal, b. 1945 (former ambassador and former director-general, General 
Intelligence Directorate, 1977–2001)
Khalid al-Faysal, b. 1941 (former governor of Asir, governor of Makkah Province 
since 2007)
In 2010 there were speculations that health problems might cause Foreign 
Minister Sa‘ud al-Faysal to step down and be replaced by his brother Turki 
and that Crown Prince Sultan would step down as minister of defense and 
aviation, to be replaced by his son Khalid (Henderson, NPR, October 12, 
2010); however, these may have been premature.

The King | 85
of a public letter in 1991 signed by 453  ‘ulama (clerics) and Islamic activists. The let-
ter called for more “seriousness” and attention to  shari ‘ah . This was followed by an 
even more strenuous call for reform in 1992 (Gause 1994, 34; Zuhur 2005a, 26–27). 
The government was off ended and concerned by the public nature of this criticism 
as much as by its content. Ever since, Islamic opposition has been a key factor in 
Saudi Arabian politics. 
 The country’s Islamic leadership role remains an important legitimating factor, 
but it has evolved and brought new challenges. Managing and guaranteeing the 
safety of the millions of pilgrims on the  hajj is a grave responsibility of the govern-
ment. The volume of pilgrims has expanded greatly thanks to the advent of air travel, 
so that it requires extraordinary eff orts, improvement of facilities, and international 
agreements with pilgrim-based nations via the Organization of the Islamic Confer-
ence (discussed in the following and in Chapter 5, section on religion). The pilgrimage 
could be the occasion for foreign policy threats or internal ones to emerge. King ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz survived several assassination attempts, one while he was on  ‘umrah , the 
minor pilgrimage. Stampeding and deaths and injuries due to trampling have marred 
some pilgrimages, for example, in 2006, and the swine ﬂ u epidemic required special 
measures in 2009. When Iranian pilgrims used the occasion to protest the authority 
of the Sa‘udi family rulers in the 1980s (see the following), the incident paralyzed 
relations between the two countries. An plot attributed to al-Qa’ida on the Arabian 
Peninsula and other militants was discovered during the 2007 pilgrimage and foiled 
(Riedel and Saab 2008, 37). 
 King ‘Abdullah is currently both the head of state and the head of government, 
acting as the prime minister as well as the ultimate ruler. The Saudi Arabian king 
is also commander in chief of the armed forces, and he appoints all diplomats and 
ambassadors. If the king is incapacitated, the crown prince will take on these func-
tions; King ‘Abdullah ruled in all but name for about 10 years, after his brother Fahd 
became seriously ill. Hence, the most recent transition from crown prince to king was 
less politically eventful than Sa‘ud’s accession. 
 The king is expected to initiate legislation. He sets the tone for the type of changes 
and development intended for the country. The king has not always acted as prime 
minister; there have been periods when a crown prince or designated prince has 
done so, as under the rule of King Sa‘ud. As the sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz have become 
increasingly elderly, the king has not always served as head of state; twice a crown 
prince has done so. 
 Concerns over succession caused King Fahd, who ascended to the throne in 1982, 
to issue another royal decree in 1992. This decree affi  rmed that the king of Saudi 
Arabia would name a crown prince and could also remove him. The crown prince 
would henceforth not automatically become the king, but he would be the provi-
sional ruler until either he was approved via the process known as the  bay ‘ ah , or oath 
of allegiance, and placed on the throne, or a diff erent al-Sa‘ud was so enthroned. In 
the same Basic Law of 1992, it is speciﬁ ed that only the sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz or his 
sons’ sons have the “dynastic right” to become ruler (Basic Law, 1992). 
 Some observers of Saudi Arabia have emphasized the stability of succession in 
the royal family; others point to the great threat that instability would pose to the 
oil industry and the West. One theory has been that full brothers in the family have 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
86 |
tended to cleave more strongly to each other. A powerful group of full brothers be-
came known as the Sudayri Seven (the sons of Ibn Sa‘ud and Hussah   al-Sudayri, a 
member of a prominent Najdi family): the late King Fahd (1921–2005); Prince Sultan 
ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (b. 1926), the current crown prince; Prince ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz (b. 1931), vice minister of defense; Minister of the Interior (since 1975) 
 Prince Nayif (b. 1933); Prince Turki ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (b. 1934); Prince Salman ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz (b. 1936), governor of Riyadh; and Prince Ahmad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
(b. 1940), vice minister of the interior. Although the princesses of the royal family are 
usually absent from the political literature, they have great inﬂ uence, as do the full 
sisters of the Sudayri Seven, Princesses Latifa, al-Jawahara, and Jawahir (see also 
Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). 
 A royal decree announced in October 2006 formally established a committee of 
Sa‘udi princes, the Allegiance (Bay‘ah) Commission, who will determine succession 
in the future. A year later, the king announced the Allegiance Commission Law, pro-
viding detailed rules for succession as well as for the constitution and conduct of the 
commission. Succession will be handled in the following manner: When a king dies, 
the commission is to meet and conﬁ rm the crown prince as king. That new king will 
send the name of a proposed crown prince to the commission within 10 days of taking 
Members of the Saudi Arabian royal family  at a press conference in New York, May 10, 
1945.  From left to right (seated):  Prince Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, Prince Faysal ibn ‘Abd 
al-Aziz, Prince Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Aziz.  Standing (left to right) are Prince ‘Abdullah 
al-Faysal (son of Prince Faysal) and Prince Nawwaf ibn ‘Abd al-Aziz.

The King | 87
KING ‘ABDULLAH
King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was born on August 1, 1924, the son 
of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and Fahda bint ‘Asi al-Shraim of the Shammar tribe, who 
had previously been married to the Amir Sa‘ud, the Rashidi leader. ‘Abdul-
lah had acted as the de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia ever since 1996, when 
Fahd suffered a major stroke, and he became king in 2005. ‘Abdullah was 
the commander of the Saudi Arabian National Guard for many years and 
stepped down from that responsibility only in 2010. The king has been married 
nine times, and he has 15 sons and 20 daughters according to one source 
(Datarabia.com). ‘Abdullah has overseen the political and security responses 
to the militant Islamist attacks in Saudi Arabia since May 12, 2003. He has 
done so through counterinsurgency, antiterrorism campaigns, criminal trials, 
and a religious reeducation program. He has shaped the nation’s response 
to international concerns and sharp attacks from the United States concerning 
Saudi Arabia’s connection with Islamist terrorism since 2001.
offi  ce, or he may ask the commission to appoint a crown prince (al-Badi, February 
14, 2008). The Bay‘ah Commission has the right to reject the ruler’s choice of a crown 
prince and to install a crown prince even if the ruler does not approve of him (T. al-
Sa‘ud 2006). Should the ruler or the crown prince, or both fall ill, or be unable to 
serve, the commission has the power to refer the health issue to a medical committee 
that should swiftly issue a conﬁ dential report on the health of the ruler. If, for some 
reason, he is incapacitated, the medical committee would provide certiﬁ cation of 
his condition. The administration of the government would pass to the Transitional 
Ruling Council, and the commission would determine a successor  (al-Badi, February 
14, 2008). This new system of determining succession will not be fully implemented 
until Crown Prince Sultan becomes king. 
 The former deputy defense minister and governor of Mecca, Prince Mishaal ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz was appointed the chairman of the commission at the end of 2007 (Abdul 
Ghafour, December 11, 2007). The commission’s members are Prince Miteb, Prince 
Abdul Rahman, Prince Talal, Prince Badr, Prince Turki, Prince Nayif, Prince Fawaz, 
Prince Salman, Prince Mamdouh, Prince ‘Abdul Ilah, Prince Sattam, Prince Ahmed, 
Prince Mashhour, Prince Hadhlool, and Prince Muqrin, all sons of King ‘Abd  al-‘Aziz. 
Additional members are Prince Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud, Prince Khalid al- Faysal, Prince 
Muhammad ibn Sa‘ad, Prince Turki ibn Faysal, Prince Muhammad ibn Nasser, 
Prince Faysal ibn Bandar, Prince Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-Mohsen, Prince Muhammad ibn 
Fahd, Prince Khalid ibn Sultan, Prince Talal ibn Mansour, Prince Khalid ibn ‘Abdul-
lah, Prince Muhammad ibn Mashari, Prince Faysal ibn Khalid, Prince Badr ibn Mu-
hammad, Prince Faysal ibn Thamir, Prince Mishaal ibn Majid, Prince ‘Abdullah ibn 
Musa’id, Prince Faysal ibn Abd al-Majid, and Prince ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Nawwaf. 
 The aim of these reforms is to maintain consensus within the royal family and the 
nation concerning the transfer of the highest power from the sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz to his 
grandsons, barring some unforeseen shift in the political basis of the kingdom.  

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
88 |
 THE CROWN PRINCE 
 Crown Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (b. 1926) is the minister of defense 
and aviation and the inspector general of the kingdom, as well as deputy prime 
minister. He is the son of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and Princess Hussah bint Ahmad ibn 
Muhammad al-Sudayri. Prince Sultan has served for many years as a government 
offi  cial. Like his brothers he was educated at the Prince’s School at the royal court. 
KING ‘ABDULLAH’S SONS IN OFFICIAL POSITIONS
In much of the earlier political literature on Saudi Arabia, a great deal of at-
tention was given to the brothers known as the Sudayri Seven, the brothers of 
King Fahd, and their sons in government. King ‘Abdullah’s sons, listed here, 
may also play a leading role in the future of Saudi Arabia and have served 
in the government:
Khalid ibn ‘Abdullah, a businessman, formerly western commander for the Saudi Ara-
bian National Guard (SANG)
Miteb ibn ‘Abdullah, commander of SANG (since November 17, 2010), formerly 
SANG vice commander, and president of King Khaled Military Academy
‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn ‘Abdullah, adviser to the king (formerly to the court of the crown 
prince)
Mishaal ibn ‘Abdullah, governor of Najran (since 2009), formerly minister plenipoten-
tiary in the foreign ministry
Faysal ibn ‘Abdullah, president of the Saudi Red Crescent Society, also a businessman
Turki ibn ‘Abdullah, wing commander, Saudi Arabian Royal Air Force
King ‘Abdullah has donated generously to various causes, establishing the 
King Abdulaziz Library in Riyadh and a library in Casablanca, Morocco. He 
worked to establish the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 
(KAUST), a graduate institute along the lines of the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, dedicated to producing superior graduate education and re-
search in the sciences, and gave $10 billion to its endowment fund. He also 
established the King Abdullah University in Azad Jammu/Kashmir in Pakistan. 
He donated $50 million in cash and $10 million in relief supplies for the victims 
of the 2008 earthquake in Szechuan, China, and supported the cost of sur-
geries performed in Riyadh to separate conjoined twins. As crown prince, he 
repeatedly attempted to change the U.S. stance on the Israeli-Palestinian issue, 
as he strongly supported Palestinian rights to sovereignty. As king or crown 
prince, ‘Abdullah has met with American presidents Gerald Ford, George 
H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama, as well as 
many other heads of state.

The Royal Diwan | 89
French President Nicolas Sarkozy (center) in a meeting with Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince 
and Defense Minister Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (left) and King ‘Abdullah (right) 
on January 13, 2008. (AP/Wide World Photos)
He was appointed the governor of Riyadh in 1947. He became the minister of agri-
culture in 1953 and the minister of defense and aviation in 1962. He has overseen the 
development of Saudi Arabia’s military forces, with the exception of the National 
Guard, which was for many years King ‘Abdullah’s responsibility. Somewhat simi-
lar to ‘Abdullah’s vision for the National Guard, Sultan has paid attention to the 
military’s education and human development. He has been ill with colon cancer since 
2004. According to the precedent set by King Faysal back in 1967, when he appointed 
Fahd (Safran 1985, 217), there is a second deputy prime minister, Prince Nayif, the 
longtime minister of the interior. 
 As the crown prince is the future king, the fortunes of his off spring are important. 
In February 2010, the king’s son Turki, who is a pilot with the Royal Saudi Air 
Force, married a daughter of Khalid ibn Sultan, the deputy defense minister; she is 
the granddaughter of the crown prince. 
 THE ROYAL DIWAN 
 The Royal Diwan houses the primary executive offi  ce of the king and his main advis-
ers on domestic politics, religious aff airs, and international relations. In addition to 
the king, those who have offi  ces in the Diwan include the chamberlain of the court; the 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
90 |
chief of protocol; the Offi  ce of Bedouin Aff airs; the Committees for the  Promotion of 
Virtue and Prevention of Vice , known as the HAIA (Hay’at al-Ma‘ruf wa al-Nahaya 
‘an al-Munkar or, more colloquially, as the  mutawa ‘ in ); the Department of Religious 
Research, Missionary Activities and Guidance; and others. Extremely inﬂ uential 
‘ ulama of the country are represented here. The king conducts many routine matters 
from this offi  ce, such as the drafting and promulgation of royal decrees. He convenes 
his  majlis  here. (A  majlis is literally a “sitting” or meeting. Members of the royal fam-
ily, offi  cials, businessmen, and tribal leaders are expected to hold such open meeting 
sessions regularly.) The purpose of the  majlis is to provide Saudi Arabia’s citizens an 
opportunity to make requests of the king, on private matters or those with a public 
aspect. Under King Khalid and King Fahd, a requestor would submit a written peti-
tion and provide an explanation and would then return for the monarch’s response 
(Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 298–299). The crown prince has his own  diwan with 
an offi  ce and  majlis maintained by its own administration. 
 THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
 The Council of Ministers is the main executive body of the government and was es-
tablished by King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz in 1953. The king appoints the Council of Ministers 
every four years. King Fahd presented the bylaws of the council in 1993. The Council 
of Ministers drafts domestic, international, economic, ﬁ nancial, educational, and 
defense policies and manages all general aff airs overseen by the state. This council 
passes laws that are proposed by the king, the deputy prime minister, or key min-
isters. The king’s ratiﬁ cation of such laws is necessary for them to take eff ect, and 
they may not contradict  shari‘ah . In fact, political practice is such that the king may 
pass laws or amend them without bringing them to the council. The council also 
creates taxes and makes decisions on the sale, lease, or use of government property 
(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Fundacion par las Relaciones 
Internacionales y el Dialogio Exterior [FRIDE] n.d. [ca. 2007], 4). The council meets 
weekly—at the time of writing, these meetings are scheduled on Mondays—and the 
king or the crown prince presides. The council members have remained consistent for 
many years; the number of ministers of state without portfolio who attend has risen 
from three to ﬁ ve; and the secretary general for the Commission of Tourism, being 
at the rank of a minister, now attends. Currently, the council lists its members as  
 • Prime Minister, the King 
 • First Deputy Prime Minister, who is the Crown Prince 
 • Minister of Agriculture 
 • Minister of Civil Service 
 • Minister of Commerce and Industry 
 • Minister of Communications and Information Technology 
 • Minister of Culture and Information 
 • Minister of Economy and Planning 

The Majlis al-Shura | 91
 • Minister of Education 
 • Minister of Finance 
 • Minister of Foreign Aff airs 
 • Minister of Hajj 
 • Minister of Health 
 • Minister of Higher Education 
 • Minister of Interior 
 • Minister for Islamic Aff airs, Endowment, Da‘wah and Guidance 
 • Minister of Justice 
 • Minister of Labor 
 • Minister of Municipal and Rural Aff airs 
 • Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources 
 • Minister of Social Aff airs 
 • Minister of Transport 
 • Minister of Water and Electricity 
 • Ministers of State (ﬁ ve) 
 • Secretary General of the Supreme Commission for Tourism (SAMIRAD 2010) 
 Others who hold ministerial rank and are represented on the council are the gover-
nor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, the commander of the Saudi Arabian 
National Guard, and the head of the General Petroleum and Mineral Organization. 
As in many other countries, the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of the Interior, 
which is responsible for security inside of the kingdom, are particularly important 
institutions. These ministries and some others are headed by members of the royal 
family; other royals are also appointed to deputy minister positions. However, non-
royals also serve as members of the council or as ministers. In 2009, a woman was 
appointed as one of the ministers, the deputy minister of education. The governors 
of provinces of Saudi Arabia hold the rank of minister and are involved in the coun-
cil through the Ministry of the Interior. The Ministry of Justice links the Supreme 
Judicial Council to this body. Since there is no tradition of political parties in Saudi 
Arabia, individuals do not ascend to government posts through party leadership as 
occurs in the United States or Europe, but many hold advanced degrees, as do key 
personnel advising them or serving as deputies. 
 THE MAJLIS AL-SHURA 
 The Majlis al-Shura, or Consultative Council, refers to  shura , the Muslim practice 
of consultation by the ruler. This allows for decisions to reﬂ ect collective under-
standings, strengthens consensus, and helps to avoid tyranny or mishap so long as 
those consulted have the right to be critical. King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ﬁ rst formed a Shura 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
92 |
Council of the Hijaz in 1927. A Majlis al-Shura was later enlarged to 20 members and 
presided over by Prince Faysal. During the rule of King Sa‘ud, the council ceased to 
meet, but the concept was revived under King Fahd (Cordesman 2003, 134). Liberal 
and Islamist trends had been calling for the council to be reestablished; it was an-
nounced in 1991 under the authority of the Basic Law and in Royal Decree No. 91 
of March 1992, which is referred to as the Majlis al-Shura, or Shura Council Law. 
The council ﬁ rst met in 1993. Members serve for four years. They are chosen by the 
king and must be Saudi Arabian nationals, “well known for uprightness and com-
petence,” and not less than 30 years of age (Majlis al-Shura Law). About half of the 
membership should be newly appointed as each new Majlis is formally convened. 
The Majlis al-Shura consists of a general assembly and committees with at least ﬁ ve 
members. The membership expanded to 90 in 1997, to 120 in 2001, and to 150 in 
2005, at which time it was also permitted to move beyond a purely advisory role. 
The Majlis has the power to examine and discuss the economic plans and to draft, 
examine, reject, or amend laws. Its decisions rest on an absolute majority. The Majlis 
al-Shura’s decisions proceed to the Council of Ministers for approval. If both groups 
agree, and the king assents, the measure or action is taken. If one group dissents, the 
king decides on the outcome. 
 The Majlis al-Shura, which meets biweekly, has consisted of appointed business-
men, professionals, academic scholars, government offi  cials, and clan and religious 
leaders, who received a salary of 20,000 Saudi Arabian riyals in 2010. There are 
 currently six women on the Majlis al-Shura, which is headed by ‘Abdullah ibn 
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Jubayr in the grand reception hall of the Majlis al-Shura, the 
Consultative Council which he chaired, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia in 1997. (AP/Wide World 
Photos)

Judiciary and Legal System | 93
 Muhammad al-Shaykh. Although the media reported in October 2003, and again 
in 2005, that a proportion of the Majlis’s members would be elected, this had not 
yet occurred by 2011. Several Majlis members have stated that if elections were held, 
they personally would not have been elected—in other words, they felt that the rul-
ers were more liberal in their selection process than the electorate may be (Zuhur, 
Personal Interviews, 2005–2008). The Majlis is now housed at Yamamah Palace in 
Riyadh. 
 The 12 committees of the Majlis are the 
 • Islamic and Judicial Aff airs and Human Rights Committee 
 • Social, Family, and Youth Aff airs Committee 
 • Economic Aff airs and Energy Committee 
 • Educational and Scientiﬁ c Research Aff airs Committee 
 • Security Aff airs Committee 
 • Cultural and Informational Aff airs Committee 
 • Foreign Aff airs Committee 
 • Health and Environmental Aff airs Committee 
 • Transportation, Communications, and Information Technology Committee 
 • Water and Public Facilities and Services Committee 
 • Administration, Human Resources, and Petitions Committee 
 The Majlis was accepted as a member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (a global 
association of national parliaments) in 2003. It now fulﬁ lls some parliamentary func-
tions as it is able to consider draft laws without prior submission to the king. It serves 
as a parliament symbolically and diplomatically, as when the prime minister of India, 
Dr. Manmohan Singh, was invited to speak on Saudi Arabian–Indian relations in 
2010 (Press Information Bureau, Government of India, March 1, 2010). 
 JUDICIARY AND LEGAL SYSTEM 
 The Ministry of Justice administers the  shari‘ah (Islamic) courts of the country. The 
minister acts as a chief justice in some instances, and the Supreme Judicial Council 
reviews legal decisions, gives opinions, and approves all capital sentences and sen-
tences for serious ( hadd ) crimes that are punished by amputation or stoning. In 2009, 
the minister of justice was Dr. Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Kareem al-‘Eissa. 
 It is often claimed there is no habeas corpus in the kingdom, and sometimes indi-
viduals are detained for a lengthy period without charge. However, the practice of 
detention without charge contravenes the Statute of Principles, Temporary Conﬁ ne-
ment, and Preventive Detention (November 11, 1983), which states that individuals 
must be charged within three days (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 
and FRIDE n.d. [ca. 2007], 6). Courts are in four tiers: limited or summary courts, 
general courts, courts of appeal, or appellate courts to the district courts, which are 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
94 |
headed by panels of three judges. The cases are divided into matters of criminal law, 
matters of personal status ( ahwal shakhsiyyah , or family law), and all other matters. 
Above the appellate courts, which are normally the ﬁ nal level of appeal, the Supreme 
Judicial Council could weigh in, or the king could issue a pardon or remove a sen-
tence (see Chapter 5, section on religion and thought for additional information). 
In addition, the Board of Grievances hears commercial cases, tax disputes, and con-
tract violations. The Ministry of Justice disciplines judges. However, the judges are 
supposed to possess independence with reference to their rulings. A Committee on 
Conﬂ icts of Jurisdiction exists. Also important is the 20-member Council of Senior 
Islamic Scholars, which serves in an advisory capacity to the king and his cabinet and 
which frames legal principles for the use of lower-court judges. 
 Saudi Arabia’s interpretation and usage of Islamic law has become a highly po-
liticized issue in the world media. The world media often inject misunderstandings 
about the diff erence between  shari‘ah  (divine law, or the theory and intention of 
Islamic law) and  ﬁ qh  (jurisprudence, which is man made), and strict penalties and 
capital punishment are targets of criticism. When the media have reported on cases 
with a public interest—as in the Qatif Girl rape case, involving a woman who was 
raped and then punished by judges along with her male companion in this incident 
for being in a situation where she was alone with a man, or the divorce suit brought 
on behalf of an eight-year-old girl (see Chapter 5, section on women)—and an in-
ternational outcry ensued, the government has responded to the perceived or actual 
injustice. Yet, in other cases, as with the executions of migrant workers, international 
reaction made no diff erence to the outcome. Saudi Arabians as well as others are 
perturbed by the degree of variation in judges’ interpretations and sentences.   Some of 
the judiciary have been angered by the reportage on their cases, regarding it as an at-
tack on their offi  ce as well as the country, although quite a few reporters and lawyers 
disagreed (Sidiya, February 23, 2010). The issue was considered in the National Intel-
lectual Dialogue in 2011 because editors of media articles are subject to ﬁ nes, and yet 
reportage of social issues is considered the press’s duty. The kingdom’s publication 
law (Article 73) appears to restrict coverage, but there is a loophole: “It is not legal to 
publish investigations or court hearings related to personal issues or other (issues) un-
less an authorization is taken from the concerned authorities” (Sidiya, February 23, 
2010). Trials are supposed to be public; however, those of the alleged terrorists have 
not been open to the public (see also Chapter 5, section on religion and law). 
 CIVIL SERVICE BOARD AND 
INDEPENDENT AGENCIES 
 The Civil Service Board presided over the Civil Service Bureau until 1999, making 
decisions about the employees of all of the ministries with respect to recruitment, 
personnel, pay rates, and grade classiﬁ cations in a greatly expanded bureaucracy. 
The Civil Services Ministry was then created in 1999. Civil servants could receive 
training in their own ministries or at the Institute of Public Administration and could 
bring complaints to a board of grievances. 

| 95
The ‘Ulama
 The Audit Bureau can monitor the accounts of various government offi  ces. Other 
separate organizations are the Central Department of Statistics, the Meteorology 
and Environmental Protection Agency, the Saudi Arabian Standards Organization, 
and the Saudi Ports Authority. 
 REGIONAL AND MUNICIPAL 
GOVERNMENT 
 The king appoints regional governors and the members of provincial councils. The 
minister of the interior appoints local administrators. Most of the governors are 
members of the royal family. The governors, who may have deputies, supervise the 
recruitment to the Saudi Arabian National Guard and the local police. Each holds 
an open  majlis at which residents may present petitions. 
 In 2003, the king approved municipal consultative councils. Half of the council 
members were to be elected by popular vote, and these elections took place in 2005. 
Elections are being held again in 2011. The councils primarily deal with the munici-
palities’ provision of services, development, and planning. The elections became a 
matter of great national and international interest, and electioneering took place in 
 majlis settings. 
 THE  ‘ULAMA 
 The  ‘ulama (literally, those who possess religious knowledge [ ‘ilm ], scholars, and 
teachers of religion) fulﬁ ll an important offi  cial task in politics and in religion in 
Saudi Arabia as an additional legitimizing force (see Chapter 5, section on religion 
and law). Many sources on Saudi Arabia attribute the prominence of the ‘ ulama 
to the legacy of intermarriage and political ties between the houses of al-Sa‘ud and 
al-Shaykh, but the relationship of the  ‘ulama to political leadership goes far back 
in Islamic history and is not reserved to Saudi Arabia. The linkage involves newer 
groups of  mutawa‘a , religious specialists who saw a reversal of their misfortunes 
in the 19th century in Ibn Sa‘ud’s new state (al-Rasheed 2002, 55–57). Their resur-
gence had various results, from the hostilities between the Ikhwan and the regime, 
to delicate maneuvering to gain acceptance of technological innovations or foreign 
inﬂ uence. But the state also created institutions that employed the ‘ ulama and made 
it possible to regulate their activities. Currently, their alliance with the al-Sa‘ud could 
be weakening, as some infer (Commins 2006), and require a reinterpretation of the 
Wahhabi reform ideals, although that interpretation may be just one of several post-
9/11 responses. Some analysts suggest that perhaps the  ‘ulama ’s ineff ective eff orts at 
political opposition may now be adapting to the reforming impulses of the present. 
Others perceive the strength of the  sahwa  (Islamic awakening)   in Saudi Arabia to 
have been profound and identify its members as a cohesive group, one in which the 
 ‘ulama remain very important. Although they have been coopted by the government 
to refrain from severe criticism (Lacroix 2011), they can and do block reform eff orts. 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
96 |
 The following are offi  cial religious institutions that are part of the government: 
The Board of Senior ‘Ulama was established in 1971 and is composed of the most 
senior ‘ ulama  and headed by the grand mufti. It issues  fatawa  on key matters. 
The Permanent Committee for Scientiﬁ c Research and Legal Opinion carries out 
research, supports the eff orts of the Board of Senior ‘Ulama, and issues private 
 ifta’ (responses, or  fatawa —speciﬁ c religious opinions). The Offi  ce of the Grand 
Mufti manages the grand mufti’s activities as he heads both the Board of Senior 
‘Ulama and the Permanent Committee for Scientiﬁ c Research and Legal Opinion 
(CRLO). 
 The Supreme Council of Islamic Aff airs (al-Majlis al-‘A’la lil-Shu‘un al-Islamiyyah) 
rules on matters requiring multiple ‘ ulama opinions and is in charge of domestic 
Islamic matters. This Council reviews judgments carrying death sentences and some 
other major crimes, constructs general principles and judicial precedents, and exam-
ines shari‘ah questions involving principles which are referred to the Council. The 
Council for Islamic Mission and Guidance (Majlis lil-Da‘wah   wa al-Irshad) is in 
charge of Muslims and mosques abroad. Both were established within a few days of 
each other in 1994, and some sources suggest that the government moved to create 
these institutions to control the mosques and “ bypass the [independent]  ‘ulama ” 
(Bachar et al. 2006, 15) or as one of the responses to the Islamist opposition move-
ment (Kostiner 1997), which gave the  ‘ulama  “a more active role in government” 
(Bachar et al. 2006, 14). 
 While the preceding institutions employ about 100  ‘ulama , the Ministry of Islamic 
Aff airs employs thousands of clerics. The educational system and the Ministry of 
Education are also sources of employment for the  ‘ulama . In Saudi Arabia, many 
students gravitate to Islamic studies and consequently to the religious ﬁ elds upon 
graduation. 
 The government has been obliged to respond to dissonant voices from conserva-
tive and also oppositionist clerical views that have countered various modernization 
eff orts. They have opposed many reforms and perceived “innovations” under the 
ﬁ rst two Saudi Arabian kings and the reforms supervised by King Faysal. There was 
another wave of clerical concerns in the wake of the Juhayman al-‘Utaybi attack on 
the Grand Mosque at Mecca, and then in the 1990s. Most recently, the clerical estab-
lishment responded to post-2003 violence by Islamic radicals, although some clerics 
have supported the  mujahidin  where foreign armies fought them in Afghanistan and 
Iraq. Meanwhile, various strands of the  ‘ulama  confronted the desire of liberals to 
open employment and grant voting and driving rights to women. Further, some have 
supported a reduction of the absolute authority of the royal family and an increase 
in the political rights of citizens. 
 The  ‘ulama establishment is not necessarily or inherently the source of all Islamic 
opposition. That has a populist base in Saudi Arabia in many instances. On the 
contrary, the scholarly establishment has called for and been part of a state-centered 
Islamic leadership and, for that reason, stands accused of compliance, passivity, 
or being a ruler-dominated  ‘ulama . Yet certain clerical elements are not included 
in that establishment and some have often pushed back against the government’s 
reforms. 

Family and Tribal Influences | 97
 FAMILY AND TRIBAL INFLUENCES 
 Estimates of the size of the al-Sa‘ud family vary, from 25,000 (probably a low estimate 
as they were counted at 20,000 in 1992) up; or, counting only males descended from 
Faysal ibn Turki, the grandfather of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, they are estimated at 6,000 
or more (4,000 in 1992). Succession to the position of king was limited   to the sons of 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 22 of whom are now living. Succession was then extended to the grand-
sons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, providing a pool of some 150 princes. External observers of 
Saudi Arabia have emphasized divisions within the royal family or speculated about 
the forces for unity or division within the royal family, but little is actually known 
outside of Saudi Arabia about these dynamics. Historical examples of schisms in-
clude the Free Princes movement, a group of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s younger’s sons, 
led by Talal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. The Free Princes demanded reforms and liberaliza-
tion and left for Egypt, returning to the kingdom at the request of Faysal ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz. The sons of King Sa‘ud followed their father into exile when he abdicated 
in favor of Faysal. In addition, several groups in the Al Faysal   branch (the sons of 
King Faysal) have been particularly important. The seven sons of Hussah   al-Sudayri 
and King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, including King Fahd, who were dubbed the Sudayri Seven 
(see the preceding), used to meet weekly at a family dinner and conferred with each 
other. The minister of defense, Prince Sultan, and the governor of Riyadh, Prince 
Salman, were Fahd’s closest political advisers. In addition, they have half brothers 
through ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s off spring from other Sudayri women. 
 The Thunayan clan, a branch of the al-Sa‘ud, included King Faysal’s favorite 
wife, Iff at; while the Jiluwi clan descended from a brother of Faysal ibn Turk. The 
mother of King Khalid and his brother, Prince Muhammad, were from the Jiluwi 
branch. The al-Kabir clan may be traced back to ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s ﬁ rst cousin, Sa‘ud 
al-Kabir, and his wife Nura, a sister of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. While not in the line of succes-
sion, Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud was an important prince (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993) 
due to seniority. Analyzing the royal family around full-brother groupings is not 
particularly useful in understanding all of its members, for although the current king, 
‘Abdullah, had no full brothers, it would be foolish to assume he had no important 
alliances within the royal family. In addition, his power and abilities were developed 
during long service as head of the National Guard and as crown prince. It is also mis-
leading to associate certain ﬁ gures entirely with religiosity or opposition to progress, 
as Michael Doran (a Princeton PhD with neoconservative views who was invited to 
GRANDSONS OF KING ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ AL-SA‘UD
Succession will eventually pass to the grandsons of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(unless the democracy movement or some other unforeseen shift in politics com-
pletely transforms the political system of Saudi Arabia, as happened in Iraq in 
1958 and 2003 and in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, and Libya in 2011). Many, but 
not all, have served in positions of great responsibility in the government. The 
following are among those better known to the world outside Saudi Arabia.

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
98 |
PRINCE SA‘UD AL-FAYSAL IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ
Prince Sa‘ud al-Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz is the son of King Faysal (his name 
is frequently transliterated as Al Faisal), born in 1942. He has served as min-
ister of foreign affairs since 1975. He obtained a degree in economics from 
Princeton University in 1964. He served as the deputy minister of oil for petro-
leum policy and as chairman of the Supreme Council’s Specialized Committee 
on Foreign Investments. He is credited as the organizing force behind the Ta’if 
Accords (1989) ending the Lebanese Civil War and the coordination of poli-
cies with Crown Prince ‘Abdullah to meet the terrorist challenge to the kingdom 
and deal with the severe criticism of Saudi Arabia abroad following 9/11. 
He is said to be deeply committed to a just solution to the Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict.
PRINCE TURKI AL-FAYSAL IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ
Prince Turki al-Faysal (Al Faisal) ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz is the son of King Faysal, 
born on February 15, 1945. He attended the Lawrenceville School in New 
Jersey and Georgetown University. He became the director-general of the Gen-
eral Intelligence Directorate in 1977 and was responsible for modernizing that 
agency. He became the ambassador of Saudi Arabia to the United Kingdom 
and Ireland in 2002 and ambassador to the United States from 2005 until his 
resignation on February 2, 2007. He is a founder of the King Faisal Founda-
tion, chairman of the King Faisal Center for Research and Islamic Studies in 
Riyadh, and co-chair of the C-100 (Council of 100 Leaders) Group.
PRINCE KHALID IBN SULTAN IBN ‘ABD AL-‘AZIZ
Prince Khalid ibn Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, born on September 23, 1949, is 
Sultan’s eldest son. He attended the Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst in 
the United Kingdom and programs at the U.S. Army’s Command and Gen-
eral Staff College and the U.S. Air War College at Maxwell Air Force Base 
in Alabama. He obtained a master’s degree from Auburn University. He was 
lieutenant general and commander of the joint forces and theater of operations 
during the 1991 Gulf War and was promoted to the rank of ﬁ eld marshal 
following the war. He rejoined the government in 2001 as deputy minister of 
defense and aviation and inspector general for military affairs.
PRINCE BANDAR IBN SULTAN
Prince Bandar ibn Sultan, born in 1949, is the son of Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz. He has been the president of the National Security Council since 
2005 and served as ambassador to the United States from 1983 to 2005. 
Bandar’s mother was a young Libyan servant and concubine to Prince Sultan, 
and he came to live with his grandmother Princess Hussah at age 11. He at-
tended the Royal Air Force College at Cranwell and served in the Royal Saudi 

Family and Tribal Influences | 99
Air Force for 17 years. He received a master’s degree in international public 
policy at Johns Hopkins University. He was on an extended leave from 2009 
to  November 2010, when he returned to Saudi Arabia.
PRINCE WALID IBN TALAL
Prince Walid ibn Talal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, born on March 7, 1955, is a nephew 
of King ‘Abdullah and a grandson of Riyad al-Solh, Lebanon’s ﬁ rst prime min-
ister. He owns most of the Kingdom Holding Company, and his net worth is 
estimated at $19.4 billion. With degrees from Menlo College and the Maxwell 
School, Syracuse University, Prince Walid has hired women to work in his own 
companies in professions from which they are excluded elsewhere in Saudi 
Arabia and notably the ﬁ rst female Saudi Arabian pilot. He is not considered 
a likely candidate to succeed to the throne.
join the U.S. National Security Council under President George W. Bush) did when 
he depicted Prince Nayif, as a force of religious conservatism and retrogression in 
contrast with then Crown Prince ‘Abdullah (depicted as a force of progress) (Doran 
2004). More often, the king is portrayed as a skillful mediator “between conﬂ icting 
elements of society,” an excellent reason for his convening of the National Dialogue 
Forums (Glosmeyer in Aarts and Nonneman, eds., 2005, 226). These forums were 
another ﬁ rst in the kingdom, whereby representatives were encouraged to discuss 
pressing matters of interest related to the nation’s development. 
 To manage domestic aff airs, the Saudi Arabian government has consulted and re-
lied on local elites, although governors were often members of the royal family. The 
tribes remain a very important part of Saudi Arabian politics; they numbered among 
the Ikhwan following Ibn Sa‘ud and have been very important in the Saudi Arabian 
National Guard (SANG). The most prominent tribes were the Bani Khalid, Harb, 
al-Murrah, Mutayr, Qahtan, Shammar, ‘Anayzah, ‘Utayba, Ajman, al-Dawasir, 
Amarat, Awazim, Bani Malik, Bani Yam, Dahamsha, Dhuﬁ r, Huwaytat, Mutaﬁ q, 
and Ruwalla; there are many others as well (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 209; 
Zuhur, Personal Interviews, 2005–2008; Kostiner 1998, 143–155; Kostiner 1991). 
 Most of the tribes have become settled or sedentary in a gradual process similar 
to that which occurred throughout the Middle East; only about 5 percent remain 
pastoral. Sedentarization created various issues around land rights. Acknowledging 
tribal structures and asserting their cultural inﬂ uence is part of the state’s discourse 
on Saudi Arabia’s  turath , or cultural legacy (Gause 1994, 27). 
 Commercial elites were important to the regime, especially prior to the large inﬂ ux 
of oil income. The al-Qusaibi, Alireza, Ba Kashab, Bin Laden, Jamjum, Kaki, Nasi, 
Juff ali, Olayan, Nasif, al-Rajhi, and Sulayman families helped by loaning money to 
the government early on. Other important families emerged later as entrepreneurial 
entities including the Khashoggi, Ojjeh, Pharaon, and Kamil families. As Eric Hoo-
glund has pointed out, other nonroyals rose politically and socially as technocrats 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
100 |
into key ministerial and government positions, but they paid a price when their poli-
cies alienated certain Sa‘udi princes. He was alluding to the fall of Ghazi al-Qusaibi 
(often shown as al-Ghosaybi), once minister of health; Ahmad Zaki Yamani, for-
merly minister of oil; and ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Qurayshi, once head of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary Agency Board (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 210). 
 NATIONAL (MEETING FOR 
INTELLECTUAL) DIALOGUE 
 King ‘Abdullah inaugurated the ﬁ rst National Meeting for Intellectual Dialogue in 
June 2003. The meetings, known as the National Dialogue, are intended to enhance 
communication and solving of the nation’s problems. Only clerics were invited to the 
ﬁ rst National Dialogue; however, these included Shi‘a, Isma‘ili (the Ismailiyya are a 
branch of the Shi‘a but distinct from Saudi Arabia’s larger Twelver or Ja‘fari Shi‘a 
of eastern Saudi Arabia), and Maliki (a diff erent school of Islamic jurisprudence, as 
contrasted with the more dominant Hanbali school) leaders alongside Sunni leaders 
who follow ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s ideas. Safar al-Hawali, one of the  neosalaﬁ  Awak-
ening Shaykhs, declined to attend a meeting that included Shi‘a of Saudi Arabia, 
as he considers them religious heretics, but another Awakening Shaykh, Salman 
al-Awdah, attended (Lacey 2009, 271). Some women were invited to attend the Sec-
ond National Dialogue meeting, although they met separately from the men, com-
municating with them via closed-circuit television. The idea of meeting in diff erent 
areas of the country was discussed at the initial Dialogue meetings and has been 
implemented. 
 The Third National Dialogue meeting in June 2004 addressed women’s issues, 
and the participants resolved that women should be able to work and further their 
education, at college or university, without needing the permission of their  mah-
ram  (guardian). They recommended that courts should be established with female 
judges to rule on women’s issues (a highly controversial issue as many male clerics 
have rejected any woman’s right to become a judge). Also, they called for a public 
transportation system that would beneﬁ t women who cannot aff ord to hire drivers 
(Lacey 2009, 325–326) and are therefore unable to travel to work or study. The Na-
tional Dialogue sessions have also discussed religious extremism and moderation, 
youth issues, relations with non-Muslims, the educational system, labor issues, and 
national unity. They have been criticized because advisory recommendations made 
in the sessions are not necessarily acted on (SUSRIS [interview with Rachel Bronson] 
April 27, 2006) but praised for introducing topics that are “open targets” for free 
speech and for giving the participants standing in civil society (Bronson in SUSRIS, 
2007). However, free expression has also been punished, as in 2006 when a Najrani 
woman, Fatima al-Tisan, spoke out about the disenfranchisement of Isma‘ili Saudi 
Arabians and was soon ﬁ red from her job at the Ministry of Education (Worth, 
October 20, 2010). The National Dialogue session in Najran in April 2010, attended 
by 70 delegates, discussed ways to improve health care in the kingdom. The theme 
of the National Meeting for Intellectual Dialogue in 2011 concerns dialogue between 
the media and society. 

Domestic Political Issues | 101
 DOMESTIC POLITICAL ISSUES 
 Domestic political issues concern many topics taken up in the National Dialogue, 
as well as competition for government resources, the growing class divisions among 
Saudi Arabians on the basis of income, regional tensions with the politics, beliefs, 
or cultural customs of the central region, Najd, and an ongoing counterterrorism 
program. King ‘Abdullah has enacted many reforms and has indicated a gradual 
path, estimated to require 20 years, to a political system with an elected legislature 
and a political life with a greater role for citizenry. The nature and measures of 
change to be implemented are controversial. This is because Saudi Arabian society 
is divided into extremely conservative, less conservative, and liberal sectors. Also, the 
potential of National Dialogue sessions appears increasingly symbolic in the context 
of regional instability; for in each case of challenged governments — in Tunisia, 
Egypt, Yemen, Syria etc. National Dialogues have been announced to stave off  radi-
cal change, and failed in some cases to forestall it. 
 Political parties are not permitted in the kingdom. The Arab Socialist Action 
Party and the Communist Party of Saudi Arabia did exist in the past but were sub-
ject to harassment and arrests and disbanded in the 1990s. An illegal Green Party of 
Saudi Arabia exists, although its 2009 website has been dismantled; it espoused po-
litical goals similar to those in a Western country, calling for a secular constitution. 
Other groups exist such as the Muslim Brotherhood and Hizb al-Tahrir, but not as 
parties. An active opposition wants a more faithfully Islamic government and op-
poses the al-Sa‘ud alliance with the United States—but their opposition activity is il-
legal. In the spring of 2011, the Islamic Ummah party, which represents the views of 
sahwa (Islamic Awakening)   supporters and calls for an end to the absolute author-
ity of the Saudi Arabian monarchy, was established. The 10 founders of the party 
were all arrested as of June 11, but other party supporters remain. It is important 
to note that some strands of opposition to the government have spoken out against 
the government; others have refrained; still others are in exile, notably in London. 
 In the 2005 municipal elections, a fairly large number of conservative, or Islamist, 
candidates prevailed, suggesting that broader elections for the legislature might bring 
more conservatives to power than liberals. Women campaigned unsuccessfully for 
participation, but even that activity was positive in raising awareness of their status 
and informing the public about potential female candidates such as the historian 
Hatoon al-Fassi and others. Despite promises to the contrary, women are also ex-
cluded from standing in the 2011 elections or voting. 
 Provincial development can involve heavy politicking. The areas of Abha, Asir, 
the Eastern Province, and the Hijaz have sometimes protested that Saudi Arabia’s 
policies reﬂ ected Najd and the attitudes and customs of those originating there. In 
addition, Saudi Arabia’s Shi‘a minority has been a political concern since the 1970s. 
Discrimination against the Shi‘a went hand in hand with neglect of the areas where 
they were a majority. To some extent, Aramco impacted the Eastern Province, em-
ploying large numbers of Shi‘a and paying for many projects that were necessary to 
establish the company’s functionality. 
 In 1980, following Shi‘a demonstrations, mentioned later, the deputy minister of 
the interior, Amir Ahmad ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, designed a comprehensive plan to de-

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
102 |
velop the Eastern Province, and the government ordered a large development project 
for al-Qatif. However, 30 years later, the Shi‘a still lack proportional representation 
in government or leadership. Only three members of the Majlis al-Shura are from 
this minority, although they did win local offi  ces in the 2005 municipal elections. In 
the spring of 2011, following pro-democracy movements in other Arab nations that 
sought the ouster of long-standing dictators like Hosni Mubarak, Zein bin Abedine 
‘Ali (who ﬂ ed to Saudi Arabia), Mu‘ammar Qadhdhaﬁ , ‘Ali Abdullah Saleh   (also 
in Saudi Arabia at the time of writing), and Bashar al-Asad, Saudi Arabian pro- 
democracy activists announced protests in the kingdom on Facebook. Demonstra-
tions and riots in the eastern cities of al-Qatif and al-Hofuf were far larger than the 
protests in Riyadh, in part because of the precedent set in this region. In addition 
to calls against discrimination, Shi‘a protesters in Saudi Arabia called for the with-
drawal of Saudi Arabian forces from Bahrain. 
 King ‘Abdullah has supported measures to improve relations between the Sunni 
majority and Saudi Arabia’s Shi‘a minority. The Shi‘a intermittently demanded free-
dom of worship in the past, so that they could build mosques, print religious books, 
and carry out religious rites according to their own custom. Opposition mostly came 
from Saudi Arabia’s religious conservatives and neosalaﬁ sts, who declare the Shi‘a 
heretical. Hence, the policies disallowing ‘Ashura   parades and preventing the call 
to prayer ( adhan ) from being delivered in the Shi‘a version (in which a certain line 
of the  adhan is repeated, the ﬁ nal phrase “La illaha ila-llah,”; as this repetition is 
not performed by Sunni Muslims, it is a target for those who argue against speciﬁ c 
exclusive Shi‘a practices and ideas) were aimed at containing public strife, much as 
Christians were expected to keep all prayer private and as invisible as possible. In 
1979, this red line was breached by activists of the Shirazi trend who had developed 
teaching centers in the Gulf region by then, who announced their intended dem-
onstrations ahead of time. They threatened Aramco workers and challenged the 
al-Sa‘ud rule in the demonstrations, known as the Muharram of 1400 (Louër 2008, 
163–165) or Intifadhat (the uprising of) Muharram 1400. Except for one cleric, the 
Shirazi leadership went into exile, and many were imprisoned. King Fahd appointed 
his son Muhammad to take the Shi‘a problem in hand in 1984, and he released many 
of these prisoners. During the Gulf War, the Shi‘a of the Eastern Province, and even 
those leaders in exile, were loyal to the Saudi Arabian government, refusing advances 
by Saddam Hussein. Today, the aims of the community are diff erent, more aimed 
at integration. Erasing discrimination will require changes in the thinking of fellow 
Saudi Arabians as much as patronage from the king, due to the anti-Shi‘a rhetoric of 
many neosalaﬁ sts (see Chapter 5, section on religion, for more discussion). 
 Other hotly debated domestic issues are women’s rights (see Chapter 5, section on 
women and marriage) and employment issues, including the large number of foreign, 
primarily Asian, workers. Clearly, state support will be necessary in further reforms, 
hopefully to include suff rage and women’s rights to stand for offi  ce. The push to 
employ Saudi Arabian citizens, including women and their future prospects, comes 
up against the more proﬁ table importation of foreign workers. These dynamics have 
a great impact on labor issues and, like many other aspects of domestic policy, are 
diffi  cult to understand without a comprehensive view of Saudi Arabia’s economy 
and also its foreign policy. 

Foreign Policy | 103
 FOREIGN POLICY 
 Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy evolved in the pre–oil production era and featured 
Great Britain as security guarantor; that role was later transferred to the United 
States. In part, the shift occurred naturally because Great Britain faced great eco-
nomic diffi  culties following World War II and had relinquished some of its inter-
national inﬂ uence. However, at the same time, some Anglo-American competition 
remained at the commercial level within the Gulf region. Saudi Arabia’s foreign 
policy initially grew to support state consolidation, and next to secure the nation and 
prevent challenges to the regime and, subsequently, the petroleum industry. Foreign 
policy initiated and strengthened certain relationships to preserve Saudi Arabia’s 
stewardship of the  hajj (pilgrimage) and secure the country from any threats to its 
own integrity or to pilgrims during the pilgrimage period. Beyond this, Islamic lead-
ership has proven a strong tool for advancing Saudi Arabia’s interests in the region, 
although this was not the case at midcentury. 
 Saudi Arabia has supported Arabism and its own sovereign and national inter-
ests but not the secular antimonarchist Arab nationalism of the revolutionary mode 
supported at one time by the countries of Egypt, Syria, and Iraq. The al-Sa‘ud have 
ﬁ rmly opposed communism and attacks on other Muslims, including those by Israel 
on the Palestinians and Muslim holy places in Palestine. Finally, it opposes terrorism 
by Muslims through an active security and counterterrorist force and also ideologi-
cally, by promoting Islamic moderation, supporting an Islamic legal stance against 
terrorism, and promoting respect for the authority of Islamic rulers. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Yemen 
 When the Wahhabi movement on the Arabian Peninsula was contained by Egyptian 
forces for the Ottoman Turks, they allowed the traditional ruler of northern Yemen, 
the Zaydi Imam, to govern that area. Meanwhile, Great Britain had occupied the 
port of Aden in 1839. Aden became a Crown Colony, and the other southern Ye-
meni areas were under a protectorate. After World War I, Imam al-Nasir al-Din 
Allah Ahmad ibn al-Mutawakkil ‘Ala Yahya (Imam Ahmad ibn Yahya) fought the 
British to the south and the Saudi Arabians to the north. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
unsuccessfully attempted to conquer Yemen in 1934. He survived an assassination 
attempt by Yemeni killers, and serious territorial disputes between the two countries 
continued. 
 Following Imam Yahya’s death on September 9, 1962, his son Imam Muham-
mad al-Badr succeeded him. Then, an army uprising overthrew Imam al-Badr, de-
claring the Yemen Arab Republic. Imam al-Badr escaped, gathered tribal forces, 
and received aid from the Saudi Arabian government against the republicans. The 
conﬂ ict continued; Gamal abd al-Nasser’s government backed the republicans and 
sent troops and aircraft, miring itself into a Vietnam-like situation (Aboul-Enein 
2004). When Egypt ﬁ nally withdrew, it faced a disastrous defeat in the Six-Day 
War with Israel in 1967. In that year, Aden and the former protectorate of South 
Yemen formed the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY), which adopted 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
104 |
Marxist ideology and policies. When thousands ﬂ ed northward in 1971, Saudi Ara-
bia backed dissidents against the PDRY. Meanwhile, the PDRY strengthened its ties 
with the Soviets as well as Cuban, Chinese, and East German advisers. 
 ‘Ali ‘Abdullah Saleh became president in 1978, and ﬁ ghting resumed between the 
North and the South in 1979. Following several violent shifts in leadership in the 
south, the uniﬁ cation of the two Yemens was achieved, an event that Saudi Arabia 
had opposed. Yemen is the only country on the Arabian Peninsula not included in 
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which results from Saudi Arabian insistence, 
due to its republican form of government. Gause, a specialist in Gulf aff airs, notes 
Saudi Arabia’s strong inﬂ uence over North Yemen due to the two nations’ political 
and structural commonalities, including their Islamic outlook (Gause 1990, 160). If 
Saudi Arabia had been less inﬂ uential in Yemen, North Yemen might more easily 
have withstood Saudi Arabia’s pressures against unity (Badeeb 1986, 95, 104). 
 Since Yemen’s uniﬁ cation, Saudi Arabia continued to give support to certain tribal 
leaders in the North and strongly supported the Saleh government until the democ-
racy movement of 2011 began, even then trying ensure a peaceful departure for Saleh 
(which he rejected, he left only after being injured in a bombing). Saudi Arabia also 
strengthened salaﬁ st Yemeni tribal elements, which led, perhaps inadvertently, to the 
creation of a haven for al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula. 
Saudi Arabia’s expulsion of a million and a half Yemeni nationals in the wake of 
the Gulf War negatively impacted Yemen’s economy. In 2000, a new border agree-
ment with Saudi Arabia was concluded with the Treaty of Jeddah (Whitaker, trans., 
June 12, 2000). The agreement includes three areas: the coastline to the Jabal al-Thar; 
the land border from there eastward, in which 17 sets of coordinates were determined; 
and respective maritime rights (Whitaker, July 1, 2000). 
 During the Gulf War, U.S. General H. Norman Schwarzkopf decided Yemen 
was strategically important, and it became a naval reloading and fueling point for 
the United States. The American ships attracted al-Qa’ida, which launched a suicide 
attack on the USS  Cole  in October 2000. This, together with the concerns raised by 
the September 11, 2001, attacks resulted in cooperation among the American, Saudi 
Arabian, and Yemeni counterterrorism programs and offi  cials. Even so, there was 
another attempted ship bombing, and eight of the suspects of the USS  Cole bombing 
escaped from prison in 2003 (two were recaptured). 
 The Houthi rebellion, or al-Sa‘adah conﬂ ict, expanded in 2004 after government 
troops killed its leader, Shaykh Husayn Badr al-Din al-Houthi, and tried to crush 
resistance. Fighting resumed in 2005, and Saudi Arabia, which had long sponsored 
tribes that fought the Houthis, embarked on bombings against the rebels in 2009. 
In 2008, a series of al-Qa’ida attacks took place. The originally Saudi Arabia–based 
al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah (QAP) joined forces with two other militant salaf-
ist organizations in Yemen. An agent of this QAP group pretended to seek media-
tion and then attempted to kill Deputy Minister of the Interior Prince Muhammad 
ibn Nayif during Ramadan in 2009. Then, a Christmas Day bombing attempt on a 
U.S. airliner revealed that the Nigerian would-be bomber had made contacts with 
al-Qa’ida in Yemen (Bergen, December 27, 2009). 
 Border issues remained, along with disputes about a barricade Saudi Arabia 
had begun to build along the Yemeni–Saudi Arabian border. The border was 

Foreign Policy | 105
being  traversed daily, according to Saudi Arabia, by scores of illegal Yemeni im-
migrants, Somalis and Ethiopians. The Saudi Arabian government related its sup-
port against the Houthi rebellion to the terrorist threat, which was not, in fact, 
as large or imminently threatening as the Saleh government made it out to be. 
Indeed, Yemenis complained bitterly about the corruption of the Saleh govern-
ment and its manipulation of foreign assistance. In addition, the Americans, who 
were coordinating with Saudi Arabia concerning Yemen, were concerned by un-
substantiated claims that the Houthis had support from Iran (Murphy, November 
14, 2009), and that was further reason to back Saleh. Saudi Arabian troops went 
after the Houthi rebels, moving into Yemen and forcing the rebels out in early 2010 
(Murphy, January 27, 2010). Despite Saudi Arabian and American support for 
the Saleh regime, in 2011 several months of massive demonstrations culminated 
in some violence; an attack wounded the president (as well as other governmental 
offi  cials) severely, and he left Yemen for treatment in Saudi Arabia on June 4, 
2011, and was not expected to return to Yemen again in a presidential capacity 
(Whitaker, June 5, 2011). 
 Saudi Arabia and Yemen have long been linked economically, and not as equal 
partners. Yemeni immigration to Saudi Arabia had brought about two million 
 Yemenis into the country before the Gulf War, many of whom worked in low-paying 
construction jobs. However, Yemen, unlike Saudi Arabia, developed many private 
structures, whereas its national banks and the state itself weakened, and it drew in-
come from tariff s and foreign aid (Chaudhry 1989, 1997; Okruhlik and Conge 1997). 
A Saudi Arabian soldier stands on top of Mt. Dowd on January 27, 2010, a strategic posi-
tion that was recaptured from the Houthi rebels of Yemen the previous week.  Mt. Dowd is 
in Jizan province.

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
106 |
Given Yemen’s rather dire economic situation, it is likely that the post-Saleh  situa-
tion will continue to rely on remittances from Yemeni immigrants in Saudi Arabia 
and elsewhere in the world. 
 Osama bin Laden’s Yemeni father made his fortune early in the construction boom 
in Saudi Arabia and acquired Saudi Arabian citizenship. Countless other Yemenis 
traveled to Saudi Arabia on the pilgrimage. Recently, illegal immigration into Saudi 
Arabia has increased because of the limited employment opportunities in Yemen. 
The settlement of naturalized Yemeni immigrants has more recently been occurring 
in Najran, contributing to  salaﬁ  and Sunni-Isma‘ili tensions in that area. The Isma‘ili 
residents of Najran contend that the government wants to alter the sectarian balance 
somewhat, just as Saddam Hussein eff ected in Kirkuk by settling non-Kurds there. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Iraq 
 Saudi Arabia shares history, land, and people with Iraq. Numerous tribes extend 
over the border (Trench, ed., 1996), including the Shammar tribe, which numbers at 
least 1 million members in Saudi Arabia and about 2.5 million in Iraq. Many Saudi 
Arabians traveled to Iraq, grew up there, or studied there due to family and cultural 
ties. The Shi‘a of Saudi Arabia have religious and intellectual linkages to the Iraqi 
holy cities. In addition, both nations became oil producers, and a fair amount of 
competition and political scrapping inﬁ ghting   emerged between the British in Iraq 
and Aramco in Saudi Arabia (Brown 1999). 
 Until 1958, Iraq was ruled by the descendants of Sharif Husayn of Mecca: the Hash-
emites, once rivals of the al-Sa‘ud. Following the revolution of 1958, when the Iraqi 
monarchy was overthrown, Sa‘udi-Iraqi relations were often hostile as a consequence 
of direct disputes, ideological diff erences, and competition for inﬂ uence in the region. 
However, the Iraqi government had begun to modify and soften its attacks in 1975, 
and a closer relationship formed in response to the emergent Islamic Republic in Iran 
following the overthrow of Shah Muhammad Reza Pahlavi. The Saudi Arabian gov-
ernment formulated several conﬂ icting policy goals from 1979 to 1982—they wanted 
to rely on Iraq to off set Iranian power without antagonizing Iran and to appease Iran 
without angering Iraq; moreover, they needed the Americans to vouchsafe their secu-
rity without angering Arab nations that had opposed Camp David (Safran 1985, 353). 
 After the Iran-Iraq War began, Saudi Arabia declared neutrality yet supported 
Iraq. Saudi Arabia was concerned by Iranian victories early in 1982 and tried to con-
vince the Egyptians to intervene militarily. The Syrians were urging support of the 
Iraqis and then reversed their position, deploying Syrian forces on their borders with 
Iraqi, cutting off  the Iraqi oil ﬂ ow through their country, and sending arms to Iran. 
The Egyptians then declined to intervene. Iran began a major advance. Finally, Saudi 
Arabian concerns were allayed when the Iraqis pushed back the Iranian attacks (Saf-
ran 1985, 373–385). By the war’s end, Saudi Arabia had supplied an estimated $25 
to $30.9 billion in grants and low-interest loans to Iraq. 
 Despite Kuwait’s similar support for Iraq during the war, Iraq pressed claims 
against Kuwait and invaded the country in August 1990. This invasion shocked the 

Foreign Policy | 107
Sa‘udi royal family and the Saudi Arabian government. It feared an Iraqi advance 
into the kingdom. It was the ultimate test of Saudi Arabia’s trust in the United States. 
The U.S. and coalition forces used Saudi Arabia’s air bases to stage strikes against 
Iraq. Iraq ﬁ red Scud missiles at Riyadh and other Saudi Arabian cities. The war 
was unpopular with many Saudi Arabians, as with other Arab populations, because 
Iraq was an Arab-led Muslim country. After many years of the constant promotion 
of Arab unity, an inter-Arab war countered popular sentiments. The government 
turned to the ‘ ulama , who issued a  fatwa that essentially permitted the presence of 
foreign troops on Saudi Arabian soil in defense of the Muslim community there. 
 Operation Desert Shield lasted from August until January 1991 and was followed 
by Operation Desert Storm. Desert Shield was a defensive staging operation that was 
vital to the success of Operation Desert Storm; it allowed for the assembly of suf-
ﬁ cient troops and supplies to defend Saudi Arabia if deterrent actions failed. Thanks 
to Desert Shield, the military coalition was prepared, in a little more than a month, 
to defend Saudi Arabia and thereafter to attack Iraq. 
 Operation Desert Storm, the coalition’s air campaign, was conducted from Jan-
uary 15 to February 17, 1991. More than 44,000 combat sorties were conducted, 
dropping more than 84,000 tons of bombs, crippling the Iraqi response. A ground 
advance achieved the ﬁ nal blows against the Iraqi forces (Cordesman and Wagner 
1996; Freedman and Karsh 1993). Major-General Prince Khalid ibn Sultan, the com-
mander of the Joint Forces, wrote his own account of the war with author Patrick 
Seale. His account is unique in providing a view of behind-the-scenes diplomacy 
including inter-Arab politics prior to the Gulf War and divergences between Ameri-
can and Saudi Arabian goals, as well as details of the battle of Khaﬁ ji and certain 
blunders during the war (Khaled bin Sultan 1995). 
 The Gulf War led to the expulsion of Yemenis working in Saudi Arabia and a 
cessation of relations with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) because of 
Yasir ‘Arafat’s support of Iraq. It also led to internal opposition. Certain clerics were 
unconvinced by the offi  cial  fatwa and believed the alliance with the United States and 
hosting of foreign troops were wrong and against Islamic law encouraged other Saudi 
Arabians to oppose the presence of Western troops and political inﬂ uence on the 
Saudi Arabian government. Their criticisms continued for many years in sermons, ac-
tions, demonstrations, letters, and offi  cial memoranda. The ultimate counterresponse 
to the hue and cry over the illicitness of the American presence was the United States’ 
withdrawal from its military missions in Saudi Arabia (although the United States 
remains involved in numerous training endeavors such as the Saudi War College). 
 During the Gulf War, the Americans followed orders developed by Ambassador 
Chas Freeman prohibiting alcohol, sexy magazines, and T-shirts on women. Non-
Muslim religious services were to be held where Saudi Arabian citizens could not see 
them, and the U.S. military forces passed the  mutawa ‘ in ’s inspection (Lippman 2004, 
304–305). Nevertheless, certain failures occurred, from leaked photos of female enter-
tainment to the troops to news of excessive civilian deaths in Iraq, to breaches of Saudi 
Arabian custom. Prince Khalid agreed to having female U.S. troops be part of the 
mission; among them were female soldiers who were permitted to drive. Saudi Ara-
bian conservatives were outraged when that same year a group of 41 Saudi Arabian 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
108 |
women staged a driving demonstration. The conservatives gathered en masse outside 
the Dar al-Ifta’ to put pressure on the government (bin Baz, January 14, 2011) and 
publicly accused these Saudi Arabian women of defying their culture, trying to trans-
form Saudi Arabia into the United States, and encouraging sin. The women were ﬁ red 
from their jobs and not allowed to travel out of the country (although bin Baz, the 
Grand Mufti, helped several to recover their positions later). The incident increased 
criticism against the government for allowing foreign troops to operate from Saudi 
Arabia. Despite this, Operation Desert Storm was a success from Saudi Arabia’s 
perspective. But it heightened the resolve of Osama bin Laden and other radicals 
to rid Saudi Arabia completely of its foreigners and alliance with the United States. 
 The Iraqi government railed against the Saudi Arabian government as U.S. at-
tacks were staged during the 1990s. However, Saudi Arabia was not in favor of the 
2003 invasion of Iraq and did not support the eff ort. On November 5, 2004, 26 well-
known Saudi Arabian clerics signed a  fatwa  in support of Iraqi resistance against the 
U.S. military there. A disputed number of Saudi Arabians traveled to Iraq to join the 
resistance against the United States and the new Iraqi government. Some were linked 
directly with al-Qa’ida in Iraq. The Saudi Arabian government then strengthened its 
border security and detained or charged many of those who had gone to ﬁ ght in Iraq. 
 Saudi Arabia was concerned that American imposition of a federal system in Iraq, 
or protracted civil war, would further endanger the region. However, Saudi Arabia is 
a charter member of the International Compact with Iraq and part of the Expanded 
Iraq Neighbors meetings. Even though Iraq’s leading political coalition was made 
up primarily of Shi‘a Islamist parties, which dominated government under Prime 
Minister Nuri al-Maliki, Saudi Arabia has assumed that Iraq will pursue policies 
independent from Iran, and this assumption has proven true. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Iran 
 Saudi Arabia’s relations with Iran shifted from a quasi-alliance and rivalry in the 
Gulf with the Pahlavi regime to confrontation upon the rise of Ayatollah Ruhol-
lah Khomeini’s government. Saudi Arabia’s leaders understood from the Islamic 
Revolution in Iran that liberalization and modernization could backﬁ re in an Is-
lamist form. Iran, a much more populous nation, with the largest military force in 
the Gulf, was obviously threatening to Saudi Arabia and its oil production. It also 
challenged Saudi Arabia on the basis of leadership in the Islamic world. Iran sends 
a large number of pilgrims to the  hajj , and their demonstrations and protests proved 
troublesome after the Islamic Revolution. Also, Saudi Arabia had witnessed rising 
tensions with its Shi‘a population in the Eastern Province immediately following 
Juhayman al-‘Utaybi’s 1979 takeover of the Grand Mosque. 
 Yet Saudi Arabia’s Iran policy has not replicated that of the United States. One 
can explain this in various ways. One view considers it the practical reaction of a 
wealthier yet more vulnerable nation. Alternatively, some experts hold that in view 
of the United States’ abandonment of the shah, the Saudi Arabians had reason to 
wonder if the United States would be a reliable ally (Chubin and Tripp 1996 and 
2005). This causes them to act more cautiously, expanding their options. 

Foreign Policy | 109
 The two nations have approached oil policies diff erently; it is often argued that 
Iran needs oil income more urgently and so pushes for higher pricing. They have 
vied with each other over regional and subregional policy, clashing in Lebanon, and 
over Iraq. Also, Iran has been suspect in activism by Shi‘a Muslim populations in 
the GCC states. Iran believes that Saudi Arabia plays a strong role in opposition 
to the central government in Baluchistan and among Arabs in Khuzestan (Wehry 
et al. 2009, x). 
 Saudi Arabia and Iran were linked by the early rivalries of British and American 
oil development. By the time Great Britain withdrew from the Gulf in 1971, the 
shah of Iran had embarked on various eff orts to enhance his inﬂ uence, including 
dispatching Iranian troops to Oman to extinguish the Dhofar Rebellion. The shah 
and the Saudi Arabian government had in common a basic antipathy to communist 
and leftist elements, and both had alliances with the United States. 
 With the Islamic Revolution in Iran, Saudi Arabian–Iranian relations deterio-
rated. Iran was fearful of a counterrevolution and concerned by Saudi Arabia’s sup-
port of Iraq, despite its declared neutrality in the Iran-Iraq War. In response to the 
war, the GCC was formed, and Iran viewed this teaming up of Arab monarchies and 
sheikhdoms as a hostile gesture. Because Saudi Arabia had invited the United States 
into the Gulf in its eff orts to boost its defense and military power, Iran was directly 
antagonized and yet constrained. Otherwise, it might have responded diff erently to 
Opening of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) consultative summit in Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia, May 11, 2010. Shown here are (from left to right) Bahraini King Hamad ibn 
Isa al-Khalifa, UAE Vice-President and Prime Minister, Shaykh Muhammad ibn Rashid 
al-Maktoum, Saudi Arabian King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, Kuwaiti Emir Sabah al-
Ahmad al-Sabah, Qatari Emir Shaykh Hamad ibn Khalifa al-Thani, and Omani Deputy 
Prime Minister Fahd ibn Mahmoud al-Saeed. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
110 |
attacks by two Saudi Arabian war planes in 1984 and the U.S. downing of a pas-
senger jet in 1988 (Chubin and Tripp 2005, 11). 
 Revolutionary rhetoric in Iran called for an end to the Sa‘udi monarchy, charging 
the royal family with corruption and improper stewardship of the Holy Cities. The ini-
tial zeal in Iran to spread the Islamic Revolution to the entire region gradually abated, 
as it was not practicable, but this hostile discourse remained active. During the 1980s, 
Iranian pilgrims directly confronted Saudi Arabia’s rulers when they demonstrated 
and shouted slogans against them during the  hajj rites. The Saudi Arabian authorities 
tried to enforce rules whereby the demonstrators were conﬁ ned to speciﬁ c areas. In 
the summer of 1987, more than 400 pilgrims, about two-thirds of these Iranian, died 
after Saudi Arabian security forces attempted to halt a demonstration in Mecca. This 
led to stricter Saudi Arabian regulations and also to attacks on the Saudi Arabia’s 
embassy in Tehran, resulting in the death of one offi  cial. In 1988 Saudi Arabia severed 
diplomatic relations with Iran, and Iranian pilgrims returned to the  hajj  only in 1991. 
 For Iran, Saudi Arabia’s subsequent enmity to Iraq during the First Gulf War 
was somewhat reassuring. On the other hand, the war invited the U.S. military even 
more deeply into the role of security guarantor in the Gulf on behalf of Saudi Arabia. 
Following the Gulf War, a number of conﬂ icts arose. Calls for religious and political 
rights for the Shi‘a in the Eastern Province heightened in the Intifadhat (uprising of) 
1400. A Qatari–Saudi Arabian dispute in 1992 elicited Iranian support for Qatar; it 
pledged to send 30,000 troops. An attempted coup by Islamist Shi‘a in Bahrain was 
dismantled by that government in 1996. In the same year, the bombings of the U.S. 
Air Force barracks in Dhahran at the Khobar Towers took place. U.S. government 
offi  cials insisted that Iran was responsible, but the bombers were a cell of the Saudi 
Arabian Hizballah, and no direct Iranian link was established. Iran had provided a 
certain degree of support to the Saudi Arabian Hizballah, which published a journal 
in Beirut from 1991 to 1995,  Risalat al-Haramayn  (Fürtig 2002; Ibrahim 2007, 195). 
The two nations diff ered in their actions in Afghanistan. Saudi Arabia had funded the 
 mujahidin . Iran opposed the emergent Taliban and preferred the Northern Alliance. 
 The various bilateral diff erences were deﬂ ected by a policy of accommodation 
between then-Crown Prince ‘Abdullah and President Rafsanjani, beginning in 1997 
with their meeting in Pakistan and continuing with the Iranian president’s visit to 
Saudi Arabia in 1999. They made various agreements concerning security, the pil-
grimage, and drug traffi  cking and cooperated again in the post-9/11 period regarding 
al-Qa’ida (Keynoush 2007). 
 Tensions also arose because the Shi‘a minorities in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf 
have been treated as a potential ﬁ fth column, accused of being more loyal to Shi’ism 
or Iran than their own country. Additionally, the numerous attacks on Shi‘a Mus-
lim pilgrims, and political and clerical attacks on Shi’ism in Iraq, sent shock waves 
through the region. Salaﬁ sts in Saudi Arabia strongly attacked the Shi‘a Muslims in 
statements and  fatawa . Senior clerics at Qum explicitly attacked Wahhabis for their 
violence to the Shi‘a (Wehry et al. 2009, 29–40). Some accommodation was achieved 
in 2007, when both Iranian and Saudi Arabian offi  cials agreed to monitor highly sec-
tarian and divisive  fatawa issued by clerics and with Ayatollah Khamene’i’s symbolic 
declaration of 2009 as a year of Islamic solidarity and national unity (Wehry et al. 
2009, 38, 40). 

Foreign Policy | 111
 The Islamic Revolution did impact the Middle East; Sunni Islamists detested Shi’ism 
but held many of the same ideals as Iranians, preferring Islamic government and law, 
and some likewise embraced activism to bring about these conditions. Yet most Islamist 
parties in the Arab world rejected the Khomeinist proposal of  vilayat-e faqih (rule of 
the cleric). The populism of Khomeini’s ideology troubled Saudi Arabia (al-Mani in 
Suweidi, ed., 1996), as it called into question a monarchy’s right to govern the holy cit-
ies. Still, Iran’s Islamic Revolution heralded the Sudanese coup led by Omar al-Bashir 
and the National Islamic Front, an Islamist-dominated government in post-Saddam 
Iraq, and a moderate Islamist leadership in republican Turkey. Nonetheless, monarchs 
and traditional  amirs continued to rule in the Gulf. When Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, 
leading a wave of Iranian neoconservatism, was elected president of Iran, U.S.-Iranian 
relations deteriorated. Ahmadinejad was admired for his anti-Americanism in the Arab 
world and in Iran for being a genuine, modest, or “plain” leader giving voice to Islamic-
Iranian nationalism (Zuhur 2006). His oral support for Hizbullah of Lebanon and 
Hamas continued as Saudi Arabia was pressed by Washington to intervene to the dis-
advantage of these two groups and Iranian inﬂ uence in the region, which they believed 
to have increased with regime change in Iraq. 
 Saudi-Iranian relations are deeply impacted by U.S.–Saudi Arabian relations, es-
pecially since the demise of Saddam Hussein and in light of Iranian claims to pursue 
their rights to a nuclear program. In the ﬁ rst year of Barack Obama’s administration, 
the United States mirrored its Cold War strategy when it had championed Saudi 
Arabia as a force against Egypt’s Abd al-Nasser and Arab socialism (Kerr 1976 ; 
Zuhur 2005b, 46–47). The United States also exaggerated a Sunni-Shi‘a division of 
the Islamic world, in which Saudi Arabia was supposed to undo Iran’s ambitions 
(Wehry et al. 2009). The United States includes Saudi Arabia in this endeavor, along 
with Arab nations it considers “moderates,” like Jordan and Egypt. 
 A Saudi Arabian–Iranian rivalry is also useful for the United States in its approach to 
the global War on Terror. However, the United States loudly opposed Islamic “theoc-
racy,” demonizing rule by the cleric and use of Islamic law in general. If this was appli-
cable to Iran, it was hard to see why Saudi Arabia’s claim to be an Islamic government 
and use of Islamic law were not to be criticized. Indeed, that came about following 9/11. 
 As part of the wave of pro-democratic and revolutionary activity in the Arab 
world in 2011, demonstrations broke out in Bahrain. Saudi Arabia’s military inter-
vention there to put down the demonstrations was sharply criticized in the Iranian 
media, as the entire set of events have a strong sectarian content, being that the dem-
onstrators are Shi‘a but the Bahraini government, like the Saudi Arabian troops, are 
Sunni. The Saudi Arabian–Iranian rivalry may appear in the “new” Middle East, if 
these same trends continue in Syria and other Arab countries. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Egypt 
 Saudi Arabia and Egypt clashed politically from Abd al-Nasser’s ascension until 
Anwar al-Sadat’s succession. Nasser’s use of propaganda against the kingdom on 
Radio Cairo and in the press was one manifestation of this rivalry. Another was 
the previously mentioned Saudi Arabian and Egyptian embroilment in Yemen, 
with the Egyptians supporting the republicans, while Saudi Arabia supported the 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
112 |
loyalists. These diff erences were exploited by Egypt following ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s de-
mise and led to a plot for an attempted assassination of Nasser involving Sa‘udi 
and Syrian offi  cials, and also many other incidents (see Chapter 2, History). Some 
of the Sa‘udi royal family, many young technocrats, and some in the military were 
inﬂ uenced by or at least receptive to the popularity of Arab nationalism, and they 
embraced challenges to the rule of the al-Sa‘ud. At the same time, the ideas of anti-
imperialism, and national control and sovereignty, impacted even King Sa‘ud, who 
vacillated between polices for a time. Also, while Egypt was truly a regional leader 
in this period, it lost some regional inﬂ uence due to the wane of Nasserism, and the 
Camp David agreement, whereas Saudi Arabia’s impact in the region has grown. 
 When the union between Egypt and Syria ended, Nasser issued increasingly ideo-
logical attacks on the forces he thought were to blame, the political inﬂ uence of the 
al-Sa‘ud, imperialism, and comprador elites (who served Western commercial and 
political interests) among them. These attacks and the stances taken by the Syrian and 
Iraqi governments led Saudi Arabia to increase its alliance with the United States. 
 Egypt received Saudi Arabian aid after its great losses as a result of the Six-Day 
War in 1967 and also following the Ramadan War of 1973. It also received aid for 
nonmilitary development. The Saudi Fund for Development, established in 1975, 
helped to provide infrastructure for the water system in Cairo as well as $50 million 
for the Egyptian reconstruction of the Suez Canal cities of Isma‘iliyya and Suez 
( Aramco World , September–October 1977;  Aramco World , November–December 
1979 [entire issue], including Lawton 1979). During these years, as President Sadat 
consolidated his power, Saudi Arabian–Egyptian relations became more amicable. 
Sadat ordered the exodus of Soviet advisers from Egypt and mended relations with 
Syria. Saudi Arabia’s position during the oil embargo of 1973 was designed to help 
the Arab and Palestinian cause, and thus Egypt as well. For similar reasons, Saudi 
Arabian defense funding to Egypt was viewed in Washington and Tel Aviv as serious 
strategic challenge (Jabber in Kerr and Yassin, eds., 1982). 
 The oil boom brought greater numbers of Saudi Arabians to Egypt, where they 
drove up property prices and indulged themselves in nightclubs and casinos, some 
married young girls for a summer (or less), which created a degree of resentment and 
dependence. The Saudi Arabian government objected to the signing of the Camp 
David Accords on September 17, 1978. The accords, signed by Sadat and Israeli 
prime minister Menachem Begin and witnessed by President Jimmy Carter, involved 
two frameworks, one of which led to a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, signed 
in 1979. Saudi Arabia opposed the Israeli-preferred tactic of pursuing separate peace 
treaties with Arab nations, and this one did not provide justice for the Palestinians. 
Egypt was ousted from the Arab League, lost its aid from Saudi Arabia, and turned 
even further to the West in consequence. Relations were restored by 1987, although, 
in the interim, Saudi Arabia had continued to be inﬂ uential, indirectly abetting the 
growth of Islamist societies and sentiment in Egypt and supporting various Islamic 
endeavors. Egypt sent forces to participate in the coalition eff orts in Saudi Arabia 
during the Gulf War. 
 Egyptian labor has contributed much in Saudi Arabia since 1971, when laws were 
changed to favor emigration. About 10 percent of Egypt’s population works abroad, 

Foreign Policy | 113
nearly 48 percent of them in Saudi Arabia. Unskilled labor accounts for a large por-
tion of those hired, but today, a higher percentage of skilled workers, professionals, 
and service employees are recruited. To counter displacement by Asian labor, the 
Egyptian government instituted a ministry for emigration. 
 The heightening of Islamism in Egypt was partially attributed to return emigrants 
from the Gulf or the example of Saudi Arabian salaﬁ sm (see the preceding, the glos-
sary, and Chapter 5, section on religion and law). This contributed to a homegrown 
salaﬁ sm in Egypt, particularly since the 1990s, as seen in the popularity of purist 
religious messages, themes, and preachers and increasing attacks against Egyptian 
Christians. The government challenged extremism by periodically repressing Egypt’s 
most well-organized opposition, the Muslim Brotherhood, but it issued no direct 
onslaught against salaﬁ sm. 
 As of 2010, Saudi Arabia had been the largest Arab donor to Egypt, even with 
the interruption in aid already mentioned. However, the ordinary Egyptian does not 
know that Saudi Arabia gives money to his country; hence, the foreign-policy inﬂ u-
ence is more on the government than on the populace. Books critical of the Saudi 
Arabian government were consistently on the censored list (euphemistically termed 
“removed from circulation”) issued by the Egyptian Ministry of Information. These 
were among a list of 500−πλυσ titles including publications about Islam or Islamic 
matters by authors with non-Muslim names, books critical of the Egyptian govern-
ment, and books whose titles mention gender or sexual issues. With the Egyptian Jan-
uary 25th Revolution of 2011, Hosni Mubarak was ousted from power. The ideas of 
the young revolutionaries or elements in the army may impact Egypt’s foreign policy; 
certainly there has been new rhetoric and actions, including the opening of the border 
to Gaza at Rafah and more criticism of Saudi Arabia due to the rulers’ repression of 
demonstrations in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. In tensions between salaﬁ st-oriented 
groups in Egypt and new liberal parties, accusations about Saudi Arabia’s role in 
encouraging salaﬁ sm is seen, particularly in the pro-liberal press in Egypt. Egyptian 
and Saudi Arabian leaders have been pressed by the United States to mitigate various 
situations involving the Palestinians, and the Arab-Israeli issue remains the crux of 
many of their diffi  culties and diff erences. The young Egyptians who sparked the 2011 
revolution want to cool relations with Israel. Some of the human rights activists held 
a large protest at the Saudi Arabian embassy in May 2011 because they felt that Saudi 
Arabia, and speciﬁ cally Prince Walid ibn Talal, is interfering with their eff orts to put 
former president Hosni Mubarak on trial ( Islâmi Davet , May 9, 2011). 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with the GCC States 
 Saudi Arabia’s relations with the smaller Arabian states were shaped by competi-
tive relations due to tribal rivalries, the inﬂ uence of Great Britain, oil policy, and 
mutual security concerns involving Iran, Iraq, and the United States. Saudi Arabia 
has had some signiﬁ cant border disputes with GCC countries, some of which have 
been settled. 
 In 1992, Saudi Arabia took the lead in forming the GCC, along with Bahrain, Ku-
wait, Oman, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates. The permanent seat of the GCC 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
114 |
is in Saudi Arabia. Each member has insuffi  cient military power to protect itself from 
Iran or Iraq, although for diff erent reasons. The smaller sheikhdoms were too small 
to protect their oil ﬁ elds; Saudi Arabia was too vast with too limited a population 
(although this is changing) and had deliberately built a smaller military to limit the 
possibility of insurrection. Therefore, the GCC sought to limit ﬁ rst Iran, and then 
Iraq, from overpowering them in the 1970s and 1980s (Anthony in Adams, ed., 1988). 
This observation has remained true from the 1990s on. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Qatar 
 Qatar hosts U.S. military forces and has become increasingly open to international 
entities at a time when U.S. military forces have withdrawn from Saudi Arabia. 
Sometimes Saudi Arabians have expressed fears that the United States can oper-
ate more easily from the GCC states   and may manipulate them against the king-
dom. However, Qatar is also home to the  al-Jazeera satellite television channel, 
which frequently targets Saudi Arabia and U.S. Middle East policies. Qatari foreign 
policy has more stringently opposed Israel, appeased Iran, and been more sup-
portive of Hamas than Saudi Arabia has in recent years. Following the December 
2008–January 2009 war on Gaza, a Doha summit was convened to which Ahma-
dinejad, Bashar al-Asaad  , Hamas’s Khalid Mishaal, and Iraqi vice-president Tariq 
al-Hashemi were invited. It coincided with an alternative summit in Riyadh (Wehry 
et al. 2009, 50–51). 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Oman 
 Oman and Saudi Arabia clashed over rights to the Buraymi Oasis, an area with nine 
villages. Ibn Sa‘ud had ordered Prince Turki ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ataishan to seize the 
Buraymi Oasis in 1952 despite the sultan of Muscat and Oman’s claims to the area. 
Aramco had supported Saudi Arabia’s claim to the Buraymi Oasis because of its 
own designs on the holdings of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company near the village of 
Fuhud. Aramco supplied Saudi Arabia with documentation for its historical claim, 
and the matter was given to a tribunal. Eff orts to bribe the tribunal were later re-
vealed. British offi  cers overseeing the forces of the shaykh of Abu Dhabi retook the 
Buraymi Oasis in 1955, forcing the Saudi Arabian police to withdrew, and they were 
followed by a 350-man Scottish regiment, the Cameron Highlanders. Aramco knew 
it had been drawn into a struggle with the British (Brown 1999, 207–213), but the 
U.S. government did not press the Saudi Arabian claim. An agreement was forged 
in 1974. In the subsequent Dhofar Rebellion, the sultan of Oman received assistance 
from the shah of Iran and Saudi Arabia. 
 Sultan Qabus ibn Said gradually opened the country from the isolation it experi-
enced under Sultan ibn Taymur. His government, like Saudi Arabia’s, has been pro-
Western. On January 17, 2011, antigovernment and pro-democracy demonstrations 
broke out in Oman as part of what is being termed the Arab Awakening, or Arab 
Spring of 2011, a wave of protest movements. 

Foreign Policy | 115
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Kuwait 
 The Ottoman Empire established the outlines of the modern states bordering the 
Gulf, from Iraq and Kuwait to Qatar. Kuwait has allowed entry to various enemies 
of the al-Sa‘ud, from the Rashidi family to the Ikhwan leaders. However, Saudi 
Arabia’s actions in the Gulf War demonstrated Saudi Arabian–Kuwaiti mutual 
interests. 
 Kuwait has a large Shi‘a population and considers itself vulnerable to Iran. As 
in Saudi Arabia, some Kuwaiti elements deplored the Western military presence in 
the Gulf. In 2005, a group called the Peninsula Lions Brigades, allegedly linked to 
al-Qa’ida, fought battles with police in Kuwait City, killing four police and eight at-
tackers, including two Saudi Arabians. Six individuals who planned attacks against 
the U.S. army Camp Arifjan (a forward logistics base) in August 2009 were arrested. 
Kuwait has shared and coordinated information on Islamist radical activists with 
Saudi Arabia. However, in Kuwait, democratization is proceeding more swiftly than 
in Saudi Arabia, resulting in some conservative backlash in Kuwait as well as actions 
against critics of Saudi Arabia or conservative Muslim policies. For instance, a Saudi 
Arabian cleric, Muhammad al-‘Uraiﬁ , was banned from entering Kuwait due to pro-
tests by Shi‘a members of parliament in Kuwait. In response, 100 leading Kuwaiti 
clerics signed a petition to lift the ban ( Kuwait Times , January 16, 2010). The late 
Egyptian Qur’an scholar Nasr Abu Zayd, identiﬁ ed with the liberal, anti-apostasy 
cause, and Saudi Arabian historian Madawi al-Rasheed, who has been critical of the 
Sa‘udi rulers, were scheduled to speak in Kuwait in 2010. However, they were both 
denied travel permissions. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Bahrain 
 The Bahraini government’s claims that Iran has designs on the island mask politi-
cal dissatisfaction with the government and discrimination against its citizenry and 
reﬂ ect the historical relationship between the island nation and Iran. Bahrain’s indig-
enous population is about two-thirds Shi‘a Muslim, but its ruling family and elites 
are Sunni. An Iranian-sponsored coup linked to the Islamic Front for the Liberation 
of Bahrain was discovered in December 1981. The police believed the group planned 
to assassinate Bahraini offi  cials and attempt to overthrow the government. Other in-
cidents followed just as the war on tankers took place during the Iran-Iraq War. An-
other period of unrest and demonstrations in Bahrain occurred in the mid-1990s, and 
then on February 14, 2011, very large antigovernment demonstrations began. Very 
severe violence against demonstrators was cataloged, and some international observ-
ers believed that the United States did not support the protesters as they claimed to 
in Tunisia and Egypt, because of the stationing of the U.S. Fifth Fleet in Bahrain 
and strong Saudi Arabian support for the Bahraini government. 
 Bahrain is now closer to Saudi Arabia than it was in the past. In 1986, Saudi Ara-
bia mediated a serious dispute between Bahrain and Qatar over the Bahraini claim to 
Zubarah, Hawar, and islands south of Zubarah. At that time, Bahrainis constructing 
a Coast Guard station were kidnapped by Qataris; a truce was reached but then failed 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
116 |
when Qatar went to the International Court of Justice in the Hague. The King Fahd 
Causeway, a 15-mile- (24-kilometer-) long highway bridge, links Bahrain to Saudi 
Arabia, providing easy access to Saudi Arabian drivers who may spend a weekend 
there or even reside in Bahrain. 
 After weeks of demonstrations, 1,000 Saudi Arabian troops along with tanks and 
vehicles moved into Bahrain on March 13, 2011, to support the Khalifa government 
along with other GCC forces. If the al-Khalifa rulers of Bahrain were to be further 
politically challenged, the Saudi Arabian government will likely continue to lend 
force to that government because it fears the spread of sectarian violence or larger 
demonstrations into Saudi Arabia. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with the United Arab Emirates 
 The United Arab Emirates, like Saudi Arabia, was shaken by the Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait, realizing the weakness of the GCC’s deterrent and defensive capabilities. It 
supported the coalition’s actions against Iraq. Similarly to Saudi Arabia, it opposed 
the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003. The Emirates are somewhat more liberal than 
Saudi Arabia; parts of the country have attracted Saudi Arabian investments, and 
Saudi Arabians travel there frequently. Although Saudi Arabian–Emirati relations 
are generally good, there are disputes concerning maritime rights. In March 2010 
an incident in which the navy of the Emirates ﬁ red on a small Saudi Arabian patrol 
vessel was reported in the foreign press ( Telegraph , March 26, 2010). 
 Some Islamist militant activities have been tracked to the United Arab Emirates, 
and the country also sent troops in March 2011 to protect the rulers of Bahrain from 
the political threat posed by demonstrators. 
 Outside of politics, the United Arab Emirates have much in common with Saudi 
Arabia. The Emirates have made eff orts similar to Saudi Arabia to reach out to Mus-
lims worldwide and to encourage scholarship in Islamic studies and on Muslims. The 
Emirates are also concerned by the populist democratic protests of the Arab Spring. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with the United States 
 Saudi Arabian–American relations are key to Saudi Arabia’s foreign and defense 
policies and also many of its oil policies to date. The United States became involved 
in Saudi Arabia through its commercial interest in oil and through commercial actors 
that are directly and indirectly linked with the U.S. government, initially Aramco and 
later many other companies. Aramco’s explorations helped to keep the government 
of Ibn Sa‘ud aﬂ oat and were able to keep out British commercial interests. Aramco 
also provided much of the country’s early infrastructure, as it needed a working port, 
housing, hospitals, roads, and imported American labor. In addition, its leadership 
served as unoffi  cial country representatives (Brown 1999; Lippman 2004). 
 Ibn Sa‘ud had depended on the British for security guarantees, but with his deci-
sion to grant oil rights to the Americans, he expected and hoped for this assistance 
from the United States. In 1943, President Franklin Roosevelt declared the defense of 
Saudi Arabia to be a key interest of the United States. Military missions were sent to 

Foreign Policy | 117
Saudi Arabia and renewed for decades. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built an 
airﬁ eld at Dhahran and other facilities, including the King Khalid Military City (built 
between 1974 and 1987), the largest project ever completed by the corps (Bronson 
2008). Even after the withdrawal of all but 500 troops, American contractors continue 
to train and hire personnel for the Saudi Arabian defense sectors. The military-aid re-
lationship has been questioned periodically by various U.S. congressional members, 
who countered or cancelled various weapons sales on the grounds that Saudi Arabia 
might use these weapons against Israel (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993, 223). 
 Saudi Arabia and the United States signed a mutual defense agreement in 1951 under 
which the United States was entitled to create a permanent Military Training Mission 
in the kingdom. The U.S. secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, considered Nasser to 
be very dangerous and thought that his promotion of Arab nationalism was dangerous 
to U.S. interests. Then after Nasser’s request to the United States for arms was ignored, 
Dulles thought his purchase of Eastern-bloc arms and an inﬂ ux of Soviet advisors even 
more ominous. Nasser’s Arab nationalist messages, and the strength of leftist parties 
and later the Ba‘th in Iraq and Syria, caused consternation in Saudi Arabia and Wash-
ington. President John F. Kennedy sent off  squadrons of ﬁ ghters to Saudi Arabia to 
fend off  Egyptian air attacks in 1963. Similarly, when the Iran-Iraq War began, Presi-
dent Carter permitted Saudi Arabia to borrow AWACs (airborne warning and control 
systems) monitoring craft and crews. The Saudi Arabian–American alliance withstood 
the pressures of diff erent stances on Israel and the Palestinians. Yet Saudi Arabia noted 
that sponsors of Israel were among its strongest critics in the United States. 
 In the 1970s, the oil boom resulted in business expansions and construction in 
the kingdom that employed tens of thousands of Americans. Aramco embarked on 
a huge eight-year project to capture and utilize natural gas that had heretofore been 
ﬂ ared off  as waste, and it needed to bring in 30,000 workers. American companies 
constructed buildings at Riyadh University, classrooms for the Saudi Navy, the head-
quarters of the National Commercial Bank, military housing, a hospital in Ta’if, resi-
dential areas for the industrial city of Yanbu, and an ethylene plant there, all in 1980. 
In the same year, they were involved in training programs for industries, ﬁ re crews, 
and naval crews, and they also handled air traffi  c control. The U.S. Congress inter-
vened and investigated the paying of bribes to foreign offi  cials. This process revealed 
that some companies like the Whitaker Corporation, which operated hospitals in the 
kingdom, successfully operated and prospered without breaking any U.S. laws, since 
payments to nongovernmental offi  cials were legal (Lippman 2004, 161, 164–165). 
 The U.S.–Saudi Arabian Joint Economic Commission (JECOR) was established in 
1974 and ceased in 2000. It was managed by the U.S. Treasury Department and ran en-
tirely on Saudi Arabian funds, except for one program for solar energy development, 
which received U.S. funds. It was independent of the U.S. embassy until about 1989 
and provided assistance in numerous aspects of development and governmental man-
agement, from statistics collection and compilation to the running of national parks, 
desalinization, customs administration, audits, highway administration, agricultural 
development, training of tax auditors, and university-level educational exchanges 
(Lippman 2004, 168–178). Depending on one’s perspective, the program could be 
critiqued for fostering a dependent, cliental relationship between Saudi Arabians and 
Americans or praised for accomplishing its achievement of building capability. 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
118 |
 The United States followed through on its security commitment to the kingdom 
when it sent 400,000 troops there following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The 1991 
Gulf War was a conﬂ uence of U.S. intent to forcibly contain Saddam Hussein and 
Saudi Arabian fears that their small military (like the other small militaries of the 
GCC states) would be overrun by Iraq. The enormous U.S. presence in Saudi Arabia 
garnered many Arab critics, including Islamic opposition in the kingdom. Following 
the Gulf War, Saudi Arabia made a request to purchase $20 billion of equipment 
from the United States. The administration remonstrated that Congress would dis-
approve of the package, and so the request was made in stages. 
 The September 11, 2001 attacks on the twin towers of the World Trade Center, 
carried out by 19 Arab Muslim hijackers, including Saudi Arabians, plunged Saudi 
Arabian–American relations into a crisis. Saudi Arabians were horriﬁ ed by the at-
tacks, but the public and media response in the United States involved such sweeping 
condemnations against the kingdom, its royal family, and religion, and against Mus-
lims and Arabs in general, that they were off ended. Many had been educated in the 
United States in the years when some 30,000 students per year traveled west. Now, 
visitor and student visas were withheld, as well as visas requested for medical reasons 
(large numbers of student visas were eventually issued in 2007). Even the staunchest 
Saudi Arabian supporters of the United States were treated like potential terrorists. 
A lawsuit was ﬁ led against members of the royal family for complicity in the 9/11 
attacks. The U.S. government demanded reforms in Saudi Arabia and an admission 
of its role in spreading religious fundamentalism globally. The U.S. government also 
asked the kingdom to take speciﬁ c measures to control donations and ﬁ nancial links 
to terrorists. Some demands took shape in the Saudi Arabian Accountability Act 
presented by both the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate in 2007. 
 Saudi Arabia disagreed with the U.S. attacks in Afghanistan and with the United 
States’ announced intent to make war on Iraq. Despite Saudi Arabia’s refusal to join 
the coalition forces invading Iraq in 2003, the United States was permitted to launch 
aircraft from the kingdom in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Simultaneously, 
on February 27, 2003, a gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops from Saudi Arabia was 
announced. At the end of April, the Combined Air Operations Center was moved 
from Prince Sultan Air Base to the al-Udeid Air Base in Qatar. About 4,500 U.S. 
troops went from Saudi Arabia to Qatar, leaving only about 500 at Eskan village 
near Riyadh. This engendered musings by Saudi Arabians, who were not consulted 
regarding the withdrawal, that the United States now preferred to rely on the smaller 
GCC countries (Zuhur, Personal Interviews 2005–2008). 
 In 2003 terrorist attacks in Riyadh and subsequent attacks on the country (see 
Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues) convinced many Saudi Arabians that an Islamist 
terrorist threat was real and urgent and required a national response. Westerners 
working in the kingdom were targeted, like Simon Cumbers and Frank Gardner, 
a journalist and photographer  who worked for the BBC. Paul Marshall Johnson, a 
helicopter engineer who lived in Saudi Arabia and worked for Lockheed Martin, was 
kidnapped on June 15, 2004, at a fake police checkpoint near Riyadh by individuals 
who called themselves al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula. The group demanded 
the release of its members who were in Saudi Arabian prisons within 72 hours. Just 

Foreign Policy | 119
three days later, Johnson was beheaded by the group, which videotaped his murder. 
For the ﬁ rst time in many decades, large numbers of workers attached to companies 
based in Saudi Arabia returned to the United States. Relations began to improve 
again by 2007, as, by then, many terrorists had been captured and quite a few of the 
measures adopted and reforms begun by King ‘Abdullah addressed U.S. and inter-
national criticisms of the kingdom. 
 Saudi Arabia, the Question of Palestine, and Israel 
 King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ﬁ rst corresponded with the British government concerning Pales-
tine. His letters claim that he did not support the Palestinian rebels of the 1936 upris-
ing (although he did). They aver his loyalty to Great Britain and express concern over 
Jewish emigration and over any Jordanian control over Palestinian territory, especially 
Jerusalem; this last arose from his lengthy rivalry with the Hashemites (al-Rasheed 
in Rogan  and Shlaim, eds., 2007, 231–233; also see Burdett 1999). Similarly, ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz’s subsequent correspondence with the U.S. government showed his opposition 
to Zionist expansion in Palestine and the partition plan and his concerns about U.S. 
support for Israel. President Truman hinted he would reverse President Roosevelt’s 
commitment to a more neutral position when he wrote to the king of the persecution of 
the Jews and the refugees’ need for a homeland. King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz replied, “I believe 
that your honor will agree that there is not a single people on this earth who would agree 
to have a foreign people come into their country, outnumber them and take control of 
everything” and concluded, “I … expect that your honor will reconsider the position 
you had adopted and ﬁ nd a just solution to the plight of those refugees which would 
secure their safety in other countries around the world without a transgression against a 
calm people living peacefully in their own country” (Letter dated November 1, 1946, in 
al-Qabesi, ed., 1998, 222–223). In response,  Mahrajanat al-jihad (festivals of jihad) were 
held in 1947. At these events as many as 200,000 Saudi Arabians signed up to ﬁ ght in 
Palestine (Abu Aliyya 1999, 321), although they did not actually ﬁ ght in the war of 1948. 
 After a huge number of Palestinians were driven from their homeland in 1948, 
Saudi Arabia off ered them support and attempted to convince the United States to 
address their rights. In the Saudi Arabian government’s analysis, the Palestinian 
issue, and the United States’ uncritical support of Israel, was a signiﬁ cant cause of 
Arab discord and the chaotic politics of the next three decades. The defeat of the 
Arab (mainly Egyptian) forces in 1967 was perceived as the failure of Arab states to 
overcome Israel and led to a period of radical activities, hostage seizures, and bomb-
ings. These were mostly discontinued by the mid-1970s. Saudi Arabia’s eff orts in the 
oil boycott of 1973 were aimed at U.S. support of Israel, and perhaps, if the boycott 
had continued, it might have achieved its goal. 
 Saudi Arabia contributed ﬁ nancially to the PLO in the 1980s. In return for this aid, 
it expected to moderate PLO actions. Islamist Palestinian student groups coalesced 
in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia during this period, eventually emerging as Hamas. Rela-
tions with the PLO had been cut off  when ‘Arafat supported Saddam Hussein dur-
ing the Gulf War, due to Hussein’s courtship of the PLO in the several years prior 
to the war. Relations between Saudi Arabia and the PLO were later restored. The 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
120 |
Oslo Accords (offi  cially the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government 
Arrangements) set in motion ‘Arafat’s return and the Fatah Party’s dominance until 
Hamas’s electoral win in 2006. Then, Saudi Arabia was forced to reassess its Palestin-
ian policies, as Israel revisited iron-ﬁ st policies against the Palestinians. 
 Meanwhile, in 2005 and 2006, Saudi Arabia was accused of supporting Hamas 
ﬁ nancially, which its ambassador to the United States, ‘Adel Jubeir, has denied. 
Americans alleged that private donors in Saudi Arabia contributed to the movement 
(Congressional Research Service [CRS] and Library of Congress 2006, 9). Although 
then U.S. secretary of state Condoleezza Rice accused Hamas of lacking a commit-
ment to peace, Prince Sa‘ud, the foreign minister, rejected the U.S. idea that Saudi 
Arabia should cut off  relations with the Palestinian National Authority due to the 
election of Hamas (CRS and Library of Congress 2006, 10). Saudi Arabia communi-
cates with and supports Hamas as a legitimate leadership; however, the United States 
and Israel refuse to do so. Therefore, some U.S leaders demanded that Saudi Arabia 
interface solely with Mahmoud ‘Abbas, leader of the Palestinian National Authority. 
Saudi Arabia’s position is that the Palestinians must determine their own leadership 
and that the Kingdom must play a role to contain the inter-Palestinian rivalries be-
tween Fatah and Hamas. King ‘Abdullah therefore invited both movements to Mecca 
for eight days of meetings resulting in the February 8, 2007 Mecca Agreement. Hos-
tilities broke out again between the two groups, and another agreement was signed 
EXCERPT FROM KING ‘ABDULLAH’S SPEECH TO THE ARAB LEAGUE 
SUMMIT, 2002, CONCERNING THE ARAB PEACE INITIATIVE
King ‘Abdullah offered a comprehensive peace initiative to Israel by the Arab 
nations at a summit meeting in Beirut in 2002, when he was Crown Prince. His 
offer was ignored by Israel at that time as the Israelis began a massive invasion 
of the West Bank. His wording acknowledges the former military struggle for 
Palestinians’ rights but emphasizes the need for peace.
“In spite of all that has happened and what still may happen, the primary 
issue in the heart and mind of every person in our Arab Islamic nation is the 
restoration of legitimate rights in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon… . We believe 
in taking up arms in self-defense and to deter aggression. But we also believe 
in peace when it is based on justice and equity, and when it brings an end 
to conﬂ ict. Only within the context of true peace can normal relations ﬂ ourish 
between the people of the region and allow the region to pursue development 
rather than war. In light of the above, and with your backing and that of the 
Almighty, I propose that the Arab summit put forward a clear and unanimous 
initiative addressed to the United Nations security council based on two basic 
issues: normal relations and security for Israel in exchange for full withdrawal 
from all occupied Arab territories, recognition of an independent Palestinian 
state with al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital, and the return of refugees” (New 
York Times, March 27, 2002).

Foreign Policy | 121
in Yemen in 2008. Reconciliation talks continued in 2010. Fatah and Hamas leaders 
signed an agreement to form a National Unity government on April 27, 2011. The new 
post-Mubarak army-led Egyptian government had brokered the deal. This endeavor 
is supported by most in Saudi Arabia but is opposed by the United States and Israel. 
 Saudi Arabia’s relations with Israel have remained hostile, both in the lack of 
diplomatic relations and in substantial counterinformation in each country. Saudi 
Arabia did not support the Camp David agreement because it held that a series of 
separately forged peace agreements would weaken the Arab and Palestinian positions 
and fail to provide the comprehensive agreements necessary to address the Palestin-
ian refugee problem or meet Israel’s demands for security. Some of the strongest 
critics of Saudi Arabia in the United States have been supporters of Israel, including 
members of Congress. The kingdom has accepted the principle of a two-state solu-
tion for many years. Saudi Arabia proposed the King Fahd Plan in August 1981, 
known as the Fez initiative (see Chapter 2, History), which included eight points: 
Israeli withdrawal from all territory occupied in 1967; dismantling of Israeli settle-
ments; a guarantee of freedom of worship for all at the holy sites in Jerusalem; rights 
of return for Palestinians and compensation for those who did not want to return; 
transitional government of the West Bank and Gaza Strip by the United Nations for 
a few months; an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital; peace for 
all states in the region; and a guarantee of the peace plan from the United Nations. 
 Another peace initiative was announced by then-crown prince ‘Abdullah in 2002 
and was reiterated after he became king. These included that Israel would withdraw 
from the occupied territories of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, that the Palestin-
ians would be entitled to East Jerusalem as their capital, and the Arab nations would 
recognize Israel and agree to nonhostilities. In 2005, Saudi Arabia announced an 
end to its previous boycott on Israeli goods, as that would counter a principle of the 
World Trade Organization. 
 Prince Turki al-Faysal invited Avi Shlaim, an Oxford professor and British-Israeli 
revisionist historian, to Riyadh, where Shlaim said he did not encounter any harsh 
anti-Israeli rhetoric. Shlaim supports the King ‘Abdullah initiative but fears that 
Israel’s Netanyahu and his American allies have been able to keep the world’s focus 
on Iran rather than on solutions to the Arab-Palestinian conﬂ ict ( Jordan Times , 
January 14, 2011). 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with Jordan 
 Due to their early warring with the Hashemites, whom they drove out of the Hijaz, 
the al-Sa‘ud have on occasion suspected the Hashemite rulers of Jordan of encour-
aging irredentism in the kingdom. The two countries became much closer politically 
after 1955, when both began to feel the sting of Nasser’s regional policies and pro-
paganda and due to their economic relationship. Saudi Arabia provided very sub-
stantial development funds and grants to Jordan consisting of millions of dollars to 
build the Husayn Thermal Power Station, develop ‘Aqaba’s port infrastructure and 
thermal station, and build Jordan University, UNRWA (United Nations Relief and 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
122 |
Work Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East) schools, the Zarqa-Ghor 
road, and many other projects. The kingdom also employed thousands of Jordani-
ans, many of whom were actually Palestinians. Because of Jordan’s large Palestin-
ian population, Saudi Arabia’s relations with the PLO were important to Jordan in 
mediations following the Black September crisis of 1970. 
 Saudi Arabia treated Jordan as an important means of creating a secure buff er 
zone to its north and of attaining cooperation on interregional smuggling and in its 
Arab relations (Brand 1994, 87–120). When the Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait and 
Saudi Arabia called on the Arab nations to support the coalition, Jordan refused to 
do so and declared neutrality. Saudi Arabia cut off  grants and aid to Jordan. Jordan 
obtained oil in the 1990s primarily from Iraq, but since 2003, it has imported oil from 
Saudi Arabia at market rates and under certain concessions. 
 Saudi Arabian Relations with Lebanon 
 Saudi Arabians became involved in Lebanon initially through Hussein ‘Uwayni 
(1900–1970), an adviser to King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. ‘Uwayni was sent by Amin Rihani, 
a visitor to Saudi Arabia in 1924–1925, to mediate between Ibn Sa‘ud and Sharif 
‘Ali, then king of the Hijaz. The mediation failed, but ‘Uwayni became close to Ibn 
Sa‘ud   and wealthy through various types of commercial ventures. He represented 
French interests in the kingdom and eventually rose to become the prime minister of 
Lebanon (Traboulsi in Al-Rasheed, ed., 2008, 65–69). 
 In these years, Saudi Arabia sought political means to resist King ‘Abdullah of 
Jordan’s plan for Greater Syria and Nuri Sa‘id Pasha’s Greater Fertile Crescent plan 
and to oppose leftists and Nasserists in Lebanon. While ‘Uwayni was prime minister, 
he tried to discourage supporters of Nasser in Lebanon (AbuKhalil in Al-Rasheed, 
ed., 2008, 85) and supported an anticommunist policy, encouraging Lebanon’s sign-
ing of the Point Four agreement with the U.S. government (Traboulsi 2008, 76). 
‘Uwayni helped obtain support for an agreement permitting the Aramco subsidiary 
Tapline and Bechtel Corporation to build a 1,750-kilometer pipeline across Syria 
and Lebanon to connect Saudi Arabia to Banyas, Syria, and Tripoli, Lebanon. The 
Lebanese parliament ratiﬁ ed an agreement with Tapline, but the Syrian parliament 
refused, leading to the Husni Za‘im coup in Syria in March 1949. Thereafter, the 
Tapline agreement was ratiﬁ ed, and Syria agreed to an armistice with Israel. Za‘im 
announced that Syria would unite with Iraq, but Saudi Arabia and Egypt moved 
quickly, off ering him $6 million to unite with their countries instead (Traboulsi in 
al-Rasheed, ed., 2008, 76–77). Za‘im was soon killed, in August 1949, by Colonel 
Sami Hinnawi, who took over and rolled back movement on Tapline and talks with 
Israel (Saunders 1996, 11). 
 The Saudi Arabian princes became powerful in the Arabic-language media indus-
try, once centered in Lebanon. They published the  al-Hayat newspaper, which later 
moved to London. Other ties were strengthened through higher education and labor 
migration. The media have had a strong inﬂ uence in Lebanese internal conﬂ icts and 
also on the Arab world in general. 

Foreign Policy | 123
 Saudi Arabian leaders repeatedly attempted to mediate throughout the lengthy 
Lebanese Civil War, for instance, between the PLO and the Syrians, and they re-
sponded to Syria’s recalcitrance by withdrawing the Saudi Arabian brigade stationed 
in the Golan since 1973 (Safran 1985, 250). Saudi Arabia’s leaders were enraged by 
the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the siege of Beirut in 1982. U.S. secretary of state 
Alexander Haig resigned when Fahd pressured President Reagan to call on Israel to 
desist, and repeated his eff ort, as Haig felt these actions undermined his own plan to 
ensure foreign withdrawals from Lebanon (Safran 1985, 347–350). The long, com-
plicated war resulted in an increase in sectarianism as well as in Syrian inﬂ uence in 
Lebanon. At the end of that crisis, the Lebanese legislature was invited to Ta’if in 
the Hijaz and negotiated the Ta’if Accords in 1989. 
 Another notable ﬁ gure enhancing Saudi Arabia’s inﬂ uence in Lebanon (and then 
in Syria) was Prime Minister Raﬁ q al-Hariri, a self-made businessman who became 
wealthy in Saudi Arabia and was an adviser to the al-Sa‘ud family on Lebanese af-
fairs. Al-Hariri was close to Hafez al-Asad and inﬂ uential in Damascus and Riyadh. 
He was assassinated in a bombing of his motorcade on February 15, 2005. Most 
assert that Syrians, or Lebanese elements working for Syria (individuals associated 
with Hizbullah), planned his assassination because he had begun maneuvering to 
attain a Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon. Saudi Arabia pressed Syria to agree to 
an international tribunal investigating the circumstances of al-Hariri’s assassination. 
Saudi Arabia strongly supported al-Hariri and, following his death, his son Sa‘d, 
who led the Future Party of Lebanon, amid U.S.-sponsored eff orts that resulted in 
Syrian withdrawal. Their combined eff orts also targeted Hizbullah and the follow-
ers of General Aoun, who comprised roughly half of the country’s population and 
demanded enhanced political rights as an opposition. As‘ad AbuKhalil holds that 
Saudi Arabia acted in this way in Lebanon because of its linkages with the Bush ad-
ministration and that it could do so in the absence of a strong Arab rival (AbuKhalil 
in al-Rasheed, ed., 2008, 92–95). I suggest that elements of the Saudi Arabian gov-
ernment were protective of Syria because of feared U.S. expansionism in the period 
from 2005 to 2008, when some U.S. offi  cials were arguing for regime change in Syria 
to follow that in Iraq (Zuhur, Personal Interviews 2005–2008). 
 In the summer of 2006, Saudi Arabia criticized Hizbullah’s actions in kidnapping 
and killing Israelis in a border village, which sparked the 2006 Israeli war on Lebanon. 
Yet the Saudi Arabian foreign minister then formally requested that President Bush 
intervene with the Israelis to halt large-scale casualties in Lebanon. Saudi Arabia 
supported a national unity government in Lebanon in the political struggle emerging 
at the time of Michel Suleiman’s ascendance to president. Rumors concerning Saudi 
Arabia’s involvement in Lebanon are diffi  cult to assess: These include charges that 
the United States and al-Hariri’s Future Party funneled money to a Sunni Islamist 
group called Fateh al-Islam, which fought against the Lebanese Army in May and 
June 2007 in the Nahr al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp. Other Syrian claims made 
in 2010 are that the United States and Saudi Arabia have tried unsuccessfully to spon-
sor anti-Hizbullah Shi‘a pockets in Lebanon, so far in vain, or funded Subhi Tufayli, 
a former Hizbullah leader, who had led the Revolt of the Hungry against the prevail-
ing Hizbullah leadership, as a counterweight to Hassan Nasrullah’s leadership. 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
124 |
 In 2008, a Lebanese former television show host who traveled to the kingdom for 
the  ‘umrah , the minor pilgrimage, was arrested by the religious police and charged 
with sorcery. On television, he had made predictions, acting as a psychic, and the 
Saudi Arabian court in Medina sentenced him to death in December 2009. The Leba-
nese minister of justice asked for a stay of execution, granted in 2010 by the Saudi 
Arabian High Court, which recommended a new trial and deportation (Naharnet.
com, November 11, 2010). Other “cultural” clashes have emerged concerning the 
popularity of Lebanese musical contest reality shows and other entertainment venues 
with younger Saudi Arabians. 
 Saudi Arabian Relations with Syria 
 Saudi Arabia and Syria were on opposing sides of the Arab Cold War waged between 
pro-Western monarchies and republican progressive Arab states during Nasser’s 
era. The secularist and republican aspects of Ba‘thism countered Saudi Arabia’s 
ideas of governance and legitimacy. Gradually, however, relations improved, and 
the Saudi Arabian government had a signiﬁ cant role in Syria through economic aid. 
Syria allied with Iran due to its fractious politics with neighboring Iraq. This alliance 
was problematic to Saudi Arabia through the years of the Iran-Iraq War. Later on, 
especially with the events of the Gulf War, that Syrian stance did not discourage 
Saudi Arabia’s relations with Syria, although the Western press has frequently over-
emphasized Saudi Arabian antipathy to Iranian inﬂ uence in Syria, at least since 2003. 
 A signiﬁ cant number of Saudi Arabian tourists travel to Syria in the summers, 
which increased during the years of the Lebanese Civil War. Many Syrians reside in 
Saudi Arabia, and Saudi Arabian businessmen own real estate and shares in service, 
tourist, and industrial projects in Syria. Saudi Arabia is Syria’s largest trading part-
ner ( Syrian Arab News Agency , March 10, 2010). This current trend is long-standing, 
despite ideological diff erences (and the fact that Syria is far from being Saudi Ara-
bia’s largest trading partner). Imports from Saudi Arabia made up an average of 
55.83 percent of Syria’s imports from 1974 to 1982 (Zuhur 1986, table 7). 
 The Syrian government attempted to destroy its Islamist front, which included the 
Muslim Brotherhood. Up to 30,000 people were massacred in the city of Hama in 
1982, and many of those Syrians with Islamist ties, or opposed to the government, 
ﬂ ed to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states. A revival, or new growth, of Islamism has 
taken place in Syria since the early 1990s, and Saudi Arabian and Kuwaiti donors to 
religious buildings and funding are evident in Syria. 
 U.S.-Syrian relations deteriorated after the 2003 regime change in Iraq but even 
more so following the withdrawal from Lebanon, the 2006 war on Lebanon, and the 
attempted isolation of Iran. The United States has generally attributed the worsening 
relations on these issues to Saudi Arabia, but perhaps this fracture is not seen simi-
larly in Riyadh and Damascus. Syria banned the Sa‘udi-owned  al-Sharq al-Awsat 
newspaper in 2007, and the Sa‘udi-owned  al-Hayat was banned in October 2008. 
However, in 2009, King ‘Abdullah announced an initiative to restore Arab unity, 
which translated into new diplomatic initiatives and visits to Syria. 

Broader Saudi Arabian Foreign Policy | 125
 Protests broke out in Syria after the revolutions in Egypt and Tunisia, and with 
the violent governmental response, the protesters who had begun by calling for more 
democracy are at the time of writing demanding the ouster of Bashar al-Asad and his 
government. Such a situation presents another strong regional challenge to the Saudi 
Arabian government and may alter Syrian–Saudi Arabian relations in the long run. 
 BROADER SAUDI ARABIAN FOREIGN POLICY 
 A substantial and special feature of the Saudi Arabian government is its relations 
with Muslim countries throughout the world. One arm of these endeavors concerns 
management of the  hajj  through the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), 
ﬁ rst established in 1969, with its permanent secretariat in Jeddah. The OIC is the 
second-largest intergovernmental organization with 57 member nations (see Chapter 
5, section on religion). 
 Saudi Arabia’s Islamic foreign policies, emphasized under King Faysal, led it to 
oppose the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and to fund the  mujahidin  there. Saudi 
Arabia supported Islamization policies in other states, such as Pakistan or the state of 
Kelantan in Malaysia, and backed political ﬁ gures such as Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan, 
who lived for eight years in exile in the kingdom. This general policy has strength-
ened Saudi Arabia’s relationship with other nations with large Muslim populations 
like Indonesia and Malaysia. Saudi Arabia has granted large amounts of aid to 
Bangladesh, Somalia, and Pakistan primarily because they are Islamic nations, and 
the Pakistani military were, during the 1980s, often seconded to the Saudi Arabian 
armed forces (Metz, ed., 1993, 227). Somali immigrants, on account of the long civil 
war, have been treated diff erently than others who make their way illegally to Saudi 
Arabia, for example, the Ethiopians (who have often entered Yemen illegally and 
then try to cross into Saudi Arabia). 
 The Institute of Islamic and Arabic Studies (referred to as LIPIA for Lembaga 
Ilmu Pengetahuan Islam dan Arab), founded in 1980 in Jakarta, Indonesia, gradu-
ated hundreds of students. Some were recruited to continue their Islamic studies 
in Saudi Arabia, where, like Saudi Arabian students and other young people, they 
joined the jihad in Afghanistan. This resulted in an Indonesian  salaﬁ  generation who 
were anti-Shi‘a, politicized, and opposed to earlier Islamic institutions. With Saudi 
Arabian ﬁ nancial support, they established new institutions in the early 1990s, pro-
ducing cassette tapes and books for their  da ‘ wah eff ort (Hasan in Al-Rasheed, ed., 
2008, 268–273). Saudi Arabia is often accused of funding salaﬁ sm in Thailand, Ma-
laysia, Vietnam, and Cambodia—as well as in South Asia, Europe, Africa, and the 
United States—although the process is often similar to that described for Indonesia, 
motivated by actors in the second country. 
 European nations are dependent on the pricing of oil set by Saudi Arabia, even 
though they import a greater share of crude from Norway and the Russian Federation 
(Aarts, Meertens, and van Duijne in Al-Rasheed, ed., 2008, 140–141). Lower oil prices 
and availability of crude for Europe, Saudi Arabia’s spending on commodities, and Eu-
rope and Saudi Arabia’s mutual desire for resource stability characterizes their relation-
ship (Aarts, Meertens, and van Duijne in Al-Rasheed, ed., 2008). Post-9/11 European 

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
126 |
criticisms of the kingdom, from neoconservative and left-liberal stances, increased and 
were directed at the kingdom’s lack of democracy, women’s rights, and secularism, but 
they also reﬂ ected political changes in Europe, including anti-immigrant movements. 
This did not damage economic relations, but the Saudi Arabian diplomatic response 
was to assert its ongoing reforms and changes and its determination to remain an Is-
lamic country (S. al-Sa‘ud, February 19 2004). Tensions reemerged with a conﬂ ict over 
cartoons lampooning the Prophet Muhammad published in a Danish newspaper in 
September 2005, resulting in the recall of the Saudi Arabian ambassador to Denmark 
and an unoffi  cial boycott of Danish food imports.  Many additional concerns about 
extremism emerged in England, Scotland, France and other countries, but a better 
understanding of the dynamics of terrorism has been gaining.
 Saudi Arabia is a major donor of international aid. It is the single largest Arab 
donor to Egypt and second only to the United States in donations to Asia, includ-
ing Iraq and Afghanistan. However, much of the aid given is not reported online, 
or information is unavailable , as with other donors. Humanitarian aid was the main 
share of Saudi Arabian support to Afghani refugees in Pakistan and other activities 
in Afghanistan. The kingdom does not view the aid given as a premise for shared 
policies or “the spread of Wahhabism” as its enemies have charged (see Chapter 5, 
section on religion). 
 Saudi Arabian Relations with Russia 
 Saudi Arabia has opposed communism since the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was estab-
lished. It cut off  diplomatic relations and closed its legation in Moscow in 1938. In the 
region around Saudi Arabia, the Communist Party has been a political force in Syria, 
Egypt, Iraq, the Sudan, and Yemen, and also among Palestinians. Saudi Arabia had 
concerns that some of its own citizens might be inﬂ uenced. Russia stood in the back-
ground of the Arab Cold War, providing aid to the more radical republican states in 
contrast with the alliances that Saudi Arabia sought with the West. However, since 
the collapse of the Soviet Union, communism is no longer seen as a primary threat by 
Saudi Arabia. Instead, Saudi Arabia has established relations with Russia and most 
of the former Soviet republics and is particularly interested in those with large Mus-
lim populations. Saudi Arabia must take note of Russia because it is a competing oil 
producer and exporter of natural gas and, at the same time, also an oil consumer. In 
September 2003, then Crown Prince ‘Abdullah made an offi  cial visit to Russia. Russia 
also hopes to improve its relations with the Islamic world since the days of its policy 
conﬂ icts with Saudi Arabia in the Arab world, notably over Afghanistan. 
 Saudi Arabia’s Relations with China 
 China is important to Saudi Arabia as an oil consumer, second in the world only to 
the United States. Former diplomats to Saudi Arabia have, in conversation and in 
print, referred to the Saudi Arabian “marriage with China,” or that China is a “sec-
ond wife ” to Saudi Arabia. The Chinese presidents visited Saudi Arabia in 1999 and 
2000, and King ‘Abdullah traveled ﬁ rst to China and then to India in 2006. Some 

Broader Saudi Arabian Foreign Policy | 127
CHRONOLOGY OF AID OR HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE 
PROVIDED BY SAUDI ARABIA IN 2010
December 1, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian medical team arrives in Rawalpindi
November 23, 2010 
 Pakistan receives 350 tons of dates from Saudi 
Arabian king
November 17, 2010 
Sacriﬁ cial meat is distributed in Pakistan
October 22, 2010 
 Fifth Saudi Arabian relief convoy heads to Pakistan
October 19, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia sends 71 tons of humanitarian aid 
to Chad
October 15, 2010 
 Mauritania and International Development Bank 
sign two loan agreements
October 15, 2010 
 Dr. Nizar Madani describes $358,198,994 and 
$700 million of aid and efforts for Pakistan at air 
conference in Belgium
October 14, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia’s medical team arrives in Pakistan
October 12, 2010 
 Prince Nayif sends 5,000 tents worth 2.21 million 
riyals to Pakistan
October 10, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia continues distributing food baskets 
in Pakistan
October 7, 2010 
 King ‘Abdullah gives $20 million for reconstruc-
tion of Mauritanian city
October 6, 2010 
 IDB approves more than $772 million to ﬁ nance 
new projects
September 24, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian campaign distributes 7,000 food 
baskets in Pakistan
September 23, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian relief camp in Pakistan 
expands
September 21, 2010 
 30 doctors from King Faisal Hospital arrive in 
Pakistan
September 17, 2010 
 King Abdullah International Foundation for Char-
ity established
September 12, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian camp for Pakistani ﬂ ood victims 
opens
September 9, 2010 
 Humanitarian aid shipment arrives in Pakistan
September 7, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian assistance for Pakistani ﬂ ood relief 
exceeds $240 million
September 2, 2010 
 First relief plane of Custodian of the Two Holy 
Mosques Campaign arrives in Pakistan
September 2, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian medical team arrives in Islam-
abad, Pakistan
September 1, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian team rescues 463 people in 
Pakistan
September 1, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian food aid distributed in Peshawar, 
Pakistan
August 30, 2010 
 700 tons of foodstuff are sent to Pakistan
August 30, 2010 
 Second ﬁ eld hospital is dispatched to Pakistan

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
128 |
August 29, 2010 
 AGFUND donates $100,000 for victims of Paki-
stani ﬂ oods
August 28, 2010 
 Medical team arrives in Pakistan to aid ﬂ ood 
victims
August 27, 2010 
 Crown prince gifts 100 tons of dates to Pakistanis
August 26, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian medical team arrives in 
Pakistan
August 25, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian Consulate in Istanbul distributes 
two tons of dates from Crown Prince
August 24, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian envoys hand over dates to Turkey 
and Cameroon
August 23, 2010 
 Kingdom sends ﬁ eld hospitals, rescue teams to 
Pakistan
August 20, 2010 
 22 Saudi planes have delivered relief supplies to 
Pakistan
August 19, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia donates $80 million for Pakistani 
ﬂ ood relief
August 17, 2010 
 King ‘Abdullah donates SR 20 million to Pakistani 
relief campaign
August 17, 2010 
 First day of national campaign to help Pakistan 
ﬂ ood victims raises SR 77 million
August 17, 2010 
 Kingdom to host 2,000 Palestinian pilgrims
August 17, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian humanitarian airlift to Pakistan 
continues
August 16, 2010 
 King’s Campaign for the Relief of the Pakistani 
People starts today
August 16, 2010 
 Saudi Popular Campaign provides ﬁ nancial 
 assistance to Lebanon
August 16, 2010 
 More Saudi Arabian relief arrives in Pakistan
August 15, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian relief planes continue to arrive with 
relief supplies for Pakistan
August 13, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia delivers tents, dates to Senegal
August 12, 2010 
 IDB extends $11 million in relief aid for ﬂ ood 
 victims in Pakistan
August 11, 2010 
 Ninth and tenth Saudi Arabian relief planes arrive 
in Pakistan
August 9, 2010 
 Sixth, seventh, and eighth Saudi Arabian relief 
planes arrive in Pakistan
August 7, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia continues relief airlift for Pakistani 
ﬂ ood victims
August 7, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia is leading MENACA aid donor
August 7, 2010 
 Ministry of Health announces the death of one of 
the separated Iraqi conjoined twins
August 6, 2010 
 100 tons of Saudi Arabian dates given to the 
Philippines
August 6, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian Ambassador to Pakistan visits 
areas hit by ﬂ ooding

Broader Saudi Arabian Foreign Policy | 129
August 5, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian humanitarian aid arrives in 
Pakistan
August 5, 2010 
 150 tons of Saudi Arabian dates delivered to 
Pakistan
August 3, 2010 
 Crown Prince Sultan provides Palestinian refugees 
with 15 tons of dates
July 27, 2010 
 The International Islamic Relief Organization, 
Saudi Arabia (IIROSA) has dug 5,745 wells in 
Asia and Africa
July 27, 2010 
 Mauritania receives 200 tons of Saudi dates
July 24, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia gifts Yemen with 150 tons of dates
July 16, 2010 
 Operation to separate Iraqi conjoined twins 
begins
July 11, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia provides Jordan with 150 tons of 
dates
July 8, 2010 
 UNRWA (United Nations Relief and Work 
Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East) 
spokesman lauds Saudi assistance to Palestinian 
refugees
July 6, 2010 
 Kingdom provides ﬁ nancial aid to help rebuild 
Ivorian Parliament
July 1, 2010 
 Saudi Fund for Development has provided over 
$8.23 billion in foreign grants since 1975
June 28, 2010 
 King ‘Abdullah addresses G-20 summit
June 23, 2010 
 Foreign ministers of the Gulf Cooperation Council 
vow to support Yemeni development
June 20, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia provides the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) $10 million 
grant for Pakistani relief
June 15, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia transfers $15.4 million to Palestin-
ian Finance Ministry
June 15, 2010 
 King orders transportation of Iraqi conjoined twins 
to Saudi Arabian hospital
June 12, 2010 
 Cameroon receives 90 tons of Saudi Arabian 
dates
June 9, 2010 
 Saudi campaign sends 11 generators to Lebanon
June 4, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian medical team performs 30 open-
heart surgeries on Yemeni patients
June 3, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian humanitarian aid convoy heads 
for Gaza
June 2, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia provides dates for World Food Pro-
gram (WFP) in Cameroon
June 1, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia will chair UNRWA Advisory 
Commission
May 25, 2010 
 Saudi Arabian medical team performs heart sur-
geries in Yemen
May 23, 2010 
 Third shipment of Saudi ﬂ our aid heads to Gaza

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
130 |
May 22, 2010 
 Yemeni president announces Saudi Arabian– 
ﬁ nanced water project
May 18, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia provides WFP in Yemen with 1,013 
tons of dates
May 12, 2010 
 Second convoy of 268 tons of Saudi Arabian ﬂ our 
(part of 2,000 tons total) to Gaza
May 12, 2010 
 Kingdom funds ﬁ ve humanitarian projects in Aceh, 
Indonesia
May 5, 2010 
 IDB expands activities with India and will fund 
Indian-Muslim institutions
April 30, 2010 
 Jordanian conjoined twins successfully separated
April 29, 2010 
 Kingdom sends 342 tons and 90 tons of dates to 
Egypt and Mauritania, respectively
April 29, 2010 
 Saudi Fund for Development provides a soft loan 
of $20 million to Cuban maternity hospitals
April 27, 2010 
 Development of 18 vocational institutes spon-
sored by the Saudi Development Fund in Yemen 
is monitored
April 15, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia sends 750 tons of ﬂ our to Gaza
April 14, 2010 
 Saudi Development Fund grants $40 million loan 
for Jordanian power station
April 9, 2010 
 Syrian conjoined twins separated in Riyadh
April 6, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia delivers $500,000 for food sup-
plies to Bangladesh
April 2, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia gives $2 million for Darfur peace-
keepers
April 2, 2010 
 King ‘Abdullah orders treatment of Palestinian 
conjoined twins
March 17, 2010 
 IDB approves $333.9 million in new grants
March 16, 2010 
 The WFP in Syria receives 450 tons of dates as 
gift from Saudi Arabia’s king
March 15, 2010 
 Prince Sultan accepts award in Algiers for disabil-
ity center
March 11, 2010 
 Arab ministers of health meet in Cairo and pro-
vide $100,000 to the Palestinian and Somali Min-
istries of Health and review reports on swine ﬂ u
March 3, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia provides $1.33 million for Côte 
d’Ivoire Islamic center and societies
March 1, 2010 
 Kingdom funds $114.8 million in Yemeni devel-
opment projects
February 23, 2010 
 IDB extends $5 million for Haitian school 
reconstruction
February 5, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia contributes $5 million to the Carter 
Center’s Guinea Worm Eradication Program
February 2, 2010 
 IDB approves $196.4 million for development 
projects
January 30, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia ﬁ nances $4.36 million for renova-
tion of Bangladesh’s national mosque

| 131
January 28, 2010 
 Saudi Arabia pledges $150 million in aid for 
Afghanistan
January 25, 2010 
 Kingdom donates $50 million for Haiti earthquake 
relief
January 21, 2010 
 Gulf Cooperation Council appropriates $164 mil-
lion for Gaza projects
January 16, 2010 
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
Fund announces $500,000 in relief aid for Haiti
January 15, 2010 
 AGFUND donates $100,000 to support relief ef-
forts in Haiti (Information adapted from that pro-
vided by the Saudi Arabian government on its 
embassy websites and SAMIRAD)
saw this outreach as a response to Washington’s declarations that the kingdom had 
not reformed itself suffi  ciently. Saudi Arabia’s interests in its relations to China are 
primarily oil sales and arms purchases. Arms purchases date back to the 1980s, when 
the Saudi Arabians imported CSS-2 intermediate-range ballistic missiles. Now, they 
are interested in upgrading them (Pant 2006). The Chinese have also been interested 
in Saudi Arabia as a market for their manufactured goods. 
 Saudi Arabia’s international relations and foreign policy are an important as-
pect of political life in that nation. Maintaining its own security and dominance 
in the Arabian Peninsula and Middle East region are major drivers of these poli-
cies. However, Saudi Arabian offi  cials know that the world is changing rapidly 
and that they must do more than react to circumstances. Therefore, the pursuit 
of diplomacy and forging of good relations are part of their preparation for the 
unknown future. 
 REFERENCES 
 Abdul Ghafour, P. K. “Mishaal Named Arab Commission Chairman.”  Arab News , December 
11, 2007. 
 Aboul-Enein, Youssef. “The Egyptian-Yemen War: Egyptian Perspectives on Guerilla War-
fare.”  Infantry Magazine , January–February 2004. 
 Abu Aliyya, Abulfatah.  al-Mamlakah al- ‘ Arabiyyah al-Sa ‘ udiyyah wa Qadiyat Falastin.  Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: al-Dara (King Abdulaziz Foundation for Research and Archives), 
1999. 
 AbuKhalil, As`ad. “Determinants and Characteristics of the Saudi Role in Lebanon: The 
Post-Civil War Years.” In  Kingdom without Borders: Saudi Political, Religious and Media 
Frontiers , edited by Madawi Al-Rasheed. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008, 
79–98. 
 AbuKhalil, As`ad.  The Battle for Saudi Arabia: Royalty, Fundamentalism and Global Power . 
New York: Seven Stories, 2004. 
 Altorki, Soraya. “The Concept and Practice of Citizenship in Saudi Arabia.” In  Gender and 
Citizenship in the Middle East , edited by Suad Joseph. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University 
Press, 2000. 
References

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
132 |
 Anscombe, Frederick.  The Ottoman Gulf: The Creation of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 Anthony, John Duke. “The Gulf in Its Contemporary Setting.” In  The Middle East , edited by 
Michael Adams. New York: Facts on File, 1988. 
 Bachar, Shmuel, Bar Shmuel, Rachel Machtiger, and Yair Minzili.  Establishment Ulama and 
Radicalism in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan . Washington, DC: Hudson Institute, Series 
1, Paper 4, December 2006. 
 Badeeb, Saeed M.  The Saudi-Egyptian Conﬂ ict over North Yemen, 1962–1970 . Boulder, CO: 
Westview, 1986. 
 al-Badi, Awadh. “Institutionalizing Hereditary Succession in Saudi Arabia’s Political Gov-
ernance System: The Allegiance Commission.”  Arab Reform Initiative , February 14, 2008. 
http://arab-reform.net/. 
 Bahgat, Gawdat. “Foreign Investment in Saudi Arabia’s Energy Sector.”  Middle East Eco-
nomic Survey XLVII,  no. 34 (August 23, 2004). 
 Basic Law. (1992). SAMIRAD (Saudi Arabia Market Information Resource). http://saudinf.
com/main/c541f.htm. Last visited March 29, 2010. 
 bin Baz, Ahmad. Interview, “Change and Reform Don’t Come without a Price.”  The Saudi , 
January 14, 2011. 
 Bergen, Peter. “Similar Explosive on Plane Used in Saudi Attack.”  CNN.com , December 27, 
2009. 
 Brand, Laurie A.  Jordan’s Inter-Arab Relations: The Political Economy of Alliance-Making . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 
 Bronson, Rachel.  Thicker Than Oil: America’s Uneasy Partnership with Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Brown, Anthony Cave.  Oil, God, and Gold: The Story of Aramco and the Saudi Kings . New 
York: Houghton-Miffl  in, 1999. 
 Burdett, A.L.P., ed.  King Abdul Aziz: Diplomacy and Statecraft 1902–1953 . 4 vols. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Archive Editions, Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Fundacion par las Relaciones Internacio-
nales y el Dialogio Exterior (FRIDE).  Arab Political Systems: Baseline Information and 
Reforms—Saudi Arabia . n.d. [ca. 2007]. 
 Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz.  The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the Middle East . 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997. 
 Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz. “The Prince of Wealth: Business and State in Labor Remittance and 
Oil Economies.”  International Organization 43 (1989), 101–145. 
 Childs, J. Rives.  Foreign Service Farewell: My Years in the Near East . Charlottesville: Uni-
versity of Virginia, 1969. 
 Chubin, Shahram, and Charles Tripp.  Iran-Saudi Arabia Relations and Regional Order . Adel-
phi Paper 304. First published by International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1996. Re-
printed New York: Routledge, 2005. 
 Commins, David Dean.  The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 Congressional Research Service (CRS) and Library of Congress. “Saudi Arabia: Current 
Issues and U.S. Relations.”  Congressional Research Survey Issue Brief  Alfred B. Prados. 
Updated February 24, 2006. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/IB93113.pdf. 

| 133
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia Enters the Twenty-First Century: The Political, Foreign 
Policy, Economic, and Energy Dimensions . London: Center for Strategic and International 
Studies; Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Abraham R. Wagner.  The Lessons of Modern War. Vol. 4,  The 
Gulf War . Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996. 
 Doran, Michael Scott. “The Saudi Paradox.”  Foreign Aff airs , January/February 2004, 
35–51. 
 Freedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh.  The Gulf Conﬂ ict, 1990–1991: Diplomacy and War 
in the New World Order . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993. 
 Fürtig, Henner.  Iran’s Rivalry with Saudi Arabia between the Gulf Wars . Reading, UK: Ithaca, 
2002. (Reprinted in 2006.) 
 Gause, Gregory F., III.  Oil Monarchies: Domestic and Security Challenges in the Arab Gulf 
States . Washington, DC: Council on Foreign Relations, 1994. 
 Gause, Gregory F., III.  Saudi-Yemeni Relations: Domestic Structures and Foreign Inﬂ uence . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1990. 
 Glosmeyer, Iris. “Checks, Balances and Transformations in the Saudi Political System.” In 
 Saudi Arabia in the Balance , edited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 
2005; New York: New York University Press  , 2006, 214–233. New York:  New York Uni-
versity Press for the other chapters in this book that are cited.
 Hasan, Noorhaidi. “Saudi Expansion, the Salaﬁ  Campaign and Arabized Islam in Indone-
sia.” In  Kingdom without Borders: Saudi Political, Religious and Media Frontiers , edited by 
Madawi Al-Rasheed. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008, 263–282. 
 Hooglund, Eric. “Government and Politics.” In  Saudi Arabia: A Country Study , edited by 
Helen Chapin Metz, Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. Washington, DC: 
Library of Congress, 1993. 
 Jabber, Paul. “Oil, Arms, and Regional Diplomacy: Strategic Dimensions of the Saudi-Egyp-
tian Relationship.” In  Rich and Poor States in the Middle East: Egypt and the New Arab 
Order , edited by Malcolm H. Kerr and Yassin, El Sayed. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1982, 
415–448. 
 Kechichian, Joseph A.  Succession in Saudi Arabia . New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
 Kerr, Malcolm H.  The Arab Cold War 1958–1964: A Study of Ideology in Politics . London: 
Oxford University Press, 1965. 
 Kerr, Malcom H., and Yassin, El Sayed, eds.  Rich and Poor States in the Middle East: Egypt 
and the New Arab Order . Boulder, CO: Westview; Cairo: American University in Cairo 
Press, 1982. 
 Keynoush, Banafsheh. “The Iranian-Saudi Arabian Relationship: From Ideological Con-
frontation to Pragmatic Accommodation.” PhD diss., Fletcher School, Tufts University, 
2007. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “The Role of Tribal Groups in State Expansion and Consolidation.” In 
 Changing Nomads in a Changing World , edited by Joseph Ginat and Anatoly Khazanov. 
Brighton, UK: Sussex Academic Press, 1998, 143–155. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “State, Islam and Opposition in Saudi Arabia: The Post Desert-Storm 
Phase.”  Middle East Review of International Aff airs  1, no. 2 (July 1997). http://meria.idc.
ac.il/journal/1997/issue2/jv1n2a8.html 
References

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
134 |
 Kostiner, Joseph. “Transforming Dualities: Tribes and State Formation in Saudi Arabia.” 
In  Tribe and State Formation in the Middle East , edited by Philip S. Khoury and Joseph 
Kostiner. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991, 226–253. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle for 
Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Islamo-Liberal Politics in Saudi Arabia.” In  Saudi Arabia in the Balance , 
edited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 2005, 35–56. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Saudi Islamists and the Potential for Protest.”    Foreign Policy , June 2, 
2011. 
 Lawton, John. “Arab Aid.”  Saudi-Aramco World  30, no. 6 (November/December 1979). 
http://www.saudiaramcoworld.com/issue/197906/arab.aid-how.it.s.spent.htm 
 Lippmann, Thomas W.  Inside the Mirage: America’s Fragile Partnership with Saudi Arabia . 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 2004. 
 Long, David. E.  The United States and Saudi Arabia: Ambivalent Allies . Boulder, CO: West-
view, 1985. 
 Louër, Laurence.  Transnational Shia Politics: Religious and Political Networks in the Gulf . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
 Majlis al-Shura Law. Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 27/08/1412 h. 
 http ://www.mofa.gov.sa 
 al-Mani, Saleh. “The Ideological Dimension in Saudi-Iranian Relations.” In  Iran and the Gulf: 
A Search for Stability , edited by Jamal S. al-Suwaidi. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: 
Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research, 1996, 158–174. 
 Murphy, Caryle. “View from Mt. Doud: Saudi Arabia Says Off ensive against Yemeni Rebels 
Over.”  Christian Science Monitor , January 27, 2010. 
 Murphy, Caryle. “Analysis: What Is behind Saudi Off ensive in Yemen.”  Globalpost , Novem-
ber 14, 2009. 
 Niblock, Tim.  Saudi Arabia: Power, Legitimacy, Survival . New York: Routledge, 2006. 
 Nonneman, Gerd. “Determinants and Patterns of Saudi Foreign Policy—Omni-Balancing 
and ‘Relative Autonomy’ in Multiple Environments.” In  Saudi Arabia in the Balance , ed-
ited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst and Co., 2005, 315–351. 
 Okruhlik, Gwenn and Conge, Patrick. “National Autonomy, Labor Migration and Political 
Crisis: Yemen and Saudi Arabia.”  Middle East Journal  51, no. 4 (Autumn 1997), 554–565. 
 Pant, Harsh V. “Saudi Arabia Woos China and India.”  Middle East Quarterly , Fall 2006, 
45–52. 
 Press Information Bureau, Government of India. “Prime Minister’s Address to the Majlis 
al-Shura.” March 1, 2010. 
 al-Qabesi, Mohyddin, coll. and ed.  The Holy Quran and the Sword: Selected Addresses, 
Speeches Memoranda and Interviews by HM The Late King Abdul Aziz al-Saud . Riyadh: 
Saudi Desert House for Publishing and Distribution, 1998. 
 al-Rasheed, Madawi. “Saudi Arabia and the Palestine War: Beyond Offi  cial History.” In  The 
War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948 War , edited by Eugene Rogan   and Avi 
Shlaim. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 228–247. 

| 135
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi.  A History of Saudi Arabia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
 Riedel, Bruce, and Bilal Y. Saab. “Al Qa’ida’s Third Front.”  Washington Quarterly  31, no. 2 
(Spring 2008), 33–46. 
 Safran, Nadav.  Saudi Arabia: The Ceaseless Quest for Security . Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press, 1985. 
 SAMIRAD ( Saudi Arabian Market Information Resource). March 26, 2010. http://www.
saudinf.com/ 
 al-Sa‘ud, Saud al-Faisal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. “Saudi-European Relations: Towards a Reliable 
Partnership.” Brussels: European Policy Center, February 19, 2004. 
 al-Sa‘ud, Turki al-Faisal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. “Saudi Arabian Constitutional Evolution.” Key-
note address at the 15th Annual Arab-US Policymakers Conference, Washington, DC, 
October 30, 2006. Available at SUSRIS (Saudi-U.S. Relations): http://www.saudi-us-rela-
tions.org/articles/2006/ioi/061106-turki-succession.html 
 Saunders, Bonnie.  The United States and Arab Nationalism: The Syrian Case, 1953–1960 . 
Westport, CT: Praeger, 1996. 
 Sidiya, Fatima. “Experts Divided over Media Coverage of Court Cases.”  Arab News , Febru-
ary 23, 2010. 
 Ibn Sultan, HRH General Khaled (with Patrick Seale).  Desert Warrior: A Personal View of the 
Gulf War by the Joint Forces Commander . London and New York: Harper Collins, 1995.
SUSRIS. “The Time is Now in Saudi Arabia.  A Conversation with Rachel Bronson.”  SUS-
RIS. April 27, 2006. http://www.susris.com/articles/2006/interviews/060427-bronson-
interview-complete.html
 Traboulsi, Fawwaz. “Saudi Expansion: The Lebanese Connection, 1924–1952.” In  Kingdom 
without Borders: Saudi Political, Religious, and Media Frontiers , edited by Madawi Al-
Rasheed. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008, 65–78. 
 Trench, R., ed.  Gazetteer of Arabian Tribes . 18 vols. Farnham Commons, Buckinghamshire, 
UK: Cambridge Archive Editions (Cambridge University Press dist.), 1996. 
 U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom. “Saudi Arabia.” 2010 Annual Report 
 May 2009. http://www.uscirf.gov/countries/1414.html?task=view 
 Wehry, Frederick, Theodore W. Karasik, Alireza Nader, Jeremy Ghez, Lydia Hansell, and 
Robert A. Guff ey.  Saudi-Iranian Relations since the Fall of Saddam: Rivalry, Cooperation 
and Implications for U.S. Policy . Washington, DC: Rand Corporation (National Security 
Research Division), 2009. 
 Whitaker, Brian. “Saleh Is Gone. What Next for Yemen?”  Guardian.co.uk , June 5, 2011. 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/jun/05/yemen-saleh 
 Whitaker, Brian. “The Yemeni-Saudi Border Treaty.” July 1, 2000. Available at http://www.
al-bab.com/yemen/ border/00629.htm 
 Whitaker, Brian, trans. “Treaty of Jiddah.” June 12, 2000. Available at http://www.al-Bab.
com/yemen/pol/int5/htm 
 Worth, Brian F. “Najran Journal: Muslim Sect Sees Struggle through Christian Lens.” 
 New York Times/International Herald Tribune , October 20, 2010. http://www.nytimes.
com/2010/10/21/world/middleeast/21saudi.html 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Orgoglio Iraniano” [Iranian pride].  Revista di Intelligence  Anno II,   no. 3 
(September 2006), 14–25. 
References

 Chapter 3 Government and Politics
136 |
 Zuhur, Sherifa. Personal Interviews with named and anonymous respondents. Jeddah, Ri-
yadh, Washington, DC, London, etc., 2005–2008. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Saudi Arabia: Islamism, Political Reform and the Global War on Terror . Car-
lisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2005a. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  The Middle East: Politics, History, and Neonationalism . Carlisle, PA, and 
Philadelphia: Institute of Middle Eastern, Islamic, and Diasporic Studies (distributed by 
Ingrahm), 2005b. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “A Preliminary View of Intraregional Trade in the Middle East, 1974–1982.” 
Los Angeles, 1986.   

137
  CHAPTER 4 
 Economy 
 OVERVIEW 
 Saudi Arabia’s economic productivity is largely based on its sale of petroleum and 
its by-products, which have made it the largest and strongest economy in the Middle 
East region. Oil income impacted the nation’s development, enabling numerous areas 
of expansion and subsidies. Simultaneously, the oil industry has complicated Saudi 
Arabia’s foreign relations, domestic policies, and global impact. Since oil proﬁ ts had 
to be invested and the entire country developed with a view toward the future, when 
oil may be depleted, the government and individual investors likewise encountered 
various conditions that both advanced and restricted their goals. 
 Saudi Arabia has been diversifying its industrial output and spending on human 
capital in education and training toward these goals. It has experimented technologi-
cally with agriculture, sometimes despite strong external criticism because of the cost 
of certain projects. All countries present unique ratios of labor and arable land. In 
some cases, they amass capital from valuable resources moving from a peripheral 
to a semi-peripheral status in the world economy (Wallerstein 1974). Saudi Arabia 
has dealt with its labor deﬁ cit (in the period prior to strong population growth) by 
importing workers from the Arab and non-Arab developing world and also from 
the West. 
 Western scholars and observers were critical of Saudi Arabia’s centralized eco-
nomic planning and state subsidies in decades past for diff erent reasons. Supporters 
of economic liberalism argued that state subsidies can heighten debt (although Saudi 
Arabia could aff ord such measures, whereas some countries arguably could not) and 
increase dependence on the state. Some aspects of their critiques emanate from the 

 Chapter 4 Economy
138 |
vulnerability felt in the West due to its need for oil. Others are iterated because of a 
belief that the private sector must never be conﬁ ned by national economic policies 
and are not particularly concerned with the impact of economics on the political 
stability of the Saudi Arabian government. Additionally, and particularly during 
the 2008 U.S. presidential elections, many pundits and politicians spoke out against 
Western dependence on petrochemicals derived from Saudi Arabia or other “coun-
tries hostile to us”—choosing to forget the lengthy U.S.–Saudi Arabian alliance and 
drawing on American economic insecurity and concerns over rising oil prices. Other 
critics have written about the oil industry as a family business of the Sa‘udi royals, 
which entrenches their power. This is an insuffi  cient and troublesome character-
ization of the largest economy in the Middle East today. In addition to politically 
motivated criticisms, many scholars and observers viewed the private sector as the 
appropriate vehicle of industrialization (Evans 1995) and warn of a predatory state 
as the alternative (Cypher and Dietz 1997, 226). Consequently, many of the most 
detailed economic assessments of Saudi Arabia’s reforms in Western languages are 
predicated on the idea that the private sector should behave as it does in a country 
like the United States and that the state should be a less controlling and powerful 
entity than it became in Saudi Arabia (as in Turkey, Iran, and Egypt—for all have 
developed very large public sectors). Saudi Arabia is, however, a developing nation, 
if semi-peripheral, under a very diff erent set of circumstances than the United States. 
 The kingdom possesses 25 percent of the world’s oil reserves. It has the largest ca-
pacity for crude oil production in the world, estimated in 2009 at about 11  million bar-
Saudi Arabians view the Aramco Mobile Oil exhibit, a traveling educational exhibition 
about the petroleum industry with audiovisual elements held in a three-tent pavilion covering 
7,000 square feet. (Khalil Abou El-Nasr/Saudi Aramco)

Overview | 139
rels/day (U.S. Energy Information Administration). Actual crude output  exceeded 
Saudi Arabia’s Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) quota in 
2010 due to domestic demand for crude oil; it pumped an average of 8.4 million 
barrels a day that year ( Bloomberg , January 4, 2011). Oil income, as well as the shift 
from pastoral to settled forms of tenure, has profoundly altered the country and its 
citizens’ lives. 
 In many brief studies, reports, and statements, Saudi Arabia has been misrepre-
sented as an undeveloped sandy desert formerly inhabited solely by nomads, who are 
dazed by their sudden wealth and who are lazy or disdain manual labor. This inaccu-
rate portrayal contrasts with a history of labor-intensive agriculture and regional and 
long-distance trade complementing the husbandry, or herding and animal raising, 
and sales by the bedouin and  jamamil (caravaneers who might sell camels and then 
carry in goods for sale). Date production and the pearl industry of the Gulf were 
other sources of pre-oil income, but they had been dependent on slave labor. These 
along with the income from annual pilgrimage also broadened the ethnic and social 
composition of the kingdom, albeit mostly in the Hijaz and on the eastern coast. 
 Once OPEC asserted more control over oil pricing, and prices rose following 
the boycott of 1973 (see Chapter 2, History); the ﬁ rst oil boom, referred to as the 
 tufrah , greatly impacted the country. Since then, price rises and contractions have 
impacted economic planning, employment, and development and have also fostered 
expansion. 
 Saudi Arabia’s modern oil-based economy outperforms many others in the Mid-
dle East in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) and growth. In comparison to 
Nigeria, the world’s eighth-largest oil producer, where many people live on less than 
Petroleum tanks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. (Corel)

 Chapter 4 Economy
140 |
$2 a day (and where the oil companies had a freer hand) or the small nations of Ku-
wait—with a population of 3.52 million, 2.36 million of whom are non-“Kuwait” 
(Kuwait. Fact Sheet. U.S. Department of State, 2011), and a per-capita GDP of 
$51,700 in 2010 (“Kuwait,”  CIA World Factbook 2010 )—and Brunei—with a popu-
lation of 395,027 and per-capita GDP estimated at $50,300 in 2010 ( CIA World Fact-
book )—Saudi Arabia’s population of 25,731,776 (2010 est., which includes 5,576,076 
nonnationals) brings its GDP per capita to $24,400 in 2010. That average is far 
lower than the U.S. GDP of $47,400 per capita in 2010 or the United Kingdom’s 
$35,100 per capita. The average in Saudi Arabia covers the wealthy and a substantial 
poverty-stricken or near-poor sector of the population. Thus, Saudi Arabia remains 
a developing nation that grew very swiftly and built a great deal of fairly new infra-
structure and housing dating at least from the ﬁ rst oil boom. New challenges Saudi 
Arabia faces are its own increasing population, which is consuming more energy, and 
the shifting global situation, in which China and India are poised to be the world’s 
largest nations and energy consumers. 
 At the modern nation’s founding, the government treasury was synonymous with 
the personal wealth of Ibn Sa‘ud, the country’s ﬁ rst king. Economic, ﬁ nancial, and 
taxation systems had to be established along with a fairly large bureaucracy and 
civil service. The numbers of Saudi Arabians employed in the national government 
has greatly increased ever since. Economic resources devoted to the building of in-
frastructure have also addressed the particular geography of the country and the 
needs of the petroleum industry. Construction and industry were staff ed with foreign 
labor, bringing along another bevy of economic and development issues. Until the 
end of the 1980s, the government’s ﬁ nancial and other sectors were also staff ed with 
foreigners in some cases. Legal and defense sectors continue to employ foreigners. 
 Saudi Arabia nationalized its petroleum industry and other economic sectors 
relatively late as compared to other neighboring countries. Much of its planning 
and reforms since 2000 have been in an opposite direction, privatizing and making 
the economy compliant with the rules and goals of the World Trade Organization 
(WTO), which Saudi Arabia joined in 2005. 
 ECONOMIC PLANNING 
 Saudi Arabia’s centralized economic planning has tended to repeat certain key goals 
and programs, and it has also been impacted by the boom and bust cycles resulting 
from increases and falls in the price of oil. However, even with a recent boom until 
2008, followed by a period of contraction, the impetus for reforms remained strong. 
These were necessary in the country’s quest for membership in the WTO and the 
encouragement of business and trade thereafter. 
 The First (1970–1975) and Second (1975–1980) offi  cial national ﬁ ve-year Devel-
opment Plans focused on improving infrastructure but also on building educational 
facilities. Highways were built, electricity was provided, and seaports were con-
structed or expanded. During the Third ﬁ ve-year Development Plan (1980–1985), 
the budget for health, social services, and education was expanded and the cities of 

Economic Planning | 141
Jubayl and Yanbu were constructed. Education and training were also important 
areas of planning in the fourth economic development plan (1985–1990) because of 
the expansion of the population. It was important to build and expand colleges and 
universities so that students could pursue higher education in the kingdom. More 
emphasis was put on encouraging private investment and joint ventures between 
public and private companies, both of which beneﬁ ted from government ﬁ nancing 
programs. During the Fifth Plan (1990–1995), coinciding with the Gulf War and its 
aftermath, the budget allocated more funds toward defense facilities and an increased 
emphasis on Saudization. The Sixth Development Plan (1996–2000) continued to 
emphasize education and training, Saudization, and control of government costs. 
The Seventh Plan (2000–2005) focused on greater economic growth in the private 
sector and continued its focus on Saudization and economic diversiﬁ cation, mean-
ing development of sectors outside of oil production. The Eighth Plan (2005–2010) 
continued to focus on economic diversiﬁ cation; it called for establishing new colleges 
and universities to encourage new technical specializations, advancing women’s in-
terests in society and the economy, building tourism, and promoting privatization. 
The Ninth Economic Development Plan (2010–2014), as approved by the Supreme 
Economic Council, is supposed to further the country’s long-term economic strategy 
to reach certain goals by 2025. One aspect is to develop six new economic cities in 
diff erent parts of the country under a National Spatial Strategy ( UNDP News Room , 
July 8, 2010). The plan is to improve quality-of-life issues and continue an emphasis 
on education and training. Under this plan spending will increase 67 percent increase 
from the previous ﬁ ve-year plan, up to a total of 1,444 billion Saudi riyals ( Saudi 
Gazette , August 10, 2010). 
 Saudi Arabia has also experienced a challenge in investing its oil income appro-
priately, and it has examined and experimented with diff erent forms of economic 
diversiﬁ cation in the industrial and agricultural sectors. The increase in its develop-
ment plan in the current cycle is possible because of a large surplus in the budget. 
The basic monetary unit is the Saudi Arabian riyal. The U.S. dollar was equal to 
3.7502 Saudi Arabian riyals in mid-January 2011. The riyal is a strong currency for 
the region. 
 Saudi Arabia is a founding member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC)   and became a member of the WTO in December 2005. It ranks 
109th in the world in wealth, and although it is the strongest economy in the Middle 
East, as noted earlier, its per-capita GDP is lower than that of the United States. 
However, in the United States, citizens do not receive free health care or college 
educations, and subsidies to the poor are sharply limited; therefore, when comparing 
the two countries these forms of spending (considered human investment in Saudi 
Arabia) should be kept in mind. Saudi Arabia is the largest aid donor to other coun-
tries in the Middle East; its economic output has created political inﬂ uence through 
aid and, more important, through trade. 
 As an Islamic country, Saudi Arabia is bound by certain economic principles 
expressed in law and tradition. Simultaneously, it is very much a part of a world 
economy that operates via proﬁ t-oriented principles. Muslims are required to sup-
port the poor and indigent, and, therefore, government policies must uphold such 

 Chapter 4 Economy
142 |
ideals. Muslims are not supposed to charge interest on loans; interest is referred to 
as  riba‘ , or usury. However, diff erent business practices allowed for certain substitute 
charges and for payments on investments in what one might term shared projects. 
As a consequence, Islamic banking has developed, which follows various practices 
to give investors conﬁ dence that Islamic law is not being violated. Islamic banks 
and investment tools are more popular and frequently utilized than in some other 
countries, although conventional banking exists as well; currently, foreign banks 
are expanding their presence in the kingdom.  Shari‘ah -compliant bonds ( sukuk ) are 
available and are now a growing market. 
 One of the fundamental pillars of Islam is  zakat , a voluntary form of charity that 
should comprise 2.5 percent of one’s income and assets. Every Muslim is required to 
give  zakat unless he is destitute, and the most blessed form is anonymous giving. This 
allows for the recycling of wealth and prevention of dire poverty. In practice, it is dif-
ﬁ cult to enforce what is voluntary or to track anonymous philanthropy. Charitable 
giving is considered virtuous but has traditionally taken place privately in requests 
by individuals to other individuals, perhaps impeding, or delaying, the state’s role 
in addressing poverty. The Saudi Arabian government, concerned by poor and un-
derdeveloped areas, including those within Riyadh, is systemizing social services. It 
also sought to control the abuse of donations made to mosques and other Islamic 
organizations, particularly after 2003, because these were alleged to have been used 
by terrorists. 
Ministers and delegates of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) 
gather on June 21, 2000 to discuss crude oil production levels. (AP/Wide World Photos)

Economic Planning | 143
 Islam forbids speculation, proﬁ ting on speculation, and gambling. In addition, 
the laws of inheritance are supposed to dissolve partnerships at death and prevent 
a person from disinheriting his legal heirs; about two-thirds of one’s estate must go 
to the heirs. One could set up a foundation or endowment with the other portion of 
one’s estate, known as a  waqf , to support a public service like a fountain or a library. 
Such properties,  awqaf , come under special rules; like the Western legal category of 
mortmain which could not be claimed by the state and was  endowed in perpetuity, 
and was not supposed to be subsumed under the ruler or government. 
 Local or distant rulers and merchants beneﬁ ted from the lucrative pilgrim inﬂ ux 
to the Hijaz, a major reason for the Ottoman Empire’s eff orts to defeat the Wahhabi 
forces on the peninsula. The pilgrimage is an enormous source of income, not only 
in Saudi Arabia but also for the private sector in countries where pilgrims originate. 
The  hajj , which now brings in nearly 2.5 million people, is regulated through an 
international organization. Muslims also travel to the holy cities for the  ‘umrah , 
or lesser pilgrimage. Saudi Arabia has not had a large share of tourism outside of 
its pilgrim trade but has recently formulated plans to foster tourism apart from the 
pilgrimage. 
 Other particular local economic features of note include money transfers made 
outside of banks, especially by foreign workers from South Asia; these are sometimes 
referred to as  hawala . The worker typically pays the  hawaladar , who telephones or 
electronically contacts his counterpart in the home country, who pays out cash to the 
worker’s family. Such transfers cannot be easily traced and have also been criticized 
as a means, or potential means, of terrorist funding, although terrorist activity has 
not been traced to the foreign-labor sector in the kingdom. 
 The social and economic systems of the bedouin, the cultivators, and the pre-
modern merchants, and of marriage payments and arrangements, all underlie the 
modern economy. In premodern times, the bedouin herded their animals exclusively 
and supplemented their needs by selling some animals or by raiding, or they made ar-
rangements with cultivators for produce, for instance, dates. Their mode of produc-
tion had already been impacted by the late 1960s, when anthropologist Donald Cole 
and sociologist Saad Eddin Ibrahim studied the al-Murrah and other bedouin tribes. 
Cole wrote that the sale of an animal was only an occasional event and that most 
food was grown for self-consumption (67.8 percent); only 3.5 percent was produced 
exclusively for selling (Cole 1975, 130) . He makes another point, that relatively few 
people (at the time he was writing) are productive, because herding requires little 
labor; at the same time herding “does not now and probably never has” met the sub-
sistence needs of the nomads (Cole 1975, 131). Of the 10 families he studied, 8 had 
a member employed in the National Guard who drew a salary and met the families’ 
needs; a third of his and Ibrahim’s larger sample was employed by the government 
(Cole 1975, 131; Ibrahim and Cole 1978). These results were taken to mean that 
these family groups were unproductive or that it was diffi  cult to instill a productive 
ethic in those who could subsist without it. Other anthropologists have shown that 
the bedouin had rarely relied entirely on herding and took Cole to task for wrongly 
depicting the bedouin household as unproductive (Fabietti 1990). Underlying this 

 Chapter 4 Economy
144 |
debate was the fact that the bedouin had been suff ering economically in the period 
prior to certain government subsidies. 
 Much has happened since then with the economy’s rapid growth, rises in prices, 
changes in consumption patterns, and new aspirations spurred by education. The 
same al-Murrah raise livestock for collectors, but their entire world has changed, as 
Cole later described (2006). 
 Agriculture is estimated at 3.2 percent ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ) of the modern 
economy; however, in the prestatistical past, it may have comprised something like 
60 percent of the pre-oil economy of speciﬁ c population centers, and it remains very 
important in many areas. Modern industry (excluding agriculture) is 60.4 percent 
of the economy, and services are 36.4 percent (estimates for 2009 in  CIA World 
Factbook 2010 ). The entire Saudi Arabian labor force (primarily men) is 6.922 mil-
lion, and a rather startling number—80 percent—of the labor force are non–Saudi 
Arabians. This labor force is employed 6.7 percent in agriculture, 21.4 percent in 
industry, and 71.9 percent in services ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). If more currently 
unemployed Saudi Arabian men and women had jobs, they would occupy a larger 
share of the labor market, and the foreign labor force might not be as high. 
 INDUSTRY 
 Agriculture 
 In the traditional agriculture ( al-zira‘ah al-taqlidiyyah ) of Saudi Arabia’s oases like 
al-‘Unayzah and Ha’il in Najd, farmers harvested dates, ﬁ gs, pomegranates, melons, 
watermelons, wheat, millet, barley, alfalfa, squash, peppers, eggplant, okra, black-
eyed peas, watercress, onions, leeks, cumin, coriander, and fenugreek. Wheat plant-
ing and date harvesting and processing were important collective activities, and the 
crops were used sometimes as payment. During the last 30 years, modern mechanical 
pumps reduced the labor needed to obtain water, as they replaced the traditional 
camel-drawn (or human-drawn) pulleys that draw well water in the  sawani method. 
Many important aspects of new planning have emerged; some traditional types of 
land tenure have ceased, and the land is now primarily farmed by foreign workers. 
Crops are more intensively wheat, barley (subsidized by the government as a fod-
der crop), and potatoes. New fruits, animals, and other enterprises have also been 
introduced. Barley was instituted because the bedouin began raising more sheep after 
Saudi Arabia’s uniﬁ cation. The additional sheep degraded the grazing lands, which 
also suff ered from droughts. On one farm in al-‘Unayzah , 30,000 fruit trees were 
planted in 1986—oranges, tangerines, Egyptian peaches, pomegranates from Ta’if, 
apricots, Spanish lemons, and American olives. Not far away, another farmer, in-
spired by travel to Syria, introduced ﬁ sh farms (Altorki and Cole 1989, 42, 170–171). 
In Asir, where the steep highlands require terraced farming, wheat, cotton, coff ee, 
indigo, ginger, and dates are grown. Roses are cultivated in the mountain wadis of 
Ta’if, not as a ﬂ oral product, but to make  attar  (rose water) for use in cooking and 
fragrances (Pint 2005). 

Industry | 145
 In the pre-petroleum era, ﬁ shing and pearl diving, and the related industry of ship-
building, were important in the Gulf and the Red Sea, but the natural-pearl industry was 
essentially killed off  by the cultured-pearl industry by 1932. Slave labor was essential to 
pearling and date production (Hopper 2010); however, pearling declined in the 1930s, 
and date exports were challenged when California began cultivating that crop. Slave 
labor was abolished in 1962. The pearl diving industry  created a seasonal workforce that 
greatly inﬂ uenced popular culture in the Gulf region (see Chapter 6, section on music). 
 For decades, foreign labor has been utilized in agriculture, construction, domestic 
service, white-collar professional jobs, service positions, hotels, the legal and medi-
cal professions, nursing, education, and the oil industry. The proportion of foreign 
labor is disputed, but the international group Human Rights Watch (2010a  ) believes 
that 8 million foreign workers from Asian and other Arab countries are employed 
in Saudi Arabia. An offi  cial policy of Saudization projects its reduction through 
additional education, training, and incentives for Saudi Arabian workers; however, 
some structural features impede Saudization, for instance, the restriction of various 
ﬁ elds to males only. 
Farmer holding harvested 
 vegetables, Saudi Arabia. (Tor 
Eigeland/Saudi Aramco)

 Chapter 4 Economy
146 |
 Land Tenure 
 Undeveloped land is termed  ‘ardh baydah and was used for grazing. Grazing areas 
were reserved for particular tribes or townships under the  hima  system, and no one 
could cut vegetation in such areas. Outside such grazing areas, if someone cultivated 
land, then he could obtain freehold ownership ( mulk hurr ) if he could prove that the 
land was previously barren. The new cultivating landholder could sell the land, and 
his family could inherit it (Altorki and Cole 1989, 35). Or land could be granted a 
ruler through  iqta‘ (a land grant, as elsewhere in the formerly Ottoman lands). When 
landholders went into debt, their land could be repossessed, usually by moneylenders 
or merchants. Another way of obtaining land was to lease it via contract—a form 
known as  subrah . Freehold land could become part of a  waqf , or an endowment, 
which changed the status of the land, because the state could not claim it, but it 
could be leased (Altorki and Cole 1989, 36–38). Sharecropping also took place, with 
peasants ( falalih ) working the land; and paying for seeds, fertilizer, and animals; and 
providing the labor on land owned by merchants, for example, who received a share 
of the crops. 
 Animal Husbandry and Trading 
 The bedouin raised animals that required grazing areas. However, many were agro-
pastoralists; that is, they were not exclusively pastoralists but also seasonally engaged 
in agriculture. An additional boost to the income of the tribal groups was the sale of 
specialized animals, such as racing camels or horses. These commanded good prices; 
however, such sales might be only occasional. Alternatively,  pastoralists  simply 
SAMPHIRE AND SEAWATER IRRIGATION
Saudi Arabian experiments with wheat farming were very successful but were 
criticized for the subsidies needed to promote the program and for their high 
water usage. Could seawater be used for irrigation? At Ra’s al-Zawr in Saudi 
Arabian’s northeastern region, samphire (Salicornia bigelovii) was grown 
commercially, irrigated with seawater, by the Arabian Saline Water Technol-
ogy Company, also known as Behar. Samphire is eaten as a salad green or 
vegetable (it is called “poor man’s asparagus” in Britain), yields oil, and can 
be used as animal feed. The project began in Saudi Arabia in 1993–1994. 
Samphire was chosen because it can thrive in salty soil and brackish water. 
Samphire was developed in Sonora, Mexico, as a potential challenger to 
soybean and safﬂ ower oil. Although it likes salt, it must still be overwatered to 
ﬂ ush out salt (Clark 1994). The Behar project ended due to lack of demand. 
Recently, a experimental Salicornia plantation has been started in Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates, with the intent of cultivating samphire as an agrofuel for 
airplanes (InterPress Service, February 15, 2010).

Industry | 147
 acquired milk and meat from their herds. As in other parts of the Middle East and 
the Horn of Africa, the pastoralist or agropastoralist bedouin moved from certain 
areas to others in diff erent seasons of the year. Each tribe, or animal owner, including 
the members of the Sa’udi royal family,  was identiﬁ ed through special marks or de-
signs branded onto the animals, known as  wasm . Such markings were also replicated 
in bedouin weaving patterns (Hilden, n.d.). Traditional occupations such as that of 
the  jammal , or caravaneer, have been relinquished in contemporary times. The  jam-
mal might typically have traveled to Damascus or Egypt to sell animals and would 
return with goods for sale. Others, known as  ‘uqaylin , engaged in long-distance trade 
and also frequently worked abroad. The lifestyle and income of all of these groups 
were impacted with the introduction of automobiles and trucks; the latter replaced 
animals and ending the  jamamil activities by and large. 
 Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 Saudi Arabia is the world’s largest supplier of oil. The Ministry of Oil and Petro-
leum Resources develops all of the country’s oil policies and projects. Deputy min-
isters report to the minister of oil, as does the country’s representative to OPEC. 
Although the actual longevity of Saudi Arabian oil reserves is disputed—and thus no 
one knows for certain how long this economic situation will last—for the foreseeable 
future, or some 30 years, it is expected that production will continue at the current 
levels. As stated at the outset of this chapter, crude oil production increased in 2010. 
Saudi Arabian farmer uses cattle to till soil. (Tor Eigeland/Saudi Aramco)

 Chapter 4 Economy
148 |
This, in turn, made oil a more economical fuel than many of the more expensive 
alternatives under debate. On the other hand, Saudi Arabia is consuming an in-
creasing share of its own fuel. To balance the dominant role of petrochemicals in the 
country’s economy, planners have been encouraging the growth of the private sector 
and encouraged the kingdom’s accession to the WTO. Six economic cities or zones 
have been constructed, and the country is emphasizing scientiﬁ c and technological 
studies in the new King Abdullah University for Science and Technology. Some oil 
is possessed by Saudi Arabia and also Kuwait under the Neutral Territory, which 
was previously managed by a Japanese company. Other products like natural gas 
and petrochemicals are produced in the kingdom. 
 The history of the oil industry is fascinating and confusing. While oil excavation 
took place in the United States—in Pennsylvania and in California early in the 20th 
century—as in the world markets, the ﬁ rst scenarios saw wildcatting, in which inves-
tors rushed to pump oil until the commodity lost value, which occurred swiftly. This 
was the sort of situation that the giant companies that eventually formed sought 
to avoid. The oil industry came to be dominated by a few gigantic personalities 
who created companies that were able to fend off  competitors, control the costs of 
transportation, and ﬁ ght regulation (Pelletiere 2001; Yergin 1991; Kirk 2000). The 
great advantage of oil in the Arabian Gulf region rested on political, economic, and 
geological speciﬁ cs. In this part of the world, companies could gain concessions for 
entire areas without dealing with individual landowners but only with the ruling 
 shaykhs  and, in Saudi Arabia, like in Kuwait, with the king. Oil companies were 
interested in excavating in the region, for geologists knew that oil was likely to be 
found there because of the naptha ﬁ res from oil seeping up to the surface, which had 
attracted the interest of visitors for centuries. In 1932, oil was discovered in Bahrain. 
In May 1933, the Saudi Arabian government agreed that Standard Oil of California 
(SOCAL) could explore Saudi Arabia for oil. This was undertaken by California 
Arabian Standard Oil Company (CASOC), a subsidiary of SOCAL. In 1936, the 
Texas Oil Company bought half of this concession and operated as the California 
Texas Oil Company. In Dammam, one well began producing more than 1,500 barrels 
a day in 1938, after nearly four years of unsuccessful eff orts. In 1944, the company’s 
name became the Arabian American Oil Company, known as Aramco. By 1948, 
the company was owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey, Socony Vacuum, SOCAL, 
and the Texas Oil Company. Aramco ran the company as it wished and set prices; 
however, it began to share the proﬁ ts with the Saudi Arabian government and wrote 
off  Saudi Arabia’s share as a U.S. tax deduction. 
 In 1973, following U.S. support for Israel during the Ramadan (or October or 
Yom Kippur) War, the Saudi Arabian government acquired a 25 percent share of 
Aramco, increased the share to 60 percent by 1974, and ﬁ nally acquired full control 
of Aramco by 1980. In November 1988, the company changed its name from Ara-
bian American Oil Company to Saudi Arabian Oil Company, also known as Saudi 
Aramco. 
 Aramco built infrastructure in the Eastern Province and transported oil by tanker 
vessels from Ra’s Tanura   and Ju’aymah. In 1981, the company embarked on an east-
west pipeline linking the eastern oil ﬁ elds to Yanbu. This pipeline was not as heavily 

Industry | 149
used as tanker traffi  c but was important in case of disruption in the Arabian (or Per-
sian) Gulf. It boosted output, even more so with its expansion in 1987. In 1993, the 
Saudi Arabian government decreed that Saudi Aramco would merge with Samarec, 
the company responsible for reﬁ ning oil. Ever since, the company has reﬁ ned and dis-
tributed oil within the kingdom and ships oil internationally via its subsidiary, Vela 
International Marine, Limited, based in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Other 
subsidiaries are Aramco Services Company of Houston, Saudi Petroleum Interna-
tional, Saudi Petroleum Overseas (located in London), Aramco Services Company 
of the Netherlands, Bolanter Corporation, Pandlewood Corporation, and Saudi 
 Aramco Total Reﬁ ning and Petrochemical Company. 
 Aramco’s senior management and engineers were nearly all Americans as recently 
as the 1970s, and foreign control over the kingdom’s natural resources was disturb-
ing to Saudi Arabia for various reasons. Even following nationalization, American 
nationals remained on as executives until 1988 (Obaid 2000, 41). The company has 
been very successful under Saudi Arabian management. 
 Today, Saudi Aramco is a huge company with a value estimated at $781 billion 
in 2006 ( Financial Times   ). It manages more than 100 oil and gas ﬁ elds and produces 
about 3.4 billion barrels of oil a year. It is the largest producer of oil and liqueﬁ ed 
petroleum gas and the ninth-largest producer of natural gas in the world (Obaid 
2000, 23; http://www.saudiaramco.com, 2010). Its headquarters are in Dhahran, and 
its chief current rival is ExxonMobil. Saudi Aramco also operates the Master Gas 
System, a hydrocarbon complex. It employed 54,441 people in 2008, including geolo-
gists and geophysicists who continue to explore for oil and more than 500 engineers 
and scientists. It maintains two research and development facilities, identiﬁ ed as 
Upstream and Downstream (and which pertain to the diff ering processes of these two 
stages), and a variety of subsidiary companies are related to Saudi Aramco. 
KEY OFFICIALS IN SAUDI ARAMCO
Saudi Aramco’s leading administrators were the following as of 2011:
Khalid al-Falih, CEO, president, and director
Saleh S. al-‘Aidh, Senior Vice President for Engineering and Project Management.
al-Khalid G. al-Buainain, Senior Vice President for Downstream Operations, ‘Abdu-
laziz F. al-Khayal, Senior Vice President for Industrial Relations, David B. Kultgen, 
General Counsel and Secretary
Amin H. Nassar, Senior Vice President for Upstream Operations for ‘Abdullatif A. Oth-
man, Senior Vice President for Finance
‘Abdulrahman F. al-Wuhaib, Senior Vice President for Operations Services (Saudi 
 Aramco,
Source: http://www.saudiaramco.com/en/home.html#our-company%257C%25

 Chapter 4 Economy
150 |
Selected and Recently Appointed Executives
Khaled A. al-Buraik, Vice President of Saudi Aramco Affairs
Dawood M. al-Dawood, Vice President of Marketing, Supply and Joint Venture Coor-
dination
Zuhair A. al-Hussain, Vice President of Drilling and Workover
Majid Y. al-Mugla, Vice President of Project Management
Ahmad A. al-Sa’adi, Vice President of Pipelines, Distribution and Terminal Operations
Saad A. al-Turaiki, Vice President of Southern Area Oil Operations
Mu’tassim al-Maashouq, for Business Development
Khalid al-Dabbagh, Treasurer
Sources: Saudi Aramco, and Reuters Africa, November 6, 2010.
Saudi Aramco Board of Directors, August 2010–2013
Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources H.E. Ali I. al-Naimi, Chairman
H. E. Dr. Ibrahim A. al-‘Assaf, Member
H. E. Dr. Mohammed I. al-Suwaiyel, Member
H. E. Dr. Abdul Rahman A. al-Tuwaijri, Member
H. E. Dr. Khaled S. al-Sultan, Member
Sir Mark Moody-Stuart, Member
Peter L. Woicke, Member
David J. O’Reilly, Member
President and CEO of Saudi Aramco Khalid A. al-Falih, Member
Abdulaziz F.  al-Khayyal, Member
Salim S. al-‘Aidh, Member
Amin H. Nasser, Member
Source: Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia, Washington, DC, and Financial Times, 
 November 6, 2010.
 ExxonMobil is the largest publicly traded corporation in the world and had earn-
ings of $19,420 million in 2009 due to falling oil prices. The company had previously 
been estimated as having a total worth of US$500 billion . The company’s earnings 
and income have increased since as oil prices rose. Its current (July 2011) book value 
is 2.68. The company owns about 40 percent of the world’s oil and is an extremely 
important corporation in the kingdom, as well as in the production of natural gas. 
ExxonMobil, like Saudi Arabia, expects an increase in the demand for petrochemi-
cals in Asia and has been building projects in China, Singapore, Saudi Arabia, and 
Qatar to that end. In conjunction with the Saudi Arabian Basic Industries Corpora-
tion (SABIC) it is studying ways to supply rubber, polymers, and carbon black from 
its joint ventures in the country (ExxonMobil Corporation 2007). 
 Chevron was one of the original Aramco partners, and it continues to provide 
services to the kingdom. In addition, it transports crude from the kingdom to its 

Industry | 151
reﬁ neries. Chevron has also been involved in technology transfer, the provision of 
asphalt for sports facilities, and, along with its Saudi Arabian partner Xenel, the 
formation of the Saudi (electrical) Cable Company. In addition, it operated the Saudi 
Arabian Maritime International Transport Company (1978–1987) to transport oil 
and is involved in civil engineering in the kingdom. Saudi Chevron Petrochemical, 
in a joint venture with the Saudi Industrial Venture Capital Group, constructed a 
Jubayl plant that blends motor gasoline and also produces cyclohexane and benzene. 
Arabian Chevron, Inc. maintains its offi  ces in Riyadh (Arabian Chevron 2007). 
 Saudi Aramco has contributed greatly to the country’s infrastructure, and Exx-
onMobil, Saudi Aramco, and other oil companies are involved in environmental 
research and donate toward humanitarian causes. For example, ExxonMobil made 
a donation of 5 million Saudi Arabian riyals (today this has a value of $1.333 mil-
lion) toward disability research in 2005 ( Arab News , May 20, 2005). The oil sector is 
currently managed in the Saudi government through particular structures such as the 
Petroleum Preparatory Committee and under the Ministry of Petroleum and Min-
eral Resources. The ministry oversees the activities of Saudi Aramco, Saudi Texaco, 
Aramco Gulf Operation Ltd., and the Saudi Arabian Mining Company, as well as 
the Saudi Geological Survey. 
 When questioned about the political volatility of the region and what that means 
for production, in 2008, oil company representatives expressed diff ering views: strong 
concerns that no war should break out with Iran or conﬁ dence that any conﬂ ict 
would be brief and that facilities could swiftly shut down and weather it. At that time, 
Saudi Arabian men converse in front of an advertisement at the 2007 OPEC summit in 
 Riyadh. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 4 Economy
152 |
at least one representative explained that conﬂ icts in Arab countries not immediately 
neighboring Saudi Arabia were not all that important to the then-booming economy, 
as these were the “hinterlands.” (Zuhur 2005–2008; also see Chapter 7, Contempo-
rary Issues) The major companies may feel somewhat diff erently about the current 
wave of protests and regime changes in the region. As important as the oil companies 
are to Saudi Arabia, the country’s participation in OPEC granted it far more control 
over the corporate giants and the industry. When OPEC was ﬁ rst created, Aramco 
refused even to speak to the ﬂ edgling cartel, considering the company’s role in pricing 
to be without challenge (Lacey 1981). OPEC is based in Vienna, Austria. OPEC’s 
member states—Algeria, Angola, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela (Indonesia and Ecuador are for-
mer members, and Iraq’s production is still so low that it plays a minor role)—often 
disagree politically and economically as individual countries, but they have learned 
to operate together to their beneﬁ t. When the cartel agrees to cut output, then prices 
rise. The opposite lesson was learned in the years of an oil glut when production was 
increased in the early 1980s, and prices fell. 
 Prior to the establishment of a ministry for oil,  the U.S.-educated ‘Abdullah al-
Tariki began his career at the Directorate for Oil and Mining Aff airs and became 
director-general of petroleum and mineral aff airs in 1954. He served as the ﬁ rst min-
ister of petroleum and mineral resources (1960–1962). His career exempliﬁ es the 
rapid transformation of Saudi Arabians, for his father was a camel and caravan 
owner. Al-Tariki set out to study Venezuela’s behavior vis-à-vis oil companies and 
how it obtained control over each process in the industry. In September 1960, the 
Venezuelan oil minister Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonzo and al-Tariki organized a meet-
ing in Baghdad, at which Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Iran, Iraq, and Kuwait were 
represented, to discuss methods of increasing oil prices. Then, in response to quotas 
imposed by the United States on Venezuela and Persian Gulf oil exporters, OPEC 
was cofounded by Tariki and Pérez. The Arab members of OPEC also joined the 
Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) in the wake of the 
June, or Six-Day, War of 1967. Following the 1973 Ramadan War between Israel 
and the Arab states, the Arab members of OPEC called for an oil embargo against 
the United States and Western Europe. The embargo was eventually called off  by the 
Saudi Arabian government but not before creating a panic and oil rationing in the 
United States and Europe. 
 OPEC’s aim is to maintain moderate oil prices that are not so high as to discourage 
global dependence on the oil market. When oil prices rose in the 1980s, non-OPEC oil 
supplies were sought out and rapidly expanded, contributing to a drop in oil prices. 
OPEC assigned production quotas in response; however, proﬁ ts continued to slide. 
Certain other OPEC members produced more than their quotas, and Saudi Arabia 
had to cut production even further so long as it sold at offi  cial prices. In 1986 Saudi 
Arabia switched to a new method called  netback pricing , which beneﬁ ted its oil pur-
chasers and allowed it to regain market share (Mohamedi in Metz, ed., 1993, 150). 
OPEC raised its quotas, and Saudi Arabia insisted on its allocation of 25 percent of 
the output, which later rose to 35 percent after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. The United 
Arab Emirates and Kuwait overproduced prior to 1990; Iraq threatened to invade 

Industry | 153
Kuwait and dominated the 1990 OPEC meeting (Mohamedi in Metz, ed., 1993, 
145–146). With the Iraqi invasion and U.S. intervention in the Gulf in Operation 
Desert Storm, Saudi Arabia obtained more of its objectives in OPEC. 
 Even so, market and corporate forces, as well as politics, continue to inﬂ uence 
Saudi Arabia as an oil economy. The Saudi Arabian–American alliance was said to 
lie behind Saudi Arabia’s role in moderating prices, which actually was part of the 
country’s long-term strategy. However, in 1998–1999, OPEC and other oil- producing 
countries campaigned to cut production and increase prices, and Saudi Arabia par-
ticipated, regarding this as a logical economic strategy for the country. According to 
Nawaf Obaid, the minister of petroleum and mineral resources ‘Ali al-Na‘imi was 
a chief advocate for subsequently maintaining a higher price, whereas those who 
urged a larger market share rather than higher prices were led by the deputy minister, 
Prince ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Salman, even though the latter had played a strong role in the 
1998 agreement to make higher prices the offi  cial policy. Obaid makes the point that 
the leaders of the oil policy-making community are not price hawks or doves in any 
extreme sense, as the question of price versus market share has been debated, very 
publicly, for years (Obaid 2000, 19). 
 Saudi Arabia produces various types of crude oil that vary in their sulfur content, 
from Arab Super Light (produced at the Hazmiyah and Ghinah ﬁ elds) to Arab 
Heavy (found at Manifa). The super-light oil is being pumped and depleted more 
rapidly throughout the global oil market, which means that reﬁ neries will eventually 
produce more of the heavier oil. The changes necessary to deal with higher sulfur 
content may produce higher costs and possibly delays (Cordesman and al-Rodhan 
2006, vol. 2, 188, 194). 
 The management of the oil sector in the Saudi Arabian government has under-
gone professionalization and also relies on its negotiations with the oil companies 
and other OPEC nations. In 2000, the Supreme Council for Petroleum and Mineral 
Aff airs was established by royal decree. It included the king, the then crown prince 
‘Abdullah; Prince Sa‘ud al-Faysal, the minister of foreign aff airs; engineer ‘Ali al-
‘Naimi, the minister of petroleum and mineral resources; Dr. Ibrahim al-Assaf, the 
minister of ﬁ nance and national economy; Dr. Hashim Yamani, the minister of 
industry and electricity; Khaled al-Ghosaybi, the minister of planning and acting 
minister of post, telephone, and telegraph; Dr. Mutlib al-Naﬁ sah, minister of state 
and secretary-general of the Supreme Council; Dr. Saleh al-Adhel, president of 
King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology; ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Rashid, former 
deputy minister of ﬁ nance; and ‘Abdullah Jumah, the president and CEO of Saudi 
Aramco (Obaid 2000, 21–29). The council has more authority than the previous Su-
preme Petroleum Council, overseeing Saudi Aramco, electing its board of directors, 
determining oil and gas production levels, and granting joint venture arrangements 
(Obaid 2000, 21). 
 The basic equation of proﬁ t maintenance in the oil industry is access to and con-
trol over the resource and regulation of production and prices. The industry mostly 
consists of giant corporations that obtain their proﬁ ts without hindrance in places 
like Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria (Maass 2009), but diff erent obstacles have been 
present in the Middle East, what with the nationalist goals determined by the Saudi 

 Chapter 4 Economy
154 |
Arabians, who, after years of deferring to the oil company executives, demanded 
their nation’s fair share. With the OPEC boycott, the power of the oil cartel became 
apparent, and eventually Aramco had to defer to OPEC after initially ignoring it. 
Saudi Arabia’s goals through OPEC were nationalization and control throughout 
the production process, although Americans retained executive positions in the com-
pany for many years. 
 Another feature of the oil industry was its economic impact during boom and bust 
cycles. The ﬁ rst boom, or  tufrah , had an incredibly strong eff ect on the economy, 
changing certain social features forever. The boom spurred construction, and many 
obtained credit to build new houses. Car imports tripled, and the U.S. ambassador, 
James Akins, wrote that the sky was “black with vultures” with “get-richer-quicker” 
schemes (Lacey 1981, 422). 
 Prices rose again in the late 1970s, ﬁ rst in response to the Iranian revolution. The 
attack by 700 rebels led by al-‘Utaybi at   the Grand Mosque in Mecca and the Soviet 
Union’s invasion of Afghanistan also produced signiﬁ cant shocks in Saudi Arabia. 
At the 1979 OPEC meeting, the Saudi Arabian position was against raising prices 
because they worried about rates of inﬂ ation and exchange and were concerned that 
high prices would stimulate the search for alternative fuels (Yergin 1991, 703). Oil 
supply channels were disrupted, and stock and oil prices rose higher and higher after 
President Carter embargoed imports of Iranian oil into the United States. Inﬂ ation 
became a problem worldwide, and the oil “bubble” was unsustainable. As a result, 
OPEC lowered the price per barrel from $34 to $29 in 1983 (Yergin 1991, 720). OPEC 
members other than Saudi Arabia argued for higher production quotas, but the king-
dom agreed to act as a “swing producer”—pumping more or less to keep prices down 
but ensure supplies  . The embargo on Saddam Hussein in 1990 and then the Gulf War 
unleashed another crisis in terms of prices. But quite a few believe that the Gulf War 
was actually supported by the United States and Saudi Arabia, either to prevent Sad-
dam Hussein from gaining more control over OPEC or to gain control over Iraq, not 
only to ensure access to Saudi Arabia’s oil but also to prevent pricing challenges be-
yond U.S. control from arising, as had happened in the late 1970s. This logic sees the 
2003 invasion of Iraq as furthering the same interests (Pelletiere 2001; Maass 2009). 
 Another oil boom took place more recently, up through 2007 and 2008, but then 
prices contracted and then rose again following the regional turmoil of the spring of 
2011. Each of the contractions caused changes in the country’s pursuance of its devel-
opment plans; most recently, these plans have been expanded due to the large surplus 
of $28.9 billion during 2010. This allowed the government to raise its expenditure 
allocations by 8 percent to SR 580 billion, intended to encourage economic growth 
but not at so steep a rate as to encourage overspending. The surplus was attributed 
to higher oil prices and lowered oil capital expenditures from Saudi Aramco. The 
government also reduced its domestic debt by 25.8 percent (domestic debt is now 
at 10.2 percent of GDP, as compared to over 80 percent in 2003; John Sfakianakis, 
personal communication, December 20, 2010; also see Reuters on Arabian.Business.
com, December 26, 2010.) 
 The literature on Saudi Arabia’s petroleum sector reﬂ ects certain polemics. First, 
its early history was largely constructed by and reﬂ ects American oil interests. Even 

Industry | 155
though Frank Holmes of New Zealand (known as Abu al-Naft [the father of oil] in 
Bahrain) was the true discoverer of oil, that fact has been obscured in accounts of the 
industry (even in Yergin’s 1991 work, he is a minor ﬁ gure). One researcher located 
Holmes’s correspondence with Karl Twitchell, the Holmes-Amin Rihani correspon-
dence and other documentation to establish this fact (Keating 2005, 9–10). At stake 
was the concept of rights to oil proﬁ ts, whereby American commercial development 
trumped the United Kingdom’s earlier governorship and initial claims. The Saudi 
Arabians (and Bahrainis, Kuwaitis, Emiratis, etc.) could and eventually did assert 
rights on the basis of national sovereignty. Earlier Western contentions in the lit-
erature that Arab states had no right to use the “oil weapon” reﬂ ected conﬂ icting 
political and commercial interests and also this history of discovery and exploitation. 
 Ever since the 1973 war and in response to the increases in oil booms, Western and 
particularly American politicians have argued, in virtually every campaign speech, 
that their nation must become less dependent on imported oil. The 2008 U.S. presi-
dential campaign featured promises to search for alternatives to fossil fuels and re-
duce the United States’ dependency on what was largely understood to mean Arab 
oil producers, that is, Saudi Arabia. Similar discourse exists in Europe where higher 
oil prices are paid. Earlier literature often criticized Saudi Arabia for being a “social 
welfare state” (Hooglund in Metz, ed., 1993) for covering its citizens’ basic economic 
needs and providing subsidies to them thanks to its oil proﬁ ts. The liberal-capitalist 
tradition in economic studies of the kingdom decried the state’s role   in centralized 
planning or that state spending and planning were intended to enrich and entrench 
the royal family (Chaudhry 1997). More recent literature continues to promote and 
Supertankers loading oil in Saudi Arabia. (Corel)

 Chapter 4 Economy
156 |
prefer  private sector growth with longtime observer Giacomo Luciani arguing that 
the Saudi Arabian private sector is expanding appropriately (Luciani in Aarts and 
Nonneman, eds., 2006). Meanwhile, others like Tim Niblock and Monica Malik 
argue that only big businesses or certain others enjoyed access to the government 
(2007, 147–149). They disagree with Gwenn Okruhlik’s claims for the importance of 
municipal chambers of commerce (1992, 320–321), which have been active and which 
serve political as well as economic interests. It seems to me, based on visits from 2005 
to 2008, that the chambers of commerce indeed proved a vehicle for liberal inﬂ uence 
in the government, contrary to Niblock and Malik’s claim. 
 An entire genre of books warn that oil will be depleted, that production levels can-
not remain as high as the Saudi Arabian government contends (Simmons 2005), or 
that the thirst for oil has driven American foreign policy. For example, it is claimed 
that former vice president Dick Cheney and former president George W. Bush had 
unnaturally close ties with the kingdom that overrode American concerns about ter-
rorism (Unger 2004; Maass 2009). These polemics shed little light on the Saudi Ara-
bian economy. Oil company executives who spoke with this author in 2008 predicted 
Workers inspect an oil 
 pipeline in Saudi Arabia. 
(Saudi Aramco World/ 
SAWDIA)

Industry | 157
that at least 30 more years of oil production lie ahead. By that time, Saudi Arabia’s 
past, current, and future investments will hopefully have built an alternative basis for 
the economy and provide another source of energy, possibly nuclear. 
 Other Industries 
 The largest nonoil company is SABIC, founded in 1976. It produces fertilizers, 
polymers, petrochemicals, and steel. This huge company brought in proﬁ ts of ap-
proximately $5.8 billion in 2008. SABIC founded its own  sukuk  (singular,  sakk ) 
company, which issues bonds that are compliant with Islamic law. There are some 
disputes among Islamic scholars about  sukuk . In general, they are supposed to repre-
sent ownership in assets or ventures that accrue proﬁ ts; payments from them should 
represent after-cost proﬁ ts; and the value paid at the maturity of the  sakk should be 
its current value. 
 Water consumption is a serious concern in Saudi Arabia; aquifers, which are 
nonrenewable sources, were being depleted. Desalinization plants have increased 
in number and capacity, but water usage has continued to grow. As a result, major 
contracts have been awarded for desalinization and water projects. Allowing inter-
national companies to set up reuse facilities for wastewater in Saudi Arabia is being 
discussed, as one of the many ideas for expanding water availability in the kingdom 
( Bawaba Business , July 6, 2010). 
 Other industries include Saudi Arabia’s transportation sector, which includes 
SAUDIA (the national airline) and the railways. The country has 865 miles of rail-
ways and 137,554 miles of roadways, which includes 2,418 miles of expressways. The 
Saudi Public Transportation Company operates buses throughout the country, now 
much easier to drive through since the construction of expressways and highways, 
such as the Trans-Arabian Highway (which connects the country’s largest cities from 
east to west) and a causeway connecting Saudi Arabia with Bahrain. Saudi Arabian 
merchant marine vessels number 62. Seventy-one other vessels are registered in other 
countries. The building and management of seaports have been essential to the coun-
try’s trade and oil exports, including the ports of Jeddah, al-Dammam, al-Jubayl, 
Yanbu, and al-Sinaiyah. 
 Air travel was essential in Saudi Arabia because of the diffi  culty of traveling long 
distances by road. Moreover, many of the pilgrims on the  hajj  travel by air, making 
up a large proportion of the estimated more than 2.5 million  hajj pilgrims. Saudi 
Arabia has 217 airports, 81 of which have paved runways, and 9 heliports ( CIA 
World Factbook 2010 ). SAUDIA is based in Jeddah and as of 2010 operated ﬂ ights 
to more than 70 global destinations. The hub airports in Saudi Arabia are King 
Khalid International Airport in Riyadh and King Fahd International Airport in 
Dammam, which opened for commercial travel in 1999. SAUDIA is the second-
largest carrier in the Middle East, behind Emirates Airlines. The privatization of 
SAUDIA began in 2006. It has had a monopoly on domestic air travel. Many Saudi 
Arabians believe that competition from other Gulf airlines would improve service, 
and they complain of overbooked ﬂ ights or the inability to obtain tickets even when 

 Chapter 4 Economy
158 |
ﬂ ights are half empty on domestic routes ( Arab News , January 15, 2011). Far more 
international ﬂ ights now arrive in Saudi Arabia than previously. Women are not 
permitted to be pilots on SAUDIA; however, Prince Walid ibn Talal, the owner of 
Kingdom Industries, made news in 2004 when he hired a female pilot, Hind Hanadi, 
to work for his company. 
 Saudi Arabia’s telecommunication business has also expanded very rapidly, as 
has cellular and wireless service. In 2008, 4.1 million telephone lines and 36 million 
mobile cellular phones were in use ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). The largest national 
provider is the Saudi Telecom service, which also off ers Internet access, and there 
are many other providers of mobile and Internet service. Government-run television 
operated four channels as of 2010, and the satellite market has opened the country to 
a multitude of television stations and companies. There were an estimated 7.7 million 
Internet users in 2008 and an estimated 11,400,000 in 2011. 
 The national radio service, located in Riyadh, is the Broadcasting Service of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This service also off ers shortwave radio, as does the 
BBC and Voice of America. Twelve Web-based FM radio channels operate from 
Riyadh and two from Khobar, and three satellite radio channels were available as 
of 2010. 
 THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND THE STATE 
 The private sector is being encouraged under offi  cial Saudi Arabian planning. One 
vehicle is the group of 26 Saudi Arabian Chambers of Commerce, which are elected 
bodies and federated under the Council of Saudi Chambers of Commerce and In-
dustry. They are intended to aid and support investors and provide information on 
possible bids. The council is also linked to bilateral business councils such as the 
Saudi-Japanese Business Council and the Saudi-Ukrainian Business Council. 
 The private sector is creating wealth for Saudi Arabian as well as foreign compa-
nies and businesspersons. The  Arabian Business  2009 Rich List (similar to  Forbes ’s 
magazine’s Rich List but surveying Arabs) ranked Prince al-Walid bin Talal bin 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz at the top of the list (not due to his royal, but his business standing), 
estimating his net worth at $18 billion. Shaykh Mohammad ibn ‘Isa al-Jabir, who 
is primarily involved in the travel and hospitality industry, ranks second, with a net 
worth of $9.7 billion. Ranked fourth is Muhammad al-Amoudi, whose primary in-
dustry is in energy and whose net worth is estimated at $8.8 billion. The bin Laden 
family, whose primary industry is construction, is ranked seventh at $7.1 billion. In 
the eighth spot is the ‘Olayan family, whose primary industry is in banking and ﬁ -
nance and whose net worth is estimated at $6.9 billion. Ranked 22nd is the al-Zamil 
family, with a net worth estimated at $3.5 billion (ArabianBusiness.com 2010). Of 
these, Prince al-Walid ibn Talal is a well-known investor in the West. Educated 
in the United States, he bought a large amount of shares in Citicorp in the 1990s 
and bailed out Citibank when it experienced ﬁ nancial diffi  culties. He holds other 
investments in Apple Inc., AOL, Motorola, and News Corporation Limited; vari-
ous hotel chains; a 10 percent holding in EuroDisney; and a 9  percent  investment 

The Private Sector and the State | 159
in Rotana Group, the large entertainment company (described in Chapter 6, sec-
tion on music). 
 Despite the gains of such giants of business, nearly 90 percent of private-sector 
business owners in Saudi Arabia operate small to medium-sized enterprises. Their 
main complaints are the handicaps of strict regulations, lack of access to credit, and 
lack of data and information that would help startups (Bundagji 2005). 
 Crafts 
 Traditional and modern crafts in Saudi Arabia include animal husbandry for rac-
ing, falconry, bread baking (   farranah ), spice dealing ( ‘attarah , frequently seen in 
Mecca and Medina, which includes traditional remedies), and the making of san-
dals, prayer beads, jewelry, and, in the past, gunpowder. The production of Islam-
related books and educational materials is an important and specialized profession, 
as well as pilgrimage-related activities like the guides for  hajj groups. Men’s and 
women’s clothing is produced in the kingdom, but some items, chieﬂ y men’s cotton 
robes, are imported from Oman, while synthetics and embroidered textiles come 
from India. 
 Palm trees produced various local crafts; women wove palm fronds into rugs 
and fans. Hats ( tafash ), rope, brooms, and matting are also made from palm fronds 
by rural men and women (Colyer-Ross 1981, 122–123). Women also fashioned 
the  maksar , or camel litter, which was based on a tamarisk or pomegranate wood 
frame, then covered with gazelle skins and decorated with shells, cloth, and pieces 
of mirror. Stonecutting was once a major trade in the area of Jawf, and sculpture 
and pottery were important (Colyer-Ross 1981, 119–121). Metal crafts were made 
in the peninsula, along with armor, weapons, and coff eepots and utensils. Leather 
goods were also made, including storage bags, camel bags, and belts (Topham 
1981). 
 Weaving was a highly developed craft in the past, and spinning to produce the 
thread was a necessary skill. In addition to woven textiles, garments, and rugs, em-
broidery was a very important craft today replaced with ready-made machine em-
broidered items. Earlier hand-produced items and the techniques used to produce 
them have been documented and photographed as well as items imported from Syria 
and Persia (Colyer-Ross 1981, 124–138; Hilden 2010). 
 Other handicrafts are based on local traditions, and some are important to tradi-
tional architecture, for instance, the tradition of mud-brick building, which has been 
championed by Prince Sultan ibn Salman al-Sa‘ud, who restored his farmhouse at 
al-‘Udhaybah with this technique. It is also known to the students of Egyptian archi-
tect Hassan Fahmy (Facey 1997, 1999). A special tradition still exists in the brilliant 
geometric painted frescoes or murals that decorate homes in the Asir region, carried 
out by master craftsmen (Mauger 1996). Both of these traditions stand in contrast to 
the far more common cement-block construction of rapidly expanding cities and towns. 
Other crafts and traditional products are displayed and sold annually at the Jinadiriyya 
Festival. 

 Chapter 4 Economy
160 |
 Pilgrimage Income and Tourism 
 The political economy of the annual pilgrimage is a unique aspect of life in Saudi 
Arabia. An enormous number of people travel each year for the  hajj , bringing income 
into the economy. The government has had to invest in the infrastructure necessary 
to transport, house, and maintain security during this period and, to a lesser extent, 
during Ramadan, when it is popular to perform the lesser pilgrimage, or the  ‘umrah . 
Political arrangements with all countries sending pilgrims are also necessary. In the 
past, it was customary for Muslim pilgrims who wanted to pursue Islamic studies 
to remain on in the kingdom. The pilgrimage visa does not allow for that possibil-
ity today; however, the burden of regulation is on the state, and some still overstay 
their visas. Other external tourism is still extremely limited; the government hopes to 
expand it as well as internal tourism. Saudi Arabia’s unique historical and geographic 
sites would make it a very interesting destination. 
 LABOR 
 In addition to the labor functions coming from pastoral and agricultural-pastoral 
life, merchants traders, and those in occupations arising from the pilgrimage such as 
guides were historically important in the kingdom. In the 1940s, an industrial work-
ing class formed. This was mostly made up of the Shi‘a workers employed by the 
oil industry in the Eastern Province. In the 1950s, merchant families became more 
important as they were able to import key goods and obtain contracts for buildings 
and new businesses. 
 The foreign workforce expanded throughout the 1960s with 60,000 foreign work-
ers in 1962/1963, rising to 722,050 in 1970. At this point, many of the foreign work-
ers were Arabs, some were Westerners, and others were from South Asia. During 
the Third Development Plan, government planners hoped that foreign labor would 
grow only 0.2 percent per year, but foreign labor is cheaper for employers, and ac-
cording to Niblock and Malik Saudi Arabian productivity fell (Niblock and Malik 
2007, 92) in spite of the expansion of educational opportunities. Reducing the for-
eign workforce and expanding the Saudi Arabian working population has remained 
a goal ever since. From 2000 to 2007, the entire labor force expanded by 1 million, 
mostly outside the oil industry, in services, construction, and electricity. More Saudi 
Arabian citizens were employed, but the number of non–Saudi Arabians working 
in the kingdom actually rose (Niblock and Malik 2007, 198–199). Only about 19 
percent of the Saudi Arabian citizenry is employed; unemployment is thus a seri-
ous economic and social issue. The current indigenous labor force is 6.922 million, 
while the estimated population is 29,207,277 (the ﬁ gure given in 2010 by the United 
States was only 25,731,776, but other, higher ﬁ gures are provided in other sources. 
One should note that a large proportion of the Saudi Arabian population is under 
the age of 15 (38 percent, according to some statistics, and over 50 percent in other 
sources). Restrictions on women’s employment also impact the labor sector, and 
the other major factor to remember is the importation of foreign labor. In addi-

Labor | 161
tion, there is some casual, or informal, employment (unreported) and unpaid family 
labor; however, it is the large amount of foreign labor that is of concern, and it tends 
to be reported at diff erent levels in diff erent sources. For 2009, American sources 
reported that 80 percent of the labor force was made up of non–Saudi Arabian 
nationals ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). For several decades, Saudi Arabia has been 
the number-one destination of many Asian workers, for example, from the Philip-
pines, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. Non–Saudi Arabian Arabs also continue to work 
in Saudi Arabia. 
 The labor force is employed primarily in services (71.9 percent), followed by in-
dustry (21.4 percent) and agriculture (6.7 percent). The unemployment rate is given 
at only 11.8 percent for 2008; however, this is based on the employment of Saudi 
Arabian males, and unemployment is estimated at 25 percent in other sources ( CIA 
World Factbook 2010 ). Unemployment among the younger generation is readily 
discussed in the kingdom. Parents comment about their children’s search for work 
despite their excellent educational qualiﬁ cations. Or they complain about the very 
poor wages off ered in certain jobs, which would not cover the expenses of a young 
man trying to save for marriage or the cost of a driver for a young woman employee. 
Foreign labor is brought in at lower wages than it would cost to employ Saudi Ara-
bian labor in certain occupations, and the foreign workers are housed cheaply. It is 
claimed that commercial agents often violate foreign workers’ rights—because they 
Asian and African immigrants live under a bridge in the city of Jeddah in 2009. Some have 
overstayed their visas after arriving as pilgrims, others have escaped employers, still others 
no longer have sponsors. (Omar Salem/AFP/Getty Images)

 Chapter 4 Economy
162 |
sponsor workers’ visas, frequently hold their passports, and sometimes withhold 
wages. The government of Saudi Arabia is targeted by international agencies for this 
situation since it is in the position to help regulate it. 
 Human Rights Watch (HRW) acknowledged that the Majlis al-Shura (Consulta-
tive Council) granted some rights to foreign workers who are employed as servants 
and domestic workers, estimated at about 1.5 million under the new law; however, 
they are still subject to abuse and are unable to leave their places of employment 
or hold their own passports. Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each 
year from domestic workers who are forced to work 15 to 20 hours a day, seven days 
a week, and are denied their salaries. Domestic workers frequently endure forced 
conﬁ nement, food deprivation, and severe psychological, physical, and sexual abuse 
(Human Rights Watch 2010b). 
 It is diffi  cult for foreign workers to pursue criminal cases against their employers, 
sometimes because they are returned to their home countries. Human Rights Watch 
mentions various examples like that of an Indonesia woman, Keni binti Carda, 
whose employer burned her and pulled her teeth out. Unfortunately, once repatri-
ated, she could not issue a formal complaint. 
 Many workers are illiterate and speak little Arabic; the agents who bring them 
into the country may hold their passports, charge them for their travel, and refuse 
to pay them. In 2007, Saudi Arabia revised its labor law to improve conditions for 
migrant workers; for example, increasing their annual leave from 15 to 21 days and 
to 30 days for those who served for ﬁ ve years. Muslim workers must have their hours 
reduced to 36 hours per week during Ramadan. However, the revised law also allows 
an employer to increase work hours beyond eight hours a day with the Ministry of 
Labor’s permission or to reduce it to seven hours ( Arab News , September 25, 2007). 
In addition, new rules punished labor traffi  cking with sentences of up to 15 years 
(Human Rights Watch 2010b). 
 Nevertheless, workers at Jadawel International, a Saudi Arabian company in 
Dhahran, complained to Human Rights Watch that those requiring medical treat-
ment could not leave the compound, because the company had not renewed their 
residency permits. Further, workers said their wages were ﬁ ve months in arrears, and 
others said they had never been paid in a timely manner. The workers enacted a two-
day work stoppage in April 2010 (Human Rights Watch 2010b). This was not the 
only company violating labor laws; 200 Filipino workers protested wage withholding 
at the al-Arab Contracting Company in February 2010 ( Business.com , February 8, 
2010). Five hundred Nepalese workers threatened a strike at a work site in Mecca but 
called it off  when promised a resolution ( Yahoo Business , May 10, 2010). 
 Strikes, collective bargaining, and unions are not permitted in Saudi Arabia. 
When the ﬁ rst labor protests broke out at Aramco in 1953, there were no formal 
laws on such issues. Workers were responding to the conditions in which they were 
housed, their treatment, and their pay, which was greatly to that of Western foreign 
workers. After their demands were ﬁ rst raised, 13,000 Saudi Arabian workers walked 
out, and there were even riots ( Time , November 2, 1953), which happened again in 
1956 (Niblock and Malik 2007, 33). At that time, there was some suspicion that leftist 
or worker-oriented views were spreading into Saudi Arabia, a form of political con-
sciousness especially troublesome to employers. Some of the authors who chronicled 

Labor | 163
Aramco’s history or their own experiences admitted the double standards permitted 
excellent housing for Western workers as compared to poor conditions for Saudi 
Arabian employees (Brown 1999; Lippman 2004; Vitalis 2009). 
 Saudization is the name of the offi  cial policy intended to result in the employment of 
more Saudi Arabians in place of foreign workers. It has impacted the service industries 
and is gradually being enacted in other sectors, for example, the health industry and 
education, which are two areas important to women’s employment. Saudization creates 
various dilemmas for employers, such as meeting higher salary demands, which may 
impact their proﬁ t margins, and diff erent regulatory procedures. An initial argument 
was that Saudi Arabians were not as qualiﬁ ed as some technically trained foreign work-
ers, managers, or supervisorial staff . In some industries, education and training have 
overcome these diff erences, but in other areas (for instance, in services like hotels), it 
appears that Saudi Arabian managerial and supervisorial staff  are employed, but addi-
tional foreign workers accomplish some of their duties. In other areas, such as the health 
industry (for example, nursing), there were diff erences in salaries, living conditions, and 
status that are being addressed through special protocols. Overall, Saudization increases 
costs for employers. In less-skilled occupations, such as the many workers brought in for 
construction, the policy is far less likely to impact employment (Lunde 2004). 
 In certain ﬁ elds of employment, the hiring of foreign workers is a long-standing 
practice, not only in Saudi Arabia but in the countries of the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC) as a whole or even more widely in the region. The hiring of foreign 
teachers, nurses, doctors, and oil-sector employees on rotating contracts strength-
ened employers’ control over employees. As more Saudi Arabians were employed 
within the oil industry, many Americans continued to work in the kingdom. The ad-
vent of local terrorism and attacks on foreign workers in 2003–2004, as in the attacks 
at al-Khobar or the kidnapping and beheading of Paul Johnson, created a degree of 
panic and caused some who had spent most of their careers in the kingdom to retire or 
return to the West. Predictably, the government was eager to contain these breaches 
of security and ensure the safety of foreigners as well as their own citizens, which has 
largely been accomplished (see Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). 
 Long-standing debates over women’s employment come from social, cultural, and 
religious attitudes, offi  cial policies of segregating—or separating—women from men, 
and some restrictions within the educational system. On the one hand, this could, and 
will in the future, create jobs for women who provide services to other women, but, on 
the other, until women are permitted to work in diff erent sectors, that eff ect is limited. 
 One area where women have worked in a mixed environment is in health services, 
but education, for instance, is segregated. Also, women are restricted at present from 
studying petroleum engineering and are excluded from military service and employ-
ment by the military or security services, except for a section of the Saudi Arabian 
National Guard. In some cases, it may be diffi  cult for women to obtain higher aca-
demic degrees outside of the kingdom, which grants a degree of prestige, because 
of the overwhelming expectation that they marry, ideally by a certain age. This is 
why the inclusion of women in the new King Abdullah University for Science and 
Technology is so important. 
 Conservatives have attacked governmental initiatives to employ women in the 
service sectors, arguing that contact between men and women would take place, that 

 Chapter 4 Economy
164 |
women would be endangered by men, or that women should not “take men’s jobs.” 
These attacks make it diffi  cult for women to move into new areas of employment. 
That women would be endangered by men is the main argument against permitting 
women to drive. That restriction also impacts their employment, because they must 
have a private vehicle and driver to reach their offi  ces or places of work, a cost that 
may consume a large portion of their salary. 
 The government understands and respects the depth of cultural socialization, 
and, due to the rules of segregation, another factor impeding women’s employment 
had concerned the diffi  culty of obtaining government permits and permissions, since 
some offi  ces lacked windows (or desks) that served women (and where they may line 
up without being in proximity to men). The government did announce the provision 
of women’s desks at all offi  ces. These are not yet operating as well as they might, 
but they are a move in the right direction. The recent appointment of a woman 
deputy minister in the government is thought to signal encouragement for women’s 
 employment, as are announcements that women advocates (attorneys) will be per-
mitted to practice. Women attorneys now work for legal groups, but men must pres-
ent briefs. Some women are dubious about the pace of progress, because previous 
announcements that women were to be employed in the Foreign Ministry were ﬁ rst 
watered down by the added statement that they might be employed ﬁ rst as secretar-
ies; in addition, these changes have not yet occurred. 
 In 2010 the general manager of the Jeddah labor offi  ce, Qusai al-Filali, announced 
that Saudi Arabian women will soon be allowed to work as cashiers. United Azizia 
Panda, which operates more than 100 supermarkets in the country, began a trial 
program for 16 women cashiers in one of its HyperPanda Jeddah stores (Handley 
2010). These announcements elicited protests from conservatives and support for 
women’s employment from others, even though women must be 26 or older, be 
divorced or widowed, observe Islamic dress requirements (wearing  ‘abaya and veils, 
not the Panda uniform), and work in a sectioned-off  women-only or family section of 
the market. In the  suqs , some women have always sold goods, but in the newer stores 
and malls, only small numbers of women sell items in women-only establishments 
( Arab News , August 26, 2010). 
 Social and cultural expectations that women will manage the domestic responsi-
bilities have also been impacted by the importation of foreign domestic labor. Not 
everyone can aff ord to hire such labor, but it became suffi  ciently prevalent as to spark 
two types of debates: one concerning the abuses of domestic laborers and the other 
concerning some families’ relinquishing of parenting to maids and other caregivers. 
Since domestic labor takes place inside private homes, workers are vulnerable in a 
way they might not be elsewhere. 
 TRADE AND FINANCE 
 Saudi Arabia’s balance of trade is considered positive as its exports have outstripped 
imports despite a fall in oil prices since 2008. In 2009, its exports were estimated 
at $180.5 billion, while 2008 exports were $313.4 billion. These ﬁ gures were even 

Trade and Finance | 165
higher in 2010. Ninety percent of Saudi Arabian exports are petroleum or petroleum-
related products ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). Saudi Arabia’s nonoil exports came 
to 8.9 billion riyals by April 2009 (on April 15, 2009, 1 SAR = 0.26668 USD), 5.8 
billion riyals of which was from plastics and petrochemicals,  which were primarily 
imported by GCC countries, followed by China (Reuters, July 3, 2010). The largest 
trading partners for Saudi Arabia’s petroleum exports are the United States, which 
purchases 17.2 percent of the yearly output); South Korea at 10.2 percent; India at 
5.9 percent; Taiwan at 4.6 percent; and Singapore at 4.4 percent. In the same pe-
riod, Saudi Arabia’s imports came to $86.61 billion and consisted primarily of ma-
chinery, equipment, food, chemicals, textiles, cattle, and motor vehicles. The United 
States provided the largest share of Saudi Arabia’s imports at 12 percent; followed 
by China, 10.4 percent; Germany, 7.3 percent; South Korea, 5.1 percent; Italy, 4.7 
percent; and the United Kingdom, 4 percent. Saudi Arabia’s current account balance 
was estimated at $24.56 billion in 2009, down from $132.6 billion the previous year. 
 Saudi Arabia’s exports are very important to Arab economies, although the in-
come from these exports is far less crucial to Saudi Arabia than that from its exports 
to world markets. Today, Saudi Arabia is Egypt’s largest Arab trading partner, and 
it has been one of Syria’s largest trading partners, Arab or otherwise, since the 1980s. 
The United Arab Emirates is Saudi Arabia’s largest Arab trading partner for its 
exports (Zuhur 1988; United Nations 2010a, 2010b). 
 Saudi Arabia’s trade with the United States has also involved arms purchases, a 
politically sensitive aspect of trade that helps uphold the alliance between the two 
countries. In most years, a gap exists between the value of the arms ordered and 
those actually delivered, and purchases include not only weaponry and aircraft but 
also construction and support services. The Gulf War heightened Saudi Arabia’s 
sense of vulnerability and arms purchases; however, reduced oil incomes restricted 
buying in the 1990s until production cuts again improved country ﬁ nances. Saudi 
Arabia has also purchased arms from the United Kingdom and China (see Chapter 
7, Contemporary Issues). 
 Saudi Arabia’s investors beneﬁ ted from the creation of the stock exchange (al-
Tadawul), which helped make capital available as well. The Capital Market Au-
thority operated informally in Saudi Arabia beginning in the 1950s until 2003. In 
2003 the Capital Market Law was issued in Royal Decree No. 30. Five full-time 
commissioners were appointed by royal decree, and the Central Market Authority 
formally established the Tadawul. The stock market most recently peaked in 2006, 
when its (Tadawul) All Share Index reached 21,000 and a value of $745 billion. Many 
Saudi Arabians invested, some taking out loans to do so, and then the index fell. The 
companies that performed best were those in petrochemicals or communications (Ni-
block and Malik 2007, 217–220). In March 2010, the ﬁ rst Saudi Arabian fund on the 
Tadawul open to foreign investors was launched; however, they had to have a Saudi 
Arabian bank account, so direct investment has been limited ( Wall Street Journal , 
May 17, 2010). Swap agreements were off ered since 2008 through certain brokerages. 
 At the end of 2010, the Tadawul was at 6,620.75 points, gaining 489.99 points over 
the previous year. The total value of shares traded was $202.45 billion, less than in 
the previous year. An example of one of the Saudi Arabian joint stock companies is 

 Chapter 4 Economy
166 |
Ma’aden, formed in March 1997, which has promoted the gold business, has oper-
ated ﬁ ve gold mines, and has branched out into phosphate, aluminum, and other 
projects. The market value of publicly traded shares at the end of 2009 was $318.7 
billion ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). 
 Public debt was estimated at 20.3 percent of GDP in 2009, and inﬂ ation was 
estimated at 5 percent ( CIA World Factbook 2010 ). The debt has now been reduced 
to 10.3 percent of GDP according to the latest ﬁ nancial information. The country’s 
reserves of gold and foreign currency were estimated at $410.3 billion at the end of 
December 2009. The ﬁ rst two ﬁ gures reﬂ ect some change in a conservative society in 
which cash spending is the norm and the use of credit is fairly new. Also, the costs of 
certain products, often, but not always, imported goods, are extremely high. 
 Prior to 2000, foreign investment in the kingdom required a Saudi Arabian part-
ner of at least 25 percent; the investor was required to boost development or tech-
nology transfer. The Foreign Capital Investment Committee normally required 
51 percent Saudi Arabian ownership. Then, the Law on Foreign Direct Investment 
was enacted, allowing for 100 percent foreign-owned companies. Also, they could 
acquire land for their activities and for their employees. The Saudi Arabian General 
Investment Authority (SAGIA) was to rule on applications by investors within 30 
days, thus speeding up the bureaucratic process. An example of the foreign invest-
ment promoted through such measures was Alcoa’s 2009 arrangement with Ma’aden 
to build an aluminum reﬁ nery and smelter estimated at a value of $10.8 billion; the 
project will begin in 2013–2014. 
 TAXATION 
 Numerous sources claim that Saudi Arabia had developed a taxation system but 
abandoned it with the ﬁ rst oil boom. In fact, Saudi Arabian citizens are required to 
pay  zakat amounting to 2.5 percent of their income and assets, excluding real estate, 
or 2.5 percent of an estimated proﬁ t of 15 percent of gross receipts. The Department 
of Zakat and Income Tax governs taxation in the kingdom and provides informa-
tion on a variety of complex topics and treaties. Beyond  zakat , taxes apply to busi-
ness income, and non–Saudi Arabian and non-GCC nationals are taxed on business 
income in relation to the percentage they hold in a business. If non–Saudi Arabians 
own rental real estate, they are taxed 5 percent of the gross rental income. Individuals 
do not pay a capital gains tax on the sale of property. 
 Taxation on corporations depends as well on whether the entity is owned by a 
Saudi Arabian or GCC national or by a foreigner from a non-GCC country and also 
on the amount of proﬁ ts. If not owned by a Saudi Arabian or GCC national, then 
the company must pay a 25 percent tax on its proﬁ ts if it makes up to 100,000 Saudi 
riyals per year and also must pay capital gains tax (though the company is usually 
exempted from paying any home-country tax on amounts taxed by the kingdom). 
The taxed amount is 20 percent up from the minimum of 100,000 Saudi riyals to SAR 
500,000 and rises to 30 percent on proﬁ ts of more than SAR 1,000,001. Expenses 
for income generation are deductible in calculating the corporation’s income. If the 

Investment | 167
corporation is GCC based, then it pays a  zakat tax at 2.5 percent (again, based on 
an estimated proﬁ t of 15 percent of gross receipts). Joint-venture companies also 
exist and are taxed; however, the foreign entity may be granted a tax holiday of up 
to ﬁ ve years by the Saudi Arabian government. SAGIA is the agency that promotes 
foreign and domestic investors and therefore must carefully consider the impact of 
taxation policies. 
 INVESTMENT 
 In 1971 the Public Investment Fund (PIF) was established to provide ﬁ nancing to 
commercial projects that could not be undertaken by the private sector. Applications 
for ﬁ nancing are made to the Secretariat of the Public Investment Fund and reviewed 
by its directors. The PIF has established ﬁ ve fully owned companies,  including the 
Saudi Rail Road Company and the Security Exchange Company known as the 
Tadawul (stock exchange). It had also funded 37 national companies by 2008 and a 
number of bilateral companies with Arab partners. 
 As of 2008, the PIF had committed 82,828 million Saudi riyals in loans for reﬁ n-
eries in the kingdom as well as to those which export; storage tanks for petroleum 
products; lubricant reﬁ ning and processing; iron, steel, fertilizer, and petrochemical 
factories; pipelines for crude oil and other petroleum products; railroad, water, and 
electricity projects; a plan for pilgrim accommodations; aircraft purchases for Saudi 
Arabian Airlines Corporation; and other projects (PIF 2010). 
 Foreign investment in Saudi Arabia has gone through several phases. Following 
the initial period of the petroleum industry’s expansion, investment in the kingdom 
was restricted in various ways, until the Foreign Investment Law of April 2000 was 
approved. At that time, the General Committee for Investment, intended to supervise 
all private and public investment, was set up under the Supreme Economic Council. 
The goal of the new law was to attract foreign capital in the interest of diversifying 
the Saudi Arabian economy (El Sheikh 2003, 22). Other changes meant that foreign 
companies could sponsor their own employees and own 100 percent of their projects 
established in the kingdom. These liberalizations were important to the country’s 
accession to the WTO in 2005. 
 All foreign investment requires a license and may not be engaged in under the 
name of a Saudi Arabian national. Foreign companies are restricted from 22 areas 
of operation; for instance, they are not permitted to engage in “upstream activi-
ties,” which include petroleum exploration, drilling, and production. However, they 
may engage in upstream gas and mining services. They are not allowed to produce 
clothing, machinery, or military equipment in the kingdom. Companies are not to 
provide services to the media, security, educational, military, and retail or distribu-
tion sectors. However, when based outside the kingdom, some companies contract 
with foreign employees who work on a contractual basis in some of these sectors, 
for instance, in the area of military education. In the past, foreign businesspersons, 
particularly those with less experience in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, generally 
considered it very diffi  cult to do business there. Offi  cial rules and regulations were 

 Chapter 4 Economy
168 |
complex, it took time to obtain permissions and licenses, and many needed to rely 
on local contacts to understand procedures. The country’s rating in this regard has 
greatly improved according to certain business publications. 
 BANKING AND FINANCIAL SYSTEMS 
 As of 2004, the International Monetary Fund judged the Saudi Arabian banking 
system to be modest but sophisticated and noted that reforms were underway. Eleven 
commercial banks held about half of the banking assets. In addition, all commercial 
banks hold universal banking licenses and manage mutual investment funds. Other 
entities exist in the ﬁ nancial system, three of which are autonomous government 
institutions—the PIF (mentioned earlier), the General Organization for Social Insur-
ance (GOSI), and the Pension Fund. These manage securities and provide foreign 
and domestic investments. The Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency manages some of 
their investments. There are also ﬁ ve specialized credit institutions, all of which ex-
tend interest-free loans for public policy purposes (in areas such as housing, agricul-
ture, or industry), and one of these is the aforementioned PIF. 
 Public ownership is fairly extensive, exceeding 20 percent in ﬁ ve banks and reach-
ing 79 percent in one bank. Foreign bank participation is mainly through substantial 
equity positions as opposed to majority shareholdings. Six banks have foreign eq-
uity stakes of 20 percent or more. Assets of the joint Saudi Arabian–foreign banks 
accounted for 49 percent of total banking sector assets at the end of 2003, com-
pared with 53 percent in 1998. One interesting feature of banking in Saudi Arabia is 
the presence of banks for women. The Saudi Arabian National Commercial Bank 
opened women-only branches in Riyadh and Jeddah in 1980. That bank later opened 
a special center for women with high-value accounts. A blog devoted to women’s 
banking noted that women control 21 percent of the country’s private investments 
and nearly a ﬁ fth of all mutual funds. They outnumber men as new stock investors 
and also invest in real estate (“Banking on Women,” 2010). These observations 
echoed those of Mona Aboelnaga Kanaan, an investment banker reporting at an 
international meeting, along with the fact that banking in Saudi Arabia operates to 
segregate women’s money from their husbands’ and family members’ investments, 
male bankers’ misconceptions that women do not understand investments, and the 
potential for women to beneﬁ t more highly from investments (National Committee 
on American Foreign Policy, 2005). Sometimes, exceptions are made for women—
for example, Nahid Taher heads the Gulf One Investment Bank, which she orga-
nized. Taher rose from a position as an economist at the National Commercial Bank; 
she was the only woman among the 4,000 employees at the bank’s headquarters 
(Andleman 2006). 
 The GOSI, the Pension Fund, and the PIF have equity ownership in the banking 
sector. Insurance companies, leasing companies, and licensed money changers make 
up only 0.3 percent of the ﬁ nancial system (International Monetary Fund based 
on information from 2004, released 2006, 10). All of the commercial banks off er 
 shari‘ah- compliant products; however, some off er only such transactions, and others 

Economic Outreach and Aid | 169
segregate them. Interbank transfers go through the Saudi Arabian Riyal Interbank 
Express (SARIE) system. A new mortgage market has been developing due to the 
demand for housing. As one would expect, the ﬁ nancial system is impacted by rev-
enues from oil sales, which rise and fall according to demand and pricing. 
 ECONOMIC OUTREACH AND AID 
 Saudi Arabia granted approximately 5.3 percent of its GNP in aid up to 1993 and 
probably has been giving amounts equal to that since then. As already described, 
 zakat is required of all Muslims and should be used to aid the needy and also to pro-
mote Islamic study and worship. At the same time, the philanthropic goals required 
by Islam were promoted through Saudi Arabia’s eff orts, beginning with King Faysal, 
to enhance Muslim solidarity on an international level. 
 The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) was established in 1975. Its goal was to 
bolster economic development in Muslim countries that are members of the Orga-
nization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) as well as Muslim communities outside of 
these countries. The shareholders of the bank are members of the OIC. The IDB set 
up the Islamic Corporation for the Development of the Private Sector (ICD) in 1999, 
the focus of which is on development and strengthening ties between business sec-
tors in Muslim countries. Its initial capital was $1 billion, and spent half of this in its 
activities until 2008, when that capital base was increased to $2 billion. Within Saudi 
Arabia, the ICD set up the Iwan Real Estate Development Company and the Anfal 
Stock Exchange. Investment opportunities have also been opened in Muslim repub-
lics of the Russian Federation and in Africa ( Sharq al-Awsat , May 2, 2010). Apart 
from the ICD, the IDB, based in Jeddah, is active in development projects. The IDB 
ﬁ nanced $180 million for road upgrades, school construction, and teacher-training 
projects in Uzbekistan in 2010 and signed a memorandum with the African Devel-
opment Bank on December 21, 2010, to jointly fund $1 million worth of projects. 
The IDB off ered two loans totaling $58 million to Mauritania in 2010 for a potable 
water project and the building of a new roadway. The IDB also off ered $5 million in 
aid to Haiti in 2010 to reconstruct its schools after the devastating earthquake there. 
 The IDB off ers charitable and development funds in addition to the commercial 
ventures already mentioned, and these are not given only to the citizens of its mem-
ber states. It has a scholarship fund for academically talented but needy Muslims 
from nonmember states for university study in Saudi Arabia. This began with 53 
students from India, Kenya, and Sri Lanka in 1983–1984. The program now includes 
many ﬁ elds of study (not only in Saudi Arabia’s large Islamic studies programs) 
and also funds students for study in other OIC member states. As a member state 
of the OIC, Saudi Arabia also contributes to the ongoing and emergency needs of 
Muslim nations. For example, in 2010, Pakistan was hit by the worst ﬂ oods in its 
history to date. The OIC announced donations of $1 billion to Pakistan; the contri-
butions came, according to Ekmelledin Ihsanaglu, the head of the OIC, from mem-
ber states, nongovernmental organizations, institutions within the OIC, and donors 
who pledged through telethons in Saudi Arabia and also in Turkey, Kuwait, Qatar, 

 Chapter 4 Economy
170 |
and the United Arab Emirates. In 2011, the OIC is expected to create an Emergency 
Relief Fund ( Rohama.org , August 30, 2010). 
 International Aid and Loans 
 Saudi Arabia is the largest donor of foreign aid after the United States. It is diffi  cult 
to provide an accurate snapshot of this aid as some of it is granted through interna-
tional agencies like the World Bank or the OIC (as already described) or agencies of 
the United Nations (UN), while other actions are reported separately or are not part 
of Saudi Arabia’s offi  cial announcements. In addition to governmentally granted aid, 
large private donors, such as Prince Walid ibn Talal, give important contributions 
to speciﬁ c projects, for instance, in Indonesia and other countries. By October 2010, 
Saudi Arabia had sent ﬁ ve convoys of humanitarian aid, including food and tents, 
to Pakistan and a total of $354,198,994 in aid and relief had been given to help the 
ﬂ ood victims of 2010. In addition, $200 million was transferred to Pakistan’s Cen-
tral Bank, a $100 million loan was given for ﬂ ood assistance, $200 million in credit 
was extended by the Saudi Development Fund (SDF), and $120 million had been 
allocated for Pakistan’s energy sector. In addition, the SDF had granted funds to 
UN relief organizations for Pakistan (Madani, 3rd Friends of Pakistan Conference, 
reported by Embassy of Saudi Arabia, October 15, 2010). 
 King ‘Abdullah gave $20 million to the SDF to fund the rebuilding of Tintan City 
in Mauritania, which had been destroyed by ﬂ ooding. The king also provided aid 
to rebuild the Parliament Building of Côte d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast), which had been 
destroyed in a ﬁ re. The Saudi Popular Fund for the Relief of Lebanon gave $40,000 
to the mufti of Lebanon to rehabilitate a health center. Saudi Arabia funded ﬁ ve 
projects in Aceh, Indonesia, in 2010, at a cost of more than $4.8 million. Saudi Ara-
bia donated $2 million to the African peacekeeping forces in Darfur. Saudi Arabia 
also donated $5 million to the Carter Center’s Guinea Worm Eradication Program 
in Africa. 
 In September 2010, Saudi Arabia provided $100 million to the Palestinian Author-
ity (to the Abbas/Fayad government) to help meet its enormous ﬁ nancial deﬁ cit. As 
a point of reference, U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton granted a 2010 year-end 
grant of $150 million to Abbas; other categories of U.S. assistance are in rule-of-law 
aid, to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the 
Near East (UNRWA), and separately to schools ( Bloomberg , November 10, 2010). 
A convoy brought 2,000 tons of ﬂ our to Gaza in May 2010 as part of the Campaign 
of the Custodian of Two Holy Mosques King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz for the 
Relief of the Palestinian People in Gaza. 
 The SDF gave $200 million to Morocco to fund an express train project ( Embassy 
of Saudi Arabia , Washington, DC, December 10, 2010). In addition, institutions 
such as the Prince Salman Center for Disability Research were active in the region; 
that institute received an award in Algeria and donated the prize money back again. 
In addition, operations were performed in Saudi Arabia on Palestinian and Iraqi 
conjoined twins in 2010, and they off ered the surgery to Algerian conjoined twins 
in 2011. A medical team off ered some 50 heart surgeries in Yemen in January 2011. 

| 171
 What will Saudi Arabia’s economy look like in the future? Certainly, the eff orts 
in human development—providing higher education and training to its youth—will 
help the country continue the progress it has made. 
 REFERENCES 
 Aarts, Paul, and Gerd Nonneman, eds.  Saudi Arabia in the Balance: Political Economy, Soci-
ety, Foreign Aff airs . New York: New York University Press, 2006. 
 Ahmed, Osama Saad. “Diversiﬁ cation through Industrialization: The Saudi Experience.” In 
 Change and Development in the Gulf , edited by Abbas Abdelkarim. London: Macmillan, 
1999. 
 Alajaji, Adel Abdullah. “Obstacles to the Employment of Male Saudi University Graduates 
by the Private Sector.” PhD diss., George Washington University, 1995. 
 Altorki, Soraya, and Donald P. Cole.  Arabian Oasis City: The Transformation of ‘Unayzah . 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. 
 Andleman, David A. “Arabian Diary: From Banking to Racing.”  Forbes.com , February 15, 
2006. 
 Arabian Chevron.  Chevron wa al-Mamlakah al-‘arabiyyah al-sa‘udiyyah . Riyadh, Saudi Ara-
bia: Arabian Chevron, 2007. 
 Bakr, Mohammed A.  A Model in Privatization: Successful Change Management in the Ports 
of Saudi Arabia . London: London Center of Arab Studies, 2001. 
 “Banking on Women.”  Birds on the Blog. May 10, 2010. http://www.birdsontheblog.co.uk/
banking-on-women/. 
 Bronson, Rachel.  Thicker Than Oil: America’s Uneasy Partnership with Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2006. 
 Brown, Anthony Cave.  Oil, God, and Gold: The Story of Aramco and the Saudi Kings . New 
York: Houghton-Miffl  in, 1999. 
 Bundagji, Fatin Youssef. “Small Businesses and Market Growth in Saudi Arabia.”  Arab 
News , September 4, 2005. 
 Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).  World Factbook . 2010 and 2011. (In some cases, 
the  Factbook displays 2010 information.) https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/# 
 Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz.  The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the Middle East . 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997. 
 Clark, Arthur C., and Muhammad Tahlawy, eds. Pledge, Thomas et al., contributing eds., 
and Facey, William, et al., contributing authors.  A Land Transformed: The Arabian Penin-
sula, Saudi Arabia and Saudi Aramco.  Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, and Houston, TX: Aramco 
Services, 2006. 
 Cole, Donald P. “New Homes, New Occupations, New Pastoralism: Al Murrah Bedouin 
1968–2003.” In  Nomadic Societies in the Middle East and North Africa Entering the Twen-
tieth Century , edited by Dawn Chatty. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2006, 370–392. 
 Cole, Donald P. “Bedouin and Social Change in Saudi Arabia.” In  Change and Development in 
Nomadic and Pastoral Societies , edited by John G. Galaty and Philip Carl Salzman. Leiden, 
the Netherlands: Brill, 1981, 128–149. 
References

 Chapter 4 Economy
172 |
 Cole, Donald P. “Pastoral Nomads in a Rapidly Changing Economy: The Case of Saudi 
Arabia.” In  Social and Economic Development in the Arab Gulf , edited by Tim Niblock. 
New York: St. Martin’s, 1980, 106–121. 
 Cole, Donald P.  Nomads of the Nomads: The Al Murrah Bedouin of the Empty Quarter . Chi-
cago: Aldine, 1975. 
 Colyer-Ross, Heather.  The Art of Arabian Costume: A Saudi Arabian Proﬁ le . Fribourg, Swit-
zerland: Arabesque Commercial, 1981. 
 Congressional Research Service. Albert B. Prados (Author)  Saudi Arabia: Current Issues and 
U.S. Relations . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, Foreign Aff airs, De-
fense and Trade Division, Library of Congress, February 24, 2006. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Khalid R. Al-Rodhan.  The Changing Dynamics of Energy in the 
Middle East . 2 vols. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International, 2006. 
 Cypher, James M., and James L. Dietz.  The Process of Economic Development . London: Rout-
ledge, 1997. 
 El Sheikh, Fath al-Rahman Abdalla.  The Legal Regime of Foreign Private Investment in Sudan 
and Saudi Arabia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984 and 2003. 
 Evans, Peter.  Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1995. 
 ExxonMobil Corporation.  2007 Summary Annual Report . Irving, TX: ExxonMobil Corpora-
tion, 2008. 
 Fabietti, Ugo. “Between Two Myths: Underproductivity and Development of the Bedouin 
Domestic Group.”  Cahiers Sciences et Humanites 26, nos. 1–2 (1990), 237–253. 
 Facey, William. “Al-‘Udhaibat: Building on the Past.”  Aramco World 50, no. 3 (July/August 
1999), 32–46. 
 Facey, William.  Back to Earth: Adobe Building in Saudi Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Al 
Turath and St. Martin’s, 1997. 
 Handley, Paul. “Saudi Supermarket Breaks Taboo with Women Cashiers.”  Zawya.com , Au-
gust 25, 2010. 
 Hertog, Steff an. “Segmented Clientelism: The Political Economy of Saudi Economic Reform 
Eff orts.” In  Saudi Arabia in the Balance: Political Economy, Society, and Foreign Aff airs , 
edited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 2005, 111–143. 
 Hilden, Joy Totah.  Bedouin Weaving of Saudi Arabia and Other Countries . London: Arabian 
Publishing; Oakﬁ eld, CT: David Brown, 2010. 
 Hilden, Joy May (Totah) “The Use of Wasm (Animal Brands) in Beduin Weavings.” Bedu-
inWeaving.com, n.d. http://www.beduinweaving.com. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “Pearls, Globalization and the African Diaspora in the Arabian Gulf in 
the Age of Empire.” Paper presented at the 124th Annual Meeting of the American Histori-
cal Association, San Diego, January 9, 2010. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “The African Presence in Arabia: Slavery, the World Economy, and the 
African Diaspora in Eastern Arabia, 1840–1940.” PhD diss., University of California, Los 
Angeles, 2006. 
 Human Rights Watch. “Saudi Arabia: Events of 2009.” 2010a. http://www.hrw.org. 
 Human Rights Watch. “Saudi Arabia: Free Trapped Workers.” April 23, 2010b. http://www.
hrw.org. 

| 173
 Ibrahim, Saad Eddin and Donald P. Cole.  Saudi Arabian Bedouin: An Assessment of Their 
Needs . Cairo: American University in Cairo, 1978. 
 International Monetary Fund. “Saudi Arabia: Financial System Stability Assessment, Includ-
ing Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes on the Following Topics, Monetary 
and Financial Policy Transparency, Banking Supervision and Payment Systems.” IMF 
Country Report No. 06/199, June 2006. 
 Keating, Allison.  Mirage: Power, Politics and the Hidden History of Arabian Oil . Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 2005. 
 Kirk, Anthony.  A Flier in Oil: Adolph B. Spreckels and the Rise of the California Petroleum 
Industry . San Francisco: California Historical Society, 2000. 
 Krimly, Rayed. “The Political Economy of Adjusted Priorities: Declining Oil Revenues and 
Saudi Fiscal Policies.”  Middle East Journal 53, no. 2 (Spring 1999), 254–267. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle for 
Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 Lawton, John. “Arab Aid.”  Aramco World 30, no. 6 (November/December 1979). http://www.
saudiaramcoworld.com/issue/197906/arab.aid-how.it.s.spent.htm 
 Lippman, Thomas W.  Inside the Mirage: America’s Fragile Partnership with Saudi Arabia . 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 2004. 
 Long, David. “The Hajj and Its Impact on Saudi Arabia and the Muslim World.”  Saudi-
Arabian Forum , February 2003. Reposted on Saudi-U.S. Relations Information Service 
website, December 16, 2007, http://www.saudi-us-relations.org/articles/2007/ioi/071216-
long-hajj.html 
 Lunde, Paul. “Saudization: A Useful Tool in the Kingdom’s Battle against Unemployment?” 
 Journal of South Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 27, no. 3 (Spring 2004). 
 Maass, Peter.  Crude World: The Violent Twilight of Oil . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009. 
 Malik, Monica, and Tim Niblock. “Saudi Arabia’s Economy: The Challenge of Reform.” In 
 Saudi Arabia in the Balance: Political Economy, Society, and Foreign Aff airs , edited by Paul 
Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 2005, 85–110. 
 Marcel, Valérie.  Oil Titans: National Oil Companies in the Middle East . London: Chatham 
House, 2006. 
 Mauger, Thierry.  Impressions of Arabia: Architecture and Frescoes of the Asir Region . Paris: 
Flammarion-Pere Casto, 1996. 
 Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Eighth Development Plan, 2005–2009 . Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: Ministry of Planning, 2005. 
 Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Seventh Development Plan 2000–2004. Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: Ministry of Planning, 2000. 
 Mohamedi, Fareed, “Economics.” In  Saudi Arabia: A Country Study , edited by Helen Chapin 
Metz, Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. 1993. (First edition 1992, based on 
the Nyrop, ed., of the same name.) 
 Moinuddin, Hassan.  The Charter of the Islamic Conference and Legal Framework of Economic 
Cooperation among Its Member States . New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. 
 al-Naqeeb, Khaldoun Hasan.  Society and State in the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula . Translated 
by L. M. Kenny. London: Routledge, 1990. 
References

 Chapter 4 Economy
174 |
 National Committee on American Foreign Policy.  Summary and Recommendations from the 
Roundtable on Arab Women and the Future of the Middle East.  New York: National Com-
mittee on American Foreign Policy, 2005. http://www.ncafp.org/articles/05 percent20Arab 
percent20Women percent20Mideast percent20Rept percent204–05.pdf 
 Niblock, Tim, with Monica Malik.  The Political Economy of Saudi Arabia . London: Rout-
ledge, 2007. 
 Obaid, Nawaf E.  The Oil Kingdom at 100: Petroleum and Policymaking in Saudi Arabia . Wash-
ington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 Okruhlik, Mary G. “Debating Proﬁ ts and Political Power: Private Business and Government 
in Saudi Arabia.” PhD diss., University of Texas, Austin, 1992. 
 Pelletiere, Stephen.  Iraq and the International Oil System: Why America Went to War in the 
Gulf . Westport, CT: Praeger, 2001. 
 Pint, Susana. “The Roses of Taif.” Desert Caves Project. 2005. http://www.saudicaves.com/
saudi/roses.html .
 Pryor, Stephen D. “Learning from the Saudi Arabian Model: Innovating through Energy 
Transition.” Speech to the Global Competitiveness Forum, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Janu-
ary 24, 2010. 
 Public Investment Fund, Ministry of Finance, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 2010. http://www.
mof.gov.sa/en/docs/ests/sub_invbox.htm .
 Romahi, Mohamed A.  The Saudi Arabian Economy: Policies, Achievements and Challenges . 
New York: Springer, 2005. 
 Simmons, Matthew.  Twilight in the Desert: The Coming Saudi Oil Shock and the World Econ-
omy . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005. 
 Topham, John.  Traditional Crafts of Saudi Arabia. London: Stacey International, 1981. 
 Unger, Craig.  House of Bush, House of Saud: The Secret Relationship between the World’s Two 
Most Powerful Dynasties . New York: Scribner, 2004. 
 United Nations. “Saudi Arabia.”  World Statistics Pocketbook . 2010a. http://data.un.org .
 United Nations. “Syria.”  World Statistics Pocketbook . 2010b. http://data.un.org .
 United States Energy Information Administration. Saudi Arabia, Background and Informa-
tion. 2010. Available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/RL33533.pdf .
 Vitalis, Robert.  America’s Kingdom: Mythmaking on the Saudi Oil Frontier . New York: Verso, 
2009. 
 Wallerstein, Immanuel.  Semi-Peripheral Countries and The Contemporary World Crisis . New 
York: Academic Press, 1974. 
 Yergin, Daniel.  The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power . New York: Touchstone 
(Simon and Schuster), 1991.  

175
 CHAPTER 5 
 Society 
 Religion and Law 
 The offi  cial religion of Saudi Arabia is Islam. The majority of Muslims in the king-
dom belong to the Sunni division of Islam. Ten to ﬁ fteen percent are Shi‘a Muslims, 
primarily of the Ja‘fari  legal tradition, while a smaller minority of somewhere be-
tween 300,000 and 700,000 are indigenous Isma‘ili Muslims, a diff erent variety of 
Shi’ism. An unknown but small number of Sunni Muslims follow philosophical, 
theological, or legal traditions other than the majority Hanbali Sunni group, includ-
ing followers of the legal tradition of Anas ibn Malik, known as the Maliki school 
( madhhab ), and Suﬁ  Muslim traditions. Non–Saudi Arabian Muslims may also fol-
low the Shaﬁ ‘i or Hanaﬁ  legal traditions. 
 Shi‘a Islam developed from a dispute over political leadership. Following ‘Ali 
ibn Abu Talib’s assassination (see Chapter 2, History), his son Husayn disputed the 
caliph Mu‘awiyya’s leadership and the right of his son, Yazid, to succeed him when 
Mu‘awiyya died. Mu‘awiyya’s Ummayyad   troops killed Husayn at Karbala, but his 
followers, the Party of ‘Ali (Shi‘at ‘Ali), even in defeat, rejected the legitimacy of the 
Ummayyads, and a serious revolt against Yazid broke out in Medina. Over time, the 
Shi‘a Muslims came to hold distinct beliefs about leadership, such as the authority 
of the imamate ( a’ima ); imams are leaders with charismatic power who designated 
their successors. One branch of the Shi‘a believe that their Twelfth Imam (who disap-
peared into occultation) will return, while others recognize a diff erent descent order 
of imams. The Twelver Shi‘a in Saudi Arabia commemorate the death of Husayn at 
Karbala on ‘Ashura, but they have been forbidden to publicly celebrate the holiday 
and follow a diff erent school of  shari‘ah than their Sunni compatriots. Many of the 

 Chapter 5 Society
176 |
Shi‘a and Khawarij groups (early advocates of ‘Ali) settled in the Arabian Gulf. As 
well, northern Yemen is home to the Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims. 
 The majority of Sunni Muslims in Saudi Arabia, including the state-employed 
clerics and scholars and educational institutions, follow the legal school of Ahmad 
ibn Hanbal (d. 855 CE/241h.). Most of these are guided by the teachings of Muham-
mad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (1703–1791), the 18th-century preacher who allied with the 
Sa‘ud family, and the socioreligious movement he inspired. These are called  muwah-
hidun  (monotheists) or, outside of Saudi Arabia, Wahhabiyya, anglicized as Wah-
habis. The tribal supporters who fought to uphold Muhammad al-Sa‘ud and spread 
‘Abd al-Wahhab’s ideas were revived in the Ikhwan, or brotherhood, by Ibn Sa‘ud. 
 The legal school ( madhhab ) of Ahmad ibn Hanbal (780–855), which is prevalent in 
Saudi Arabia, diff ers from the Shaf‘i, Maliki, and Hanaﬁ   madhahib . Ibn Hanbal was 
a ﬁ rm Traditionist, relying on the Qur’an and hadith. He gathered the  Musnad al-
Imam Ahmad , a six-volume collection of  ahadith . Ibn Hanbal also issued  fatawa (legal 
decisions), which his students collected. He based his decisions on the Qur’an and the 
 sunnah , the  fatawa of the Prophet’s Companions in Medina (unless they contradicted 
the Qur’an or  sunnah , the hadith of the Companions, and after that the weaker ha-
dith, and then, only if necessary,  qiyas  (reasoning by analogy). Ibn Hanbal survived a 
great philosophical and theological clash that took place in his lifetime. He opposed 
the movement of the  mutakallimun (those who used logic in a form of argumentation 
called  kalam ) and withstood that movement’s inquisition and torture (Hurvitz 2002, 
1–21). He provided some reconciliatory positions on questions that had divided Mus-
lims by creating an order of preference for the Companions of the Prophets, defending 
the caliph’s right to choose his successor, and calling for obedience to the imam, as 
long as he met his duties (Abdul Rauf in Cornell, ed., 2007, 200). He opposed Shi‘i 
and Khariji claims that essentially detracted from the legitimacy of the ruling caliphs, 
and responded to such claims using the preceding points. When the followers of ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab came to dominate the Arabian Peninsula in 1773 by capturing Riyadh, the 
Hanbali school became the offi  cial legal stance of the al-Sa‘ud and, eventually, today’s 
Saudi Arabia. The Wahhabiyya are, however, willing to reject a Hanbali interpreta-
tion, if they can prove it wrong; and they exercise  ijtihad , or juristic interpretation, a 
source of Islamic law that the other Sunni schools ceased to use in the 10th century. 
 Two to three million non-Muslims work in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: Chris-
tians, Buddhists, Hindus, and others. Christians and Jews (and Samaritans and the 
Sabeans) are called the  ahl al-kitab , or “People of the Book,” as they possess a scrip-
ture, a divine message, and believe in Allah, the One God. As  ahl al-kitab , they 
must be allowed to follow their own religion. Yet they must abide by the principles 
of Islamic law while living in Saudi Arabia and not involve any Muslims in sinful 
activity. Non-Muslims may not worship publicly; this is meant to discourage any 
violence against them by the salaﬁ sts or other conservatives. They may not prosely-
tize and must abide by the aspects of Islamic law that are enforced as public policy. 
Most of the time, authorities permit them to worship in private homes, but anything 
that could be construed as tools for proselytizing, such as the importing of Bibles, is 
punished. It is claimed that Jews are not allowed to travel to Saudi Arabia; however, 
this is untrue. Saudi Arabia does not recognize Israel, not because it is a Jewish state, 

| 177
Religion and Law
but rather because of its illegal occupation of Palestinian territory and ill treatment 
of Palestinians since 1948. 
 In certain circles religious antipathy to non-Muslims increased during the 1990s, and 
this intolerance along with political resentment of the West was manifested in the at-
tacks by al-Qa’ida   on foreigners in Saudi Arabia (see Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). 
Religious justiﬁ cation for such attacks was related to the insistence on  al-wala’a wa-
l-bar’a , a call to cleave to Muslims and stay far from non-Muslims. While this phrase 
comes from the Qur’anic call to support the Muslim community, it became a favorite 
stance of extremists in order to emphasize in-group status and strife between Muslims 
and non-Muslims. It was not at all evident in the attitude of generations of Saudi Ara-
bians who studied and sometimes resided abroad. The Qur’an states unambiguously 
that some Christians are righteous; however, other verses refer to battles early in Islam’s 
history and speak of the enmity of nonbelievers toward believers. This has created a 
type of religious chauvinism that the government began to address in 2007. Before 
the rise, or resurgence, of militant salaﬁ sm in Saudi Arabia, the question of whether 
Muslims should engage in  hijra h (immigration) to the West had been answered by ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz Siddiq, who said that residence in the West for education and employment was 
permitted and that the position that the countries bound in pacts with Muslim nations 
no longer needed to be designated as  dar al-kufr (the lands or domain of unbelief) for 
the reasons of ensuring Muslim safety (‘Abd al-‘Aziz Siddiq 1985, 51, 12–13). 
 Saudi Arabia is wrongly labeled a theocracy and accused of merging religion and 
politics. This is far from the ideal in Islam. In the earliest decades of Muslim rule, 
the caliphs of the Ummayyad and Abbasid empires claimed religious legitimacy. 
A  religious class of scholars eventually asserted their independence from the rulers 
An historic edition of the Qur'an, the holy book of Muslims. (Larry Sampas)

 Chapter 5 Society
178 |
during the 10th and 11th centuries. These are the  ‘ulama (those who possess  ‘ilm , or 
religious knowledge), and they may be trained to issue  fatawa , teach (see section on 
education in this chapter), and guide Muslims. They were generally not supposed 
to involve themselves in politics and had the right to criticize the political leader-
ship if it violated religious principles or was unjust. As historian Peter von Sivers 
has explained, “caesaropapism” was rejected in Islam (von Sivers 1992, 255). The 
caliphs and, beginning in the 10th century, the sultans or other rulers were supposed 
to govern in accordance with Islamic law and consult with the  ‘ulama . There is no 
central authority or pope in Islam, nor can any ruler declare simultaneous political 
and religious leadership. 
 The message of Islam is conveyed in the Qur’an, the word of Allah, delivered in 
Arabic by the angel Gabriel to the Prophet Muhammad in a series of revelations over 
23 years. The language of the Qur’an is considered the most beautiful and perfect 
possible, based on the “high” Arabic of the seventh century. It was forbidden to 
translate the Qur’an, and translations cannot convey the rhythms and emphasis of its 
language. Translations have been carried out, but they are entitled “interpretations” 
and often add explanatory notes. 
 Following the  mihna (inquisition) in Ibn Hanbal’s era, the winning faction de-
clared that the Qur’an was “uncreated”—meaning it was not written by human be-
ings. Literary analysis of the Qur’an displays poetic and rhetorical forms of that age 
(see Chapter 6, section on literature), and, indeed, the Prophet Muhammad’s enemies 
in Mecca “classed him with the poets and soothsayers, who in the common belief were 
inspired by genii ( jinn )” (Gibb 1974, 35), a claim he rejected. After Muhammad and 
his followers left for Yathrib (Medina) in the  hijrah    (emigration) in 622 CE (see Chap-
ter 2, History), they established their rituals and rules of social interaction and war 
as interpreted from the Qur’anic verses (Ibn Ishaq as given in Guillaume 1955). The 
Qur’an insists on social justice, monotheism, and ethical and social practice, which 
distinguished the Muslims from their native families in Mecca. The Muslims were still 
endangered by the Meccans and fought with them, bearing the Qur’an as a standard. 
 The ﬁ rst revelation of the Qur’an to Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah on Mount Hira 
began when the angel Gabriel commanded “Iqra’!” (Recite!) three times. Muham-
mad asked what he should “read,” and the angel recited the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve  ayat (verses, 
and also signs) of Surah 96. After a pause in revelation, the Qur’an was revealed in 
sections (singular,  surah ; plural,  surat ) over the course of 22 years until Muhammad’s 
death. Passages that had direct relevance for the Prophet Muhammad and his follow-
ers led to the ﬁ eld of  asbab  (causes) of revelation in Qur’anic study and to the ﬁ eld 
of  naskh , which examines abrogating and abrogated verses (verses that are contra-
dicted by later verses). The 114 Qur’anic  surat are arranged from longest to shortest 
in length, and  surat are identiﬁ ed according to whether they were revealed in Mecca 
or in Medina. The Prophet’s Companions and some of his wives had collections of 
the Qur’an, and other collections were made. Eventually, seven valid readings of the 
Qur’an were accepted (Ayoub 1992; Goldziher 1970; al-Sa’id 1975). 
 The Qur’an’s theological importance is twofold, in its declaration of monothe-
ism and guidance concerning human accountability. God, or Allah, is declared to 
be perfect, merciful, omnipotent, and all-knowledgeable (57:33). He is One and not 
a trinity, and his qualities are described in 99 names. The duty of every person is to 

| 179
Religion and Law
submit to Allah, and that is the action of  islam . Human beings must obey Allah’s 
commands and be true to them in intent as well as deed, not acting merely to avoid 
punishment or when it is easy or convenient. Muslims must treat and interact with 
others as Allah commands, in a righteous and moral manner. Otherwise, they will 
be punished in hell, whereas if they follow the straight path, the way of Islam, their 
souls will proceed to paradise. Muslims believe in a Day of Judgment when all souls 
will be resurrected and held to account for themselves. 
 The Qur’an also serves as a source of  shari‘ah (Islamic law is the usual translation 
of this term, but actually it applied to  ﬁ qh ;  shari‘ah  is larger than interpreted law and 
encompasses the lifestyle or code of behavior and intent of Islam) and is studied for 
this speciﬁ c reason, as well as being read by all Muslims and memorized if possible. 
That which is forbidden in the Qur’an is also forbidden in  ﬁ qh , Islamic jurisprudence. 
The exegesis of the Qur’an is called  tafsir , and its interpretations have varied in dif-
ferent ways. The Qur’an contains references to texts and prophets of the Bible. This 
has sometimes confused Western readers; the Qur’an’s affi  rmation of the previous 
revelations must be remembered. 
 The importance of the Qur’an and Islam in Saudi Arabia cannot be overempha-
sized. It is taught in all educational settings and is considered the country’s consti-
tution. The  shari‘ah  and its goals of protecting life, intellect, property, belief, and 
inheritance are constantly brought into debates about the degree of change that 
can be tolerated in the kingdom. Living according to the  sunnah of the Prophet is 
also an extremely important goal. Muslims do not worship the Prophet, yet many 
try to follow his example by repeating or performing supernumerary prayer or fast-
ing, growing their beards because he wore one, wearing a shorter  thob (robe) that 
reaches only to the ankle, using henna, and engaging in other customs popular with 
the  salaﬁ  trend. 
 The teachings of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and his followers have uniquely 
inﬂ uenced Saudi Arabia. ‘Abd al-Wahhab believed Qur’anic instruction should be 
required for all women as well as men, but that understanding of the text should 
be the goal of that instruction. Memorization, or parroting the teachings of others 
about the Qur’an, was insuffi  cient. Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab did not provide a full written 
 tafsir (interpretation of the Qur’an), but he typically provided active interpretation in 
his discussions with his followers. Instead of citing other interpreters; he often chose 
a Qur’anic verse to discuss or cited one at the end of a discussion about a particular 
issue. The  ‘ulama (clerics) of his time opposed his teaching methodology, just as he 
decried their reliance on memorization and blind imitation ( taqlid ). He also opposed 
the claims of those  ashraf (descendants of the Prophet) who claimed to have esoteric 
knowledge of the Qur’an and who demanded deferential treatment from ordinary 
believers. Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab also took issue with Suﬁ  and Shi‘i claims to esoteric 
knowledge (Delong-Bas 2004, 42–44). The institution of the  a’ima , the charismatic 
leadership of specially designated imams beginning with Ibn ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, 
smacked of associationism to Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, as did their belief in the absent 
( gha’ib ) Twelfth Imam. In this, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was not unique; his anti-Shi’ism 
was prefaced by Ibn Taymiyya. He and his followers strongly opposed the Shi‘a 
visitations to their leaders’ graves and reverence for their masters, as well as ecstatic 
Suﬁ  rituals, calling them an unlawful  bid ‘ a (innovation). 

 Chapter 5 Society
180 |
 The King Fahd Complex for the Printing of the Holy Qur’an was established in 
1982 in Medina to print offi  cially recognized editions and translations of the Qur’an 
(at least 55 editions in 39 languages) and audiotapes of its recitations. The Ministry 
of Islamic Aff airs, Endowments ( Awqaf ),  Da‘wah   , and Guidance (see the following) 
supervises the complex, which contains the Qur’anic Studies Center, also dedicated 
to the preservation of Qur’ans, and a training and technical qualiﬁ cation center. 
( Da‘wah    is the “mission” of Islam, or education about Islam and propagation of its 
creed.) As part of the Islamic  da‘wah Saudi Arabia has distributed many editions 
of the Qur’an and other religious materials to Muslims elsewhere in the world; the 
country supports religious training, Qur’an memorization, and Islamic studies. 
 ISLAMIC LAW 
 Muslims must follow Islamic law, or  shari‘ah . In Saudi Arabia, law is a matter of 
religion and vice versa. The  shari‘ah  is a complex, evolving body of rulings that has 
not been codiﬁ ed in Saudi Arabia. Some understanding of  shari‘ah  is essential to 
understand the Saudi Arabian environment and religious process as well as the cri-
tiques levied against Saudi Arabia by external agencies like Amnesty International 
or Human Rights Watch. 
 The purpose of the  shari‘ah is to guide Muslims, who, if they are faithful to Allah’s 
edicts, will attain paradise. Crimes that hurt the community are the most heinous, 
and those considered most severe are mentioned in the Qur’an. These may warrant 
a severe punishment called  hadd (plural,  hudud ), such as stoning, or lashing for adul-
tery or fornication, and these punishments were carried out in public to serve as an 
object lesson. Judges are supposed to operate via precedent, and a complex judicial 
system is overseen by the government. 
 The basis of Islamic legal judgments are found in the Qur’an, but where it off ers 
no speciﬁ c guidance, Muslims consult the  ahadith (singular,  hadith ). These short texts 
relate the Prophet’s practice, behavior, remarks, and beliefs, and sometimes those 
of his wives or Companions. They are preceded by a chain of transmitters (called an 
 isnad ), and the  isnad  are accordingly judged as being weak or sound depending on 
the persons in the chain of transmitters. Additionally, if there is a single occurrence 
of a particular hadith, it may be considered weak, whereas one that occurs multiple 
times may be judged “sound.” 
 Other major Islamic legal principles are  qiyas , or a type of analogy, in determining 
the licitness of any action or behavior, and the principle of  ijma ‘, which means consen-
sus. Some sources claim that the followers of Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab do not use  ijma ‘ or 
state that Wahhabists reject the legal interpretations of the four classical legal schools. 
Although this claim has been made by certain leading scholars and opponents of Wah-
habism (Asgari 2011), this is not an accurate version of Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s legal 
stance. Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab deﬁ ned  ijma ‘ in two particular ways. The ﬁ rst was as the 
consensus of the Companions of the Prophet, because they actually lived alongside the 
Prophet and could consult him. The second type of  ijma ‘ is that of legal scholars. ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab found this type of consensus to be rare, and only when there was absolute 

Islamic Duties | 181
agreement between the scholars did he invoke it and believe it incumbent on Muslims. 
He invoked this type of consensus, for instance, when he was trying to reform the 
prevalent bribery and corruption then practiced by some judges, in a question about 
repossessing the property of a debtor (Delong-Bas 2004, 98–99). The ﬁ nal methodol-
ogy is  ijtihad , a juristic interpretation. The Shi‘a qualify certain jurists,  mujtahid s, to 
use it, but Sunni schools other than Ibn Hanbal’s stopped using it in the 10th century. 
When any legal question arises, a jurist capable of issuing a  fatwa must consider the 
preceding sources of Islamic law to determine whether the action or issue in question 
is licit in Islam ( halal ) or unlawful ( haram ), neutral, recommended, or reprehensible. 
 ISLAMIC DUTIES 
 The basic rituals of Islam are practiced in Saudi Arabia. The ﬁ ve obligatory practices 
are often called the Five Pillars and include the testimony of faith ( shahadah ), which 
is the uttering of the phrase: “There is no God, but Allah; and Muhammad is his Mes-
senger.” The second requirement is the daily prayers ( salat ). Prayer is announced by 
a loud or broadcast call (‘ adhan ) at dawn, noon, midafternoon, sunset, and evening. 
While prayer is obligatory for all Muslims, in Saudi Arabia, businesses, schools, and 
institutions must cease all other activities at prayer time to allow employees or stu-
dents to pray, which they do after ablutions called  wudu ‘, facing Mecca. It is common 
to see individuals praying wherever they may be in Saudi Arabia, and the direction of 
Pilgrims perform the noon prayer at the Prophet Muhammad’s Mosque in Medina, Saudi 
Arabia, February 26, 2002. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 5 Society
182 |
prayer ( qibla ) is indicated on aircraft so that Muslims can orient themselves correctly. 
Attendance at the communal prayer on Friday, when a sermon is given, is obligatory 
for men but not for women. 
 The fast ( sawm ) of Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic calendar, is the third 
requirement. Nothing must pass the lips during daylight hours—no food, beverages, 
and no smoking of cigarettes; however, the fast is broken just after sunset. Fast-
ing was practiced in pre-Islamic Arabia during three sacred months and also in the 
month of Rajab. Ramadan supplanted these fasts, and it is a religious obligation as 
compared to other supernumerary fasts. It is traditional in Saudi Arabia to break the 
fast by eating dates. The fasting month is a time for reﬂ ection, reading of the Qur’an, 
and gatherings of families and friends for an evening meal, called an  iftar . Another 
meal ( suhur ) is served in the early morning hours before the dawn prayer. Numerous 
traditions are attached to Ramadan; for instance, the government may off er amnes-
ties or release prisoners on this occasion, and gifts of money are given to employees, 
as they are at the Lesser Feast, or ‘Id al-Fitr, which celebrates the end of the fasting 
month. In Saudi Arabia, fasting is considered obligatory, except for those who are 
ill, and no restaurants or food services are open in the daytime hours. Ramadan 
festivities have a carnival-like atmosphere in some parts of the Muslim world, and 
over the years, the month on the  hijri calendar moves from the winter months to the 
summer months and back again. When Harry St. John Bridger Philby (known as 
Jack Philby or Shaykh ‘Abdullah), then part of the British military intelligence and 
later an adviser to King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, observed Ramadan in 1918, it came at the 
height of summer and there was a full 15 hours of fasting. The nights of Ramadan 
were spent praying rather than in festivities (Philby 1928, 3–7, 11–13, cited in Goitein 
2006, 167). Muslims regard the last 10 days of Ramadan as particularly important. 
One of these nights is the  laylat al-qadr , the Night of Power, the night on which the 
ﬁ rst revelation of the Qur’an was delivered. 
 Zakat , or charity, is the fourth pillar. It is a tax of 2.5 percent of a Muslim’s 
income and assets and is supposed to support the poor and also promote Islamic 
institutions. A Department of Zakat operates in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. As 
explained in Chapter 4, Economics,  zakat is considered a government requirement, 
not only a requirement of individuals, and thus it is an important feature of charity 
and philanthropy abroad and at home. Mosques typically have a box for  zakat of-
ferings; however, after concerns about terrorists who allegedly took these funds and 
coupons, safer measures for  zakat were to be instituted. 
 The ﬁ fth pillar of Islam is the  hajj , a mandatory pilgrimage at least once in a life-
time to the Holy City of Mecca and its environs in the western province of the Hijaz. 
During the  hajj , pilgrims follow rules of ritual puriﬁ cation and don special clothing. 
Numerous beliefs about the  hajj rituals are bolstered by the  ahadith (Lazarus-Yafeh 
in Hawling, ed., 2006, 24–30 ). Muslims believe, and are told by their local imams in 
other parts of the world, that the sins of those who pray in Mecca will be erased or 
that a prayer made at the Black Stone (of the Ka‘ba) and its circumambulation count 
for thousands of prayers made elsewhere. The Ka‘ba is a cube-shaped building in 
the center of the Grand Mosque in Mecca, considered Allah’s house on earth. The 
prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) and his son Isma‘il (Ishmael) rebuilt it on the founda-

Islamic Duties | 183
tions of a Ka‘ba ﬁ rst erected by Adam or angels. Muhammad cleansed the Ka‘ba of 
pagan idols. It was henceforth the center of Islamic pilgrimage, and Muslims face it 
during prayer. The  hajj gives Muslims a sense that their lives are related to their fate 
in the hereafter, and it unites them as Muslims in a common visit to God’s house. 
Philosophers, religious leaders, and modern reinterpreters of Islam have all written 
about the meaning of the  hajj . 
 The water of the Zamzam spring near Mecca is considered holy, and pilgrims 
drink it. Pilgrims attempt (but do not succeed due to the crowds) to kiss the Black 
Stone, which will rise like a bride on the Day of Judgment. Muslims believe that if 
they die before their return home, they are assured of paradise. The preceding ritu-
als can be shortened because of the extreme overcrowding, and even if one is missed 
(such as not being able to hit a pillar, spend the entire night at Muzdalifa, or kiss the 
Black Stone), the pilgrimage is still valid (Bianchi 2004, 9, 10–16).  
 As there is great demand by Muslims to participate in  hajj , the annual inﬂ ux of 
pilgrims has strongly impacted Saudi Arabia’s economics and politics. The govern-
ment of Saudi Arabia, namely the king and the Sa‘udi royal family, are considered 
and bear the title of the Guardians of the Holy Mosques (at Mecca and Medina). 
They are, in essence, the managers of the  hajj . Under Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran tried 
to persuade other Muslim countries to put the control of the  hajj under a shared 
Muslim apparatus. The Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), established 
by King Faysal, is an international body that meets and determines the quotas of 
pilgrims from diff erent countries and the rules that guide their selection. The Asian 
Muslim pilgrims perform their ﬁ nal circumambulation around the Ka‘ba at the Grand 
Mosque, November 30, 2009. In the foreground a man raises his palms in supplication. 
(AFP/Getty Images)

 Chapter 5 Society
184 |
and  African countries within the OIC supported Saudi Arabia’s continued manage-
ment of the  hajj , but they demanded some internationalization of the process (Bi-
anchi 2004, 5). Saudi Arabian pilgrims are permitted to attend the  hajj during  hajj 
season only once every ﬁ ve years in order to be fair to the international pilgrims. 
The government also issues visas for the lesser pilgrimage, the  ‘umrah , so that those 
who cannot visit during the  hajj season may visit during a less-crowded time. Going 
on the  ‘umrah  is considered  sunnah (a deed blessed by the Prophet’s practice but not 
required). 
 The responsibility for performing all of these duties falls on the individual, and 
observance varies. Travelers and those who are ill are exempted from prayer and 
fasting; menstruating women are exempt from fasting, and those who have recently 
given birth are not to pray. Those who are able, make up their days of fasting later. 
PERFORMANCE AND STAGES OF THE HAJJ
 1.  On the ﬁ rst day, the ihram, the clothing of a pilgrim is donned. Pilgrims enter the 
sacred area outside of Mecca. They chant the talbiyya (a greeting to Allah said in 
unison) on the way to Mecca. And they perform the tawwaf (circumambulation) 
of arrival around the Ka‘ba before the eighth day of the hajj.
 2. Pilgrims camp at Mina on the night of the eighth day of the pilgrimage.
 3.  All pilgrims assemble at the Plain of ‘Arafat for the Day of Standing. This commem-
orates the Prophet Muhammad’s address to the Muslims when he declaimed the 
ﬁ nal verses of the Qur’an a few months before he died when on his ﬁ nal pilgrim-
age. It is believed one’s prayers reach Allah more easily here than anywhere else.
 4.  Pilgrims depart Arafat after sundown on the ninth day and then camp at the valley 
of Muzdalifa, where they each gather 70 pebbles to use the next day.
 5.  Pilgrims arrive in Mina on the 10th day, Dhu al-Hija. They throw the pebbles 
(stones) at three pillars representing Satan. This commemorates Ibrahim’s throw-
ing of stones at Satan when Satan tempted him to disobey Allah’s command to 
sacriﬁ ce Isma‘il. Today’s pilgrims try to hit the ﬁ rst pillar before noon. Then they 
offer a sacriﬁ ce of an animal that represents Allah’s allowing Ibrahim to sacriﬁ ce 
a ram instead of his son. The day is celebrated as ‘Id al-Adha (the Feast of the 
Sacriﬁ ce), by all Muslims, whether they are on the hajj or not. The ihram is re-
moved.
 6.  On the 10th or 11th day, the pilgrims return to Mecca and carry out a second 
tawwaf. Then they run back and forth seven times between the hills of al-Safa and 
al-Marwa to commemorate Isma‘il’s mother Hajar’s frantic search for water. It 
culminated in her discovery of the waters of Zamzam.
7–9.  Pilgrims travel between Mecca and Mina; all three pillars should be stoned; and 
pilgrims stay the night in Mina on the 11th to 13th nights.
10.  On the 12th day or after, the tawwaf of farewell is performed at Mecca, and the 
pilgrims depart the hajj (Bianchi 2004, 9).

Islamic Duties | 185
Muslims who are inﬁ rm and cannot pray in the normal postures of bowing and 
prostrating themselves may sit on a chair and pray. 
 Unlike in Egypt or Jordan, where the governments have not generally permit-
ted Muslims to enforce practice on others, in Saudi Arabia, the followers of ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab believed it was the duty of the ruler (today, the state) to uphold the 
 hisba —that is, to command the good and forbid the evil. In the service of the  hisba , 
the HAIA (Hay’at al-Ma‘ruf wa al-Nahaya ‘an al-Munkar, the Committee for the 
Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice), sometimes called the religious police, 
admonish believers about lax practice. There are other restrictions as well. Muslims 
must not drink alcohol, not simply as a forbidden substance but because it clouds 
alertness and judgment and makes it impossible to pray. Alcohol is therefore strictly 
forbidden in Saudi Arabia, and severe punishments are meted out to those who 
illegally import it. On the same grounds, drug use is forbidden. Pork is forbidden, 
as are gambling (although there are casinos in other Gulf countries) and sorcery 
or magic. 
 Modest behavior is required of both men and women. This is interpreted as requir-
ing the segregation of men and women to prevent contact between unrelated men 
and women. This underlies the requirement for women to wear the ‘ abaya  over their 
clothing and cover their hair with a  shayla  or the  hijab  (or sometimes both). Some 
women also wear a face veil ( niqab ) and gloves. This is not a statement of fashion 
but one of religiosity. However, other women do not believe the face veil is required 
in Islam. 
 In addition to the pillars, the obligation of jihad, struggle in the cause of Allah, 
falls on Muslims. Because of contemporary violent Islamist movements’ contention 
that jihad has been abandoned, it has become the subject of a new philosophical and 
religious debate extending far beyond Saudi Arabia (discussed in Chapter 7, Con-
temporary Issues). Jihad (or jihad ﬁ  sabil Allah [on the path of God]) has multiple 
meanings, including the struggle for Islam ( jihad al-akbar) and the so-called lesser 
jihad, meaning the military or political struggle to defend Islam and Muslims from 
unbelievers. (Haarman in Hawling, ed., 2006, 307–314; Aboul-Enein and Zuhur 
2004; Peters 1979) declared in certain periods on a yearly basis. The obligatory nature 
of the jihad played an important role in the founding of the ﬁ rst through the third 
Sa‘udi states. It was supported by Ibn Taymiyya as the highest demarcation of belief 
next to the duty of prayer ( salat ) (Haarman in Hawling, ed., 2006, 307). 
 Shari‘ah also governs criminal law (discussed under Law), economic transactions, 
and such matters of personal status as marriage, divorce, and inheritance. Precisely 
because matters of personal status must be regulated in accordance with  shari‘ah in 
Saudi Arabia, reforms concerning women’s personal rights are quite a diffi  cult pros-
pect. Polygamy (the correct anthropological term is polygyny) is permitted, as is early 
marriage (there are many objections to the marriage of very young women, and a 
child marriage law may be supported by the government), and women’s rights to di-
vorce are limited by the judicial interpretation of  shari ‘ ah . These include quite narrow 
grounds for divorce, which must be granted by a judge if a woman initiates divorce, 
whereas a man’s rights to divorce are less restrained. Polygamy is a psychological, an 
emotional, and sometimes an economic threat to women if husbands do not heed the 

 Chapter 5 Society
186 |
Qur’anic command to treat their wives equally. Unfortunately, divorced women are 
often unable to remarry, unless they agree to become second wives in Saudi Arabia, 
although this is not an Islamic ideal but a social trend. As there is a stigma and many 
limitations on unmarried women, this means that women also support the systems 
of thought undergirding polygamy. 
 Inheritance in Islam is set out to ensure that individuals cannot disinherit their 
own heirs and to provide equity among them. Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s inﬂ uence was 
to emphasize classical rulings, for instance, that women must be able to inherit and 
not be denied their rights as they customarily were among the tribes. Property owners 
could set aside endowments and name their administrators and beneﬁ ciaries so long 
as their heirs could claim their due shares. These are called  awqaf , and they are now 
administered by the government. 
 The ﬁ nal source of Islamic law,  ijtihad (independent striving of the jurist), which 
was already mentioned, is controversial. Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was very intent on 
eradicating the practice of interpreting Islam by rote and blind imitation and conse-
quently utilized his own  ijtihad at times. 
 Some legal schools were also concerned, as were the Hanbalis, about a “mechani-
cal application of analogy.” Therefore, the Hanaﬁ  school also used  istishan  (or a 
preference of the jurist according to public interest), and the Maliki jurists elaborated 
on the idea of public interest (A. Yamani in Malik, ed., 1972, 54). Diff erent jurists and 
legal schools vary in their reliance on particular principles. Generally, the Hanbali 
school adheres whenever possible to the Qur’an or the hadith, but when nothing is 
found to be applicable, their jurists can be more ﬂ exible than others in employing 
 ijtihad to ﬁ nd a solution. One example is that the Hanbalis argue that all relatives who 
may inherit from someone who is ill or impoverished must provide care for them, but 
according to the Hanaﬁ  school only the nearest relatives are to care for them. Also, 
borrowing from the Maliki school, Hanbali jurists hold that minerals must not be 
controlled by private owners. (This latter idea has special relevance to Saudi Arabia.) 
 MUHAMMAD IBN ‘ABD AL-WAHHAB 
 The legal thought and religious principles of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab 
strongly impacted Saudi Arabia. Most important, this came about because of the 
military expansion of Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud (see Chapter 2, History), even though 
Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab   aimed for religious reform as a lifelong pursuit. Since he believed 
materialism was adopted in the lands governed by the al-Sa‘ud family, once ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud came to power, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab stepped down 
from his position as his imam. 
 Ibn ‘Abd al-‘Wahhab’s  writing concerns  tawhid  (an absolute monotheism or 
unicity of God) and  shirk (the idolatry he wanted Muslims to avoid). His treatise 
 Kitab al-Tawhid  deﬁ nes and expands on this concept, outlining several types of 
 tawhid :  tawhid al-rububiyya  means Allah’s unique status of being the creator of the 
world and holding dominion over all of his creation;  tawhid al-ibada refers to the 
idea that absolute monotheism or unicity must govern all aspects of worship of 

Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab | 187
Allah—that nothing and no one but he may be the object of worship; and  tawhid 
al-asma’ wa al-sifat , or monotheism of names and characteristics, means Allah’s 
 al-asma  multiple names or attributes (such as the Generous or the Beneﬁ cent) that 
may be found in the Qur’an apply solely to Allah and may not be applied to rulers 
(Delong-Bas 2004, 57). 
 The greatest sins according to Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab in  Kitab al-Kaba’ir were  shirk 
(polytheism or worship of any other than Allah), sheltering a perpetrator of a crime, 
cursing one’s parents, and unjustly altering boundaries of land. Other terrible sins 
were engaging in sorcery, committing murder, living on  rib ‘ a  (unlawful interest or 
usury [see Chapter 4, Economics]), robbing orphans, deserting jihad when the battle 
begins, and making false accusations about women’s sexual behavior or reputation 
(Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Kitab al-Kaba’ir ,  35–36; also see Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab 1398h ). 
Ibn  ‘Abd al-Wahhab was concerned about illicit innovations ( bid ‘ ah ) that had 
crept into Islamic practice and beliefs, particularly those with “associationist” 
 content—that is, where something other than Allah is worshipped. He opposed 
Muslims who prayed at graves or tombs, expanded these into shrines and mauso-
leums, or attached mosques to them. Many popular Suﬁ  rituals were carried out 
at saints’ tombs or celebrated their birthdays, and the Shi‘a revered the sites where 
their leaders had perished. Both groups often sought intercession ( shaf ‘ a ) by these 
ﬁ gures with Allah, to plead for the soul of the supplicant (Delong-Bas 2004, 67–69). 
Natana Delong-Bas, who has studied Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s work in depth, does 
not believe that Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab supported extremism; she writes that when 
the  ‘ulama of Najd issued  fatawa  that those who engaged in tomb worship should 
be put to death, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab thought these injunctions too extreme (2004, 
67). These positions had obvious consequences for all Muslims who visited the Holy 
Cities after the al-Sa‘ud’s conquest, and they provoked a reaction from  ‘ulama who 
did not support Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and left Najd or Arabia. The Ottomans were 
greatly concerned by the rise of the Wahhabi movement and were determined to 
defeat it. Al-Jabarti, an Egyptian historian writing at the time, noted the Wahhabi 
massacre at Ta’if but seemed to approve of the Wahhabis’ position on doctrine; he 
wrote that their takeover of the holy cities in 1803 and 1805 was peaceful and that 
they imposed order. At Medina, the warriors destroyed all the domes that had been 
erected over graves except the one at the tomb of the Prophet; they banned smok-
ing, ordered people to attend prayer, and did away with then-current extortion of 
pilgrims (Commins 2006, 31). 
 In addition to Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s opposition to  taqlid (blind imitation), his 
views concerning the Shi‘a, jihad, and the identiﬁ cation of nonbelievers through a 
process called  takﬁ r were all important. Like others in the Hanbali school, Ibn ‘Abd al-
Wahhab opposed the Shi‘a (he wrote about an extreme and early faction, the Raﬁ dah) 
on the grounds that they violated  tawhid on many points, including their tendency 
to allow their religious leaders great authority, their arguments against the ﬁ rst three 
caliphs in favor of leadership by ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, and their belief that the imams 
were infallible (Delong-Bas 2004, 85–86). On jihad, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was close to 
the classical teachings about it; in Kitab al-Jihad,  he held that its aim is religious, that 
it is a collective activity (unless certain circumstances prevail (‘Abd al-Wahhab 1398h), 

 Chapter 5 Society
188 |
and that jihad can be taken only after the nonbeliever has been invited to Islam and 
rejects it. He did not believe that the so-called Qur’anic verses of peace were abrogated 
by the sword verses (Delong-Bas 2004, 232–234), nor did he write about martyrdom. 
Moreover, he did not support jihad in the service of political gain. 
 Takﬁ r  means the identiﬁ cation of someone as an inﬁ del. According to various schol-
ars, the Wahhabists applied this to all who did not share their own interpretation of 
Islam (Commins 2006, 25; Algar 2002; Vali Nasr 2007); however, others do not agree 
that the Shaykh, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, supported a state of permanent warfare of this 
type (Delong-Bas 2004, 242–243). A family member of the Shaykh, Sulayman ibn 
‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad (1785–1818), added some emphatic positions to the reform 
movement. He wrote that whoever is loyal to or pretends to believe in the religion of the 
idolators, or does not actively oppose them, is an inﬁ del and that one could travel to the 
idolators’ land only if one practiced Islam and did not befriend the idolators (Commins 
2006, 33–37). These views had special meaning in the historic period that Sulayman 
lived through, when the supporters of the al-Sa‘ud and the Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab reform 
movement were conquered by the Egyptian-Ottoman forces and had to ﬂ ee. 
Ibn  ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s family became known as Al-Shaykh, because of his 
position as religious adviser to Muhammad al-Sa‘ud. His four sons all taught at 
Diriyyah. Essentially, his  da‘wah , or proselytizing mission and reform movement 
reshaped the ‘ ulama of Saudi Arabia, as other schools or philosophies were replaced 
by his (Commins in Ayoob and Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 40–45). This was true 
despite condemnations of Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab by his own brother, Sulayman, and 
resistance to him from other  ‘ulama  at ‘Uyaynah . Many of his descendants are part 
of the Saudi Arabian government. Also, it is extremely diffi  cult to separate Ibn ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab’s impact from that of the Sa‘udi political endeavor (despite Delong-
Bas’s eff orts). Much of the polemics over al-Wahhabiyya have to do with its political 
nature and mission, more so than with its intended religious mission (al-Dakhil in 
Ayoob and Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 23–35). Khalid al-Dakhil, a sociologist who 
supports political reform, makes the point that  shirk  (polytheism or polytheistic 
practices) was not so prevalent in Najd in this period; it could not be logically proven 
to be the true motivation for the Wahhabi mission. Rather, he infers that territorial 
expansionism was the goal. He also emphasizes that this movement arose from a 
settled,  hadhari , or town-based milieu, which reﬂ ected several centuries of change 
in the Najd (al-Dakhil in Ayoob and Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 33; al-Juhany 2002). 
Al-Dakhil refutes the claims of many scholars like Bernard Lewis, Bassam Tibi, and 
Ghassan Salame, who, he notes, are unfamiliar with Najdi history and so described 
al-Sa‘ud and Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s movement as a tribal backward-looking one. 
This is true of many scholars; Vali Nasr claims that “Abdul Wahhab was a purist 
whose creed reﬂ ected the simple ways of the desert tribesman of Nejd’ ” (Vali Nasr 
2006, 96). In fact, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab was a scholar from a settled town, and he 
found the desert tribesmen lax in religion and their adherence to  shari‘ah as com-
pared to the townspeople. 
 Up until Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s mission, the  ‘ulama in Najd had mostly written 
works of jurisprudence (al-Isa 1997, 87–100). During his era, Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab 
wrote more than others; his work on jurisprudence follows along with prior tradition 

| 189
The ‘Ulama
(as  Delong-Bas [2004] basically shows); it was his ideas about doctrine, described 
both in the preceding and in the following, that were new. 
Ibn  ‘Abd al-Wahhab and his followers are said to have opposed Suﬁ sm (mystical 
Islam) and Shi’ism and to have promoted violence in general. According to some, he 
did not violently oppose the more scriptural Suﬁ  orders (Delong-Bas 2004), but in 
the Hijaz, the Suﬁ  orders were mostly banned, though not entirely (Sedgwick 1997), 
and their leaders moved underground, teaching privately (Ochsenwald in Ayoob and 
Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 78). 
Ibn  ‘Abd al-Wahhab signiﬁ cantly promoted  da ‘ wah , or missionary activity that 
expanded the numbers of  ‘ulama promoting his beliefs. After their defeat by the Egyp-
tians and Ottomans, these ‘ ulama had, in some cases, to ﬂ ee and survive; they then 
revived and became the dominant order in the country. That historical process has 
created some resistance to external critique in today’s ‘ ulama (Commins in Ayoob and 
Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 50). Second , the  da‘wah implies constant and international 
activities to “call” others to the correct Islam through education and other means. 
 Wahhabism became a synonym for  salaﬁ yya (a reform movement) over the 20th 
century although there are other actors in that movement. It was identiﬁ ed with vio-
lence initially because of the Ikhwan’s excesses. It did inﬂ uence the Muslim world; 
also, there were parallel movements. The movement of Sayyid Ahmad ibn Muham-
mad Irfan of Rai Barlei in India is credited with following similar ideas in opposing 
the  bid ‘ a h of “suﬁ stic polytheists,” and the Indian “Wahhabi” movement grew even 
after the Egyptian defeat of the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state (Ahmad 1994, 14–15). With the rise 
of Osama bin Laden’s al-Qa’ida movement, many wrote increasingly about global 
 salaﬁ   trends that may rely on inﬂ uence from Saudi Arabia, although Osama bin 
Laden has incessantly opposed the Saudi regime. In caution, historian John Voll 
writes that “generic militance that is labeled as ‘Wahhabi’ is not the same as historical 
Wahhabism” (Voll in Ayoob and Kosebalaban, eds., 2009, 163). The latest round of 
scholarly polemics over Wahhabism appear to signal diff erent beliefs about the link-
age between the Saudi Arabian government and liberals and their Western scholarly 
allies and the more ardent of the Wahhabiyya—some appear to argue that Ibn ‘Abd 
al-Wahhab’s legacy was lacking in scholarly legitimacy or embroidered on by others 
(Commins 2006, 2009); conversely, others claim that his legacy is rooted in a classical 
tradition and capable of tolerance (Delong-Bas 2004, 2009) or that its root problem 
is an association with expanding state power (al-Dakhil 2009). 
 THE  ‘ULAMA 
 The religious scholars of Saudi Arabia and their families are a large group in com-
parison to the situation in other countries (other nations with a large clerical presence 
include Iran). They numbered 7,000 to 10,000 in the early 1990s and possibly up to 
20,000 today. Their numbers probably increased naturally and with the rise of the 
 sahwa , or Islamic Awakening movement , and the emphasis on religious matters in 
Saudi Arabia following the 1979 takeover of the Grand Mosque. Many are employed 
by the government in Islamic education and other departments. Not all  ‘ulama are legal 

 Chapter 5 Society
190 |
scholars; some are solely preachers or teachers, and some are appointed prayer lead-
ers at particular mosques. Since 2003, the government has been very concerned about 
preaching that might support the claims of the Islamic opposition or support extrem-
ists elsewhere. Several programs have been held to reeducate preachers, who must be 
registered and are being monitored. Other points of tension arose when the supervision 
of girls’ and women’s education was returned to the Ministry of Education when King 
‘Abdullah made eff orts to initiate religious dialogue. Some clerics and scholars oppose 
the views of other Muslim sects or fear that the inﬂ uence of non-Muslims and offi  cial 
sponsorship of religious dialogue make it more diffi  cult for them to continue opposing 
variant views and beliefs without consequences.  
 GOVERNMENTAL RELIGIOUS DEPARTMENTS 
 The Ministry for Islamic Aff airs, Endowments (Awqaf), Da‘wah, and Guidance is 
in charge of all Islamic matters in the kingdom except for the  hajj. Its responsibilities 
TABLE 5.1 The Council of Senior ‘Ulama
The following are among the most important of the offi  cial ‘ulama (clerics) serving in the 
 government of Saudi Arabia as of 2009.
‘Abdulaziz ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ashaikh (chairman)
Saleh ibn Muhammad al-Lahaidan 
Saleh ibn ‘Abdulrahman al-Husayn
Saleh ibn Humaid
‘Abdullah ibn Abdulmohsin al-Turki 
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abdulrahman al-Ghedyan 
‘Abdullah ibn Sulayman al-Manie 
Saleh ibn Fouzan al-Fouzan
‘Abdul Wahhab Abu Sulayman 
‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Ashaikh 
Ahmad Sirr Mubaraki 
‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Mutlaq 
Yaqub ibn ‘Abdul Wahhab al-Bahussain 
Abdul Karim ibn ‘Abdullah al-Khodair 
‘Ali ibn ‘Abbas Hakami 
‘Abdullah ibn  Muhammad al-Khanayn 
Muhammad al-Mukhtar Muhammad 
Muhammad al-Ashaikh 
Sa‘d ibn Nasr ibn ‘Abdullah al-Shathri 
Qays al-Ashaikh Mubarak 
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Karim ‘Eissa

Governmental Religious Departments | 191
include building and maintaining the mosques throughout the kingdom, monitoring 
the mosques’ activities, and registering and administering the land and property held 
as  awqaf . The minister of Islamic aff airs, endowments,  da‘wah , and guidance as of 
2010 was Shaykh Saleh bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Shaykh, 
who had served since 1999 in this position. The Ministry of the Hajj is responsible for 
the pilgrimage and in 2010 was headed by Dr. Fouad ibn ‘Abd al-Salaam ibn Muham-
mad al-Farsy, who has been the minister of the  hajj since 2005. The Ministry of Justice 
administers  shari‘ah and all legal and judicial matters for Saudi Arabian citizens. As 
described, this is a religious as well as a legal function. In 2009, King ‘Abdullah ap-
pointed Dr. Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Karim al-‘Eissa as minister of justice and issued 
decrees to restructure the Supreme Court and the Council of Senior ‘Ulama  .  
 The Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (CPVPV) 
is popularly called the  mutawa ‘ in  and offi  cially termed the HAIA. This governmental 
department employs at least 3,500 religious offi  cers and thousands of volunteers who 
claim to uphold the  hisba , the command to order the good and forbid the evil. Until 
HAJJ 2010
The hajj is the largest annual pilgrimage in the world. How many attended the 
2010 hajj? We still don’t really know. Saudi Arabians have been ofﬁ cially 
limited to attendance once every ﬁ ve years, and other countries have quotas 
for pilgrimage visas. Some sources said the Saudi government expected 3.4 
million people over the hajj period; others said 2.8 million came, and some 
reported that up to 1 million or at least “tens of thousands” of unregistered 
pilgrims and squatters ﬂ ocked to the pilgrimage as well, since they could move 
into the Plain of ‘Arafat at night. From the United Kingdom alone, 25,000 
pilgrims traveled.
The distinctive dress worn by pilgrims represents their equality and the 
sincerity of their intention to be pure and devoted to Allah and his rules for 
the hajj. The lowliest peasant and the wealthiest businessman wear the same 
dress, although the former may save for years for his hajj. This fact, and the 
amazing sight of Muslims from every corner of the world, of every color and 
language, has deeply impressed many. Pilgrims wear their ihram clothing and 
usually try to pray on the way to the hajj, even on the airplanes. Printed guides 
are published for pilgrims so they can prepare themselves to correctly perform 
the ritual. Human guides are also hired by different groups of pilgrims. Euro-
pean and American media sometimes cover the hajj, as when Michael Wolfe, 
an American Muslim, shared his hajj experience on the television program 
Frontline, including many of the vows, traditions, and explanations of the rite’s 
practices and symbols. (“The Hajj, One American’s Pilgrimage to Mecca,” 
Nightline, ABC News. Part 1 / 2, 1997, 2010, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=7dOlGoiGrSA). Saudi Arabians preparing for the hajj had many 
special traditions, some of which are now fading away. In Mecca, women 
used to prepare large quantities of ma‘mul, a stuffed sweet pastry (usually 
stuffed with dates), to last the entire month.

 Chapter 5 Society
192 |
2007, they stopped, interrogated, and incarcerated individuals on their own, some-
times beating people, and there have been some fatalities. They were then ordered to 
allow the regular police to decide on charges. The  mutawa ‘ in enforce dress codes, the 
separation of men and women, and dietary rules, and they seize items they consider 
violations of religious doctrine, like CDs of music, iPods, ﬁ lms, Valentine’s Day 
items (they consider this a pagan holiday), and many other items. 
 Grand Mufti 
 The grand mufti of Saudi Arabia as of 2010 was Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn ‘Abdullah 
ibn Muhammad al-Shaikh (b. 1940). He taught in various institutions, including the 
Faculty of Shari‘ah at the Imam Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamic University in Riyadh, 
from 1971 to 1991. Like quite a few of the  ‘ulama , he is blind. He became a member of 
the Council of Senior ‘Ulama and of the Permanent Committee for Islamic Research 
and Fatawa in 1986 and became the deputy to the previous grand mufti, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Baz, in 1995. He has condemned suicide bombings and the 9/11 
and London 7/7 attacks, and he also forbade Saudi Arabian youth from going abroad 
to engage in jihad because they were being exploited (Tariq Alhomayed,  al-Sharq al-
Awsat , October 2, 2007). He has ﬁ rmly opposed al-Qa’ida   but also decries the term 
 Wahhabist for Saudi Arabian Muslims, and he has rebuked Iraqi prime minister Nuri 
Members of the HAIA (Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, 
also known as religious police) while attending a training course in Riyadh on April 29, 
2009. (Fahad Shadeed/Reuters/Corbis)

Shi‘a Muslims in Saudi Arabia | 193
al-Maliki for his statements about Saudi Arabian support for anti-Shi’ism. Like his 
predecessor, Shaykh ibn Baz, he often speaks on a popular radio show, “ Nur ‘ala 
Darb ,”  and supports socially conservative stances, arguing that Saudi Arabian girls 
must guard their virtue and that they may be married as young as 10 to 12 years of age. 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama (Scholars) 
 The most prominent religious scholars serve on a Council of Senior ‘Ulama established 
by King Faysal in 1971. The group has usually had 30 to 40 members. King Faysal and 
King Fahd used to meet weekly with those members who resided in Riyadh to provide a 
regular channel of communication between the rulers and the  ‘ulama . When the Grand 
Mosque in Mecca was captured by Juhayman al-‘Utaybi and his supporters, this coun-
cil’s approval was necessary for the state to launch operations against the group in that 
sacred space. Their approval was also sought when U.S. forces were invited to conduct 
operations in the kingdom prior to the Gulf War. The council is chaired by the grand 
mufti. Under the reforms of King ‘Abdullah, the council now includes scholar represen-
tatives of the other  madhahib , in addition to the Hanbali scholars, but no Shi‘a  ‘ulama . 
 Permanent Committee for Islamic Research and Fatawa 
( Lajnah al-Da’imah lil-Buhuth al-‘Ilmiyyah wa-l-Ifta ’ ) 
 The Permanent Committee for Islamic Research and Fatawa, sometimes identiﬁ ed 
in English as the Committee for Research and Legal Opinions (CRLO), is headed 
by scholars selected from the Council of Senior ‘Ulama. Muslims can write to the 
committee and request a  fatwa  on matters important to them. The committee will not 
issue a  fatwa unless a majority of members agree on it, and if the group is split, then 
the chair’s view carries. The committee does not include opposition clerics; rather, it 
consists of the very important ﬁ gures Shaykh ‘Abdullah ibn Qu’ud, Shaykh ‘Abdul-
lah   ibn Munay, Shaykh Saleh al-Fawzan, and Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Shaykh, who 
is the chair of the committee and grand mufti of the kingdom. The committee was 
formerly headed by Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Baz. Their rulings are not binding 
on all Muslims but are inﬂ uential in Saudi Arabia. Some argue that their rulings, 
particularly on women’s issues, are inappropriately harsh and illustrate undue inﬂ u-
ence by the  ‘ulama and that, in some cases they are wrong (as when they state that a 
woman walking in front of a man [while he prays] or a woman’s presence invalidates 
a man’s prayers, or that a woman cannot be permitted to study at the university if 
her husband disagrees, or may be beaten) (Abou El Fadl 2001b). 
 SHI‘A MUSLIMS IN SAUDI ARABIA 
 The Shi‘a Muslims of Saudi Arabia are mostly concentrated in the Eastern Province. 
A small Shi‘i community lives in Medina, known as the Nakhawila. Musta’li Isma‘ili 

 Chapter 5 Society
194 |
Muslims, who form the Sulaymani branch of that sect, relocated to Yemen and 
Najran, Saudi Arabia. Their leader since 2005 has been the 52nd Da‘i, ‘Abdullah ibn 
Muhammad al-Makrami. The Sulaymanis struggled with the Zaydi Shi‘a leaders of 
northern Yemen and at one time controlled an area in Hadhramaut . When Najran 
was annexed to Saudi Arabia, they remained, numbering perhaps between 300,000 
and 400,000, but were more isolated than their Shi‘a counterparts to the east. Their 
freedom of worship was restricted due to the Saudi   Arabian promotion of  mutawa ‘ in 
to enforce compliance with Wahhabi standards. Reportedly, the Saudi Arabian gov-
ernment is currently settling Sunni Yemeni refugees—in large numbers—in Najran, 
which concerns the Sulaymanis (Nanji and Daftary in Cornell, ed., 2007,  239; U.S. 
Commission on International Religious Freedom 2009; Human Rights Watch 2008). 
 The Shi‘a of the Eastern Province underwent attacks by the Ikhwan of Ibn Sa‘ud 
in Hasa and then at Qatif and elsewhere. Ibn Sa‘ud reined in the Ikhwan. The Shi‘a 
were not self-governing but were permitted to conduct their own religious aff airs 
(Louër 2008, 21–22). Their  ‘ulama were in touch with scholars from Iraq and Iran and 
have typically arisen from the same scholarly families. With the Islamic Revolution 
in Iran in 1978 and 1979, tensions grew, especially after Khomeini preached against 
the House of al-Sa‘ud and embarked on active propaganda to spread the revolution. 
In 1979, a Shi‘a uprising on the heels of the Grand Mosque takeover, dubbed the 
Intifadhat (uprising) Muharram 1400, was brutally subdued by the National Guard 
(see Chapter 2, History). Some radical elements among the Shi‘a, allegedly funded by 
Iran, formed a group called Hizbullah al-Hijaz, which was responsible for the Khobar 
bombing of 1996. Hizbullah retains a following; however, the vast majority of Shi‘a 
do not advocate violent opposition and want greater representation and to assimilate 
into Saudi Arabian society. In February 2009, Shi‘a attempting to celebrate the death 
of Muhammad and Hasan ibn ‘Ali (who was buried along with the other imams) at 
al-Baqi‘ cemetery in Medina were attacked by Sunnis and security forces, setting off  
protests abroad and in the Shi‘a towns of the Eastern Province. The Shi‘a have called 
this the Intifadhat 1430 (Matthiesen 2009; also see Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). 
 OTHER COMPETING IDEOLOGIES 
 The small number of remaining nomads are moving away from their own systems 
of thought, behavior, and beliefs. These range from aesthetic concepts and special 
terminology to tribal law ( ‘ urf ) to traditional healing practices (see section on health 
in this chapter) and ideas about the cohesiveness of tribe and family (see subsection 
on society in this chapter).  ‘Urf predated Islam, and, in some ways, it has been incor-
porated into shari ‘ah, as well as sociocultural practices . Because of the need to rely 
on  ijma ‘—consensus—as a source of adjudication,  ‘urf or the existing practices were 
adopted to some degree. For instance, the second class of off enses under Islamic law 
may be punished through  qisas . Here, the clan of a killed or injured tribesman (or 
-woman) was given the option of retaliating exactly in kind—no harsher—or receiv-
ing payment, called  dhiyya , for the life taken or injured body part. Under Islamic 
law, the state may enact this punishment instead of the clan. Other tribal practices 
used to include swearing of oaths, tests of truthfulness, and the use of guarantors. 

| 195
References
 Suﬁ sm has existed in Saudi Arabia; however, its rites have been forbidden since the 
rise of the Wahhabiyya, even though it has continued to be practiced. Other popular 
beliefs concerned possession by spirits, and these were addressed through exorcism 
rituals, the  zar , which is found throughout Egypt, eastern Africa, and the Arabian 
Peninsula. Such rituals are frowned on by the Wahhabiyya. 
 Modern political trends of thought like Nasirism, Baathism, Marxism, and subsid-
iary forms of Arab nationalism or Arab socialism had only a limited impact on Saudi 
Arabia because the government moved forcefully against such tendencies, using the 
security forces, foreign policy, media control, and other forms of dissuasion. The 
rulers were deeply concerned that such movements should not take hold. However, 
even a number of the al-Sa‘ud princes defected—Talal, Badr ‘Abd al-Muhsin, and 
Fawwaz ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz—and supported Nasser and a “free Saudi Arabia” (im-
plying political freedom from the al-Sa‘ud monarch). In contrast, Islamic diplomacy 
and emphasis on Saudi Arabia’s Islamic mission has been the path preferred by the 
government under King Faysal and ever since. 
 Nevertheless, some aspects of Arab left philosophy, or antiroyalism, impacted the 
kingdom. In 1954 an attempted coup was discovered and revealed more antiroyal-
ist activity. In 1962 two incidents involved four ﬂ ight crews defecting to Egypt in 
October; then, in November, a group of pilots mounted another coup attempt. The 
pilots were members of the royal family, and they defected to Egypt. The regime 
grounded the air force (Kechichian 2008, 112–113) and was again threatened in 1969 
by military supporters of antiroyalist groups, the Federation of Democratic Forces, 
the National Front for the Liberation of Saudi Arabia, and the Popular Democratic 
Front. Arab nationalism was believed to be encouraged by Arab expatriate workers, 
and many, although not all, were replaced with Asian workers. The concerns over 
the military became a debate over whether or not to professionalize and modernize 
the armed forces or to put more emphasis on strengthening the National Guard; 
these concerns were partially based on fears of political opposition arising from the 
military again. (Other opposition movements are discussed in Chapter 7, Contem-
porary Issues.) 
 All of this provides a background for two alternative philosophies of the pres-
ent, one that we could call a reformist democratic movement and the other, the 
sahwa, or Islamic Awakening , whose advocates support greater democratization 
but have in mind a much diff erent endpoint than the liberal reformers. 
 REFERENCES 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn.  Kitab al-Tawhid . Translated by Ismail al-Faruqi. Kuwait 
City: al-Faisal Printing Company, 1986. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Jihad.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam 
 Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab :  al-Fiqh . Vol. 2. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. (corresponds to 1977 or 1978). 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Kaba’ir.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam Mu-
hammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 1. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Muhammad 
ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. 

 Chapter 5 Society
196 |
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Nikah.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam Mu-
hammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 2. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Muhammad 
ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Tawhid.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam Mu-
hammad Ibn Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 1. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Muhammad 
ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. 
 Abdul Rauf, Feisal. “What Is Sunni Islam?” In  Voices of Islam . Vol. 1,  Voices of Tradition , 
edited by Vincent Cornell. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007. 
 Abou El Fadl, Khaled.  And God Knows the Soldiers: The Authoritative and Authoritarian in 
Islamic Discourses . Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 2001a. 
 Abou El Fadl, Khaled.  Speaking in God’s Name: Islamic Law, Authority and Women . Oxford, 
UK: Oneworld, 2001b. 
 Aboul-Enein, Youssef, and Sherifa Zuhur.  Islamic Rulings on Warfare . Carlisle, PA: Strategic 
Studies Institute, 2004. 
 Ahmad, Qeyamuddin.  The Wahhabi Movement in India . New Delhi, India: Monohar, 
1994. 
 Ahmed, Leila.  Women and Gender in Islam . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. 
 Alavi, Karima Diane. “Pillars of Religion and Faith.” In  Voices of Islam . Vol. 1,  Voices of 
Tradition , edited by Vincent Cornell. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007. 
 Algar, Hamid.  Wahhabism: A Critical Essay . Oneonta, NY: Islamic Publications Interna-
tional, 2002. 
 Alhomayed, Tariq. “Saudi Arabia’s Grand Mufti.”  al-Sharq al-Awsat , October 2, 2007. http://
www.alarabiya.net/views/2007/10/03/39898.html 
 Armstrong, H. C.  Lord of Arabia . London: Arthur Barker, 1934. 
 Asgari, Seyed Mohammad. “Islam: Reviewing Shiite-Sunni Relations in India: An Interview 
with Seyed Mohammad Asgari.” Interviewed by Mahan Abedin.  Religioscope , January 12, 
2011. http://religion.info/english/interviews/article_513.shtml 
 Ayoob, Mohammed, and Hasan Kosebalaban, eds.  Religion and Politics in Saudi Arabia: 
Wahhabism and the State . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2009. 
 Ayoub, Mahmoud M. “The Qur’an: History of the Text.” In  Encyclopedia of the Modern 
Islamic World , edited by John Esposito. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995, Vol. 3, 
385–387. 
 Bianchi, Robert.  Guests of God: Pilgrimage and Politics in the Islamic World . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 Bunt, Gary.  iMuslims: Rewiring the House of Islam . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2009. 
 Commins, David Dean.  The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 Cook, Michael. “The Expansion of the First Saudi State: The Case of Washm.” In  The Islamic 
World from Classical to Modern Times: Essays in Honor of Bernard Lewis , edited by C. E. 
Bosworth, Charles Issawi, Roger Savory, and A. L. Udovitch. Princeton, NJ: Darwin, 
1989. 
 Cornell, Vincent. “The Quran as Scripture.” In  The Encylopedia of the Modern Islamic 
World , edited by John Esposito. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995, Vol. 3, 
387–394. 

| 197
 Delong-Bas, Natana. “Wahhabism and the Question of Religious Tolerance.” In  Religion 
and Politics in Saudi Arabia: Wahhabism and the State , edited by Mohammed Ayoob and 
Hasan Kosebalaban. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2009. 
 Delong-Bas, Natana.  Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 Edwards, Richard, and Sherifa Zuhur. “Sunni Islam.” In  Encylopedia of U.S. Wars in the 
Middle East , edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010, 1176–1181. 
 Ende, W. “The Nakhawila: A Shi’ite Community in Medina, Past and Present.”  Die Welt des 
Islams 37, no. 3 (1997), 264–348. 
 Esposito, John L.  Islam: The Straight Path . New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. 
 Fandy, Mamoun.  Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent . New York: St. Martin’s, 1999. 
 Gibb, H.A.R.  Arabic Literature: An Introduction . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 
1974. 
 Goitein, S. D. “Ramadan, the Muslim Month of Fasting.” In  The Formation of the Classical 
Islamic World , edited by Lawrence I. Conrad. Vol. 26,  The Development of Islamic Ritual , 
edited by Gerald Hawling. Aldershot, UK, and Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2006. 
 Goldziher, Ignacz.  Die Richtungen der islamischen Koranauslegung . Leiden, the Netherlands: 
Brill, 1970. (Originally published in 1920.)   
 Guillaume, Alfred.  The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ishaq’s Sirat Rasul Allah . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1955. 
 Habib, John S.  Ibn Saud’s Warriors of Islam: The Ikhwan of Najd and Their Role in the Cre-
ation of the Saudi Kingdom, 1910–1930 . Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1978. 
 al-Hasan, Hamza.  al-Shi ‘  a ﬁ l-Mamlaka al-‘Arabiyya al-Sa‘udiyya . Beirut, Lebanon: 
Mu’assasat al-Baqi‘ li-Ihya’ al-Turath, 1993. 
 al-Hashimi, Muhammad Ali.  The Ideal Muslim Society: As Deﬁ ned in the Qur’an and Sunnah . 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: International Islamic Publishing House, 2007. 
 Hawling, Gerald, ed.  The Development of Islamic Ritual . Vol. 26 of  The Formation of the 
Classical Islamic World , edited by Lawrence I. Conrad. Aldershot, UK, and Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2006. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas.  Jihad in Saudi Arabia: Violence and Pan-Islamism since 1979 . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 Human Rights Watch. “The Ismailis of Najran: Second Class Citizens.” September 22, 2008. 
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/09/22/ismailis-najran-0 
 Hurvitz, Nimrod.  The Formation of Hanbalism: Piety into Power . London: RoutledgeCurzon, 
2002. 
 Ibn Bishr, ‘Uthman.  ‘Unwan al-majd ﬁ  tarikh Najd . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Maktabah al-
Riyadh al-Hadithah, n.d. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Tarikh Najd . Edited by Nassar Al-Din Assad. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Shaykh, 1982. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Rawdat al-afkar wa al-afham li-murtad hal al-imam wa-ta’dad ghaza-
wat dhawi al-Islam . Riyadh, 1381h. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Tarikh Najd . Cairo, 1961. 
 Ibn Qasim, Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad, ed.  al-Durar al-saniya ﬁ  al-ajwiba al-najdiyya . 
12 vols. Riyadh, 1995. 
References

 Chapter 5 Society
198 |
 Ibrahim, Fuad.  The Shiis of Saudi Arabia . London: Saqi Books, 2007. 
 International Crisis Group. “The Shi’ite Question of Saudi Arabia.” Report No. 45, Ri-
yadh, Amman, and Brussels: International Crisis Group, September 2005. http://www.
crisisgroup.org/en/regions/middle-east-north-africa/iran-gulf/saudi-arabia/045-the-shiite-
question-in-saudi-arabia.aspx 
 al-Isa, Mayy bint ‘Abd al- ‘Aziz.  al-Haya al- ‘ ilmiyya ﬁ  Najd mundhu qiyam da ‘ wat al-Shaykh 
Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab wa hatta nihayat al-dawla al-Sa ‘ udiyya al-‘ula . Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia: Darat al-Malik ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 1997. 
 Jones, Toby. “Saudi Arabia’s Not So New Anti-Shi‘ism.”  Middle East Report 242 (Spring 2007). 
 al-Juhany, ‘Uwaidah M.  Najd before the Salaﬁ  Reform Movement: Social, Religious and Politi-
cal Conditions in the Three Centuries Preceding the Rise of the Saudi State . Reading, UK: 
Ithaca, 2002. 
 Kechichian, Joseph.  Faysal: Saudi Arabia’s King for All Seasons . Gainesville: University Press 
of Florida, 2008. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Between Islamists and Liberals: Saudi Arabia’s New ‘Islamo-Liberal’ 
Reformists.”  Middle East Journal 58, no. 3 (Summer 2004), 345–365. 
 Lazarus-Yafeh, Hava. “The Religious Dialectics of the Hadjdj.” In  The Formation of the Clas-
sical Islamic World , edited by Lawrence I. Conrad. Vol. 26,  The Development of Islamic 
Ritual , edited by Gerald Hawling. Aldershot, UK, and Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2006. 
 Long, David E.  The Hajj Today: A Survey of Contemporary Makkah Pilgrimage . Albany: 
State University of New York, 1979. 
 Louër, Laurence.  Transnational Shia Politics: Religious and Political Networks in the Gulf . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
 Makky, Abdel Wahed.  Mecca: The Pilgrimage City: A Study of Pilgrim Accommodations . 
London: Croom Helm, 1978. 
 Matthiesen, Toby. “The Shi’a of Saudi Arabia at a Crossroads.”  Middle East Report Online , 
May 6, 2009. http://www.merip.org/mero050609.html 
 Meijer, Roel, ed.  Global Salaﬁ sm: Islam’s New Religious Movement . London: Hurst, 2009. 
 Moinuddin, Hassan.  The Charter of the Islamic Conference and Legal Framework of Economic 
Cooperation among Its Member States . New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. 
 Nanji, Azim, and Farhad Daftary. “What Is Shiite Islam?” In  Voices of Islam . Vol. 1,  Voices 
of Tradition , edited by Vincent Cornell. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007. 
 Nasr, Vali.  The Shia Revival: How Conﬂ icts within Islam Will Shape the Future . New York: 
W. W. Norton, 2007. 
 Ochsenwald, William. “Saudi Arabia.” In  The Politics of Islamic Revivalism , edited by Shireen 
Hunter. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988, 105–115. 
 Ochsenwald, William.  Religion, Society and the State in Arabia: The Hijaz under Ottoman 
Control, 1840–1908 . Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1984. 
 Peters, F. E.  The Hajj: The Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy Places . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1994, 1996. 
 Peters, Rudolph.  Islam and Colonialism: The Doctrine of Jihad in Modern History . The Hague, 
the Netherlands: Mouton, 1979. 
 Rougier, Bernard, ed.  Qu’est-ce Que le Salaﬁ sme? Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2008. 
 Rush, Alan, ed.  Records of the Hajj: A Documentary History of the Pilgrimage to Mecca . 
Slough, UK: Archive Editions, 1993. 

| 199
Social Classes and Ethnicity
 al-Sa’id, Labib.  The Recited Koran . Translated by Bernard G. Weiss, M. A. Rauf, and Morroe 
Berger. Princeton, NJ: Darwin, 1975. 
 Salamah, Ahmad Abdullah.  Shia and Sunni Perspective on Islam: An Objective Comparison of 
the Shia and Sunni Doctrines Based on the Holy Quran and Hadith . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: 
Abul-Qasim Publication House, 1991. 
 Schacht, Joseph, ed.  The Legacy of Islam . 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1974. 
 Sedgwick, Mark. “Saudi Suﬁ s: Compromise in the Hijaz 1925–1940.”  Die Welt des Islams 37, 
no. 3 (1997), 349–368. 
 Sharif, M. M., ed.  History of Muslim Philosophy . 2 vols. Wiesbaden, Germany, 1966. 
 Siddiq, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz.  Hukum al-iqama bi bilad al-kufr wa bayan wujubiha ﬁ  ba’d al-ahwal . 
Tangier: Bughaz, 1985. 
 Smith, William Cantwell.  Islam in Modern History . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1957.
Snouck Hugronje, Christiaan.  “The Meccan Feast” (An edited translation of C. Snouck Hur-
gronje,  Het Mekkaansche feest [Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1880]). In  The Formation of the 
Classical Islamic World , edited by Lawrence I. Conrad. Vol. 26,  The Development of Islamic Rit-
ual , edited by Gerald Hawling. Aldershot, UK, and Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2006, 239–290. 
 Steinberg, Guido. “The Shiites in the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, 1913–1953.” In  The 
Twelver Shia in Modern Times: Religious Culture and Political History , edited by Rainer 
Brunner and Werner Ende. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2001. 
 U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom.  Annual Report of the United States 
Commission on International Religious Freedom . May 2009. 
 al-‘Uthaymin, Abd Allah Saleh.  Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab: The Man and His Works . 
London: I. B. Tauris, 2009. 
 von Sivers, Peter. “Islam in the Middle East and Africa.” In  Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic 
World , edited by John Esposito. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1992, Vol. 2, 254–261. 
 Yamani, Ahmad Zaki. “Islamic Law and Contemporary Issues.” In  God and Man in Con-
temporary Islamic Thought: Proceedings of the Philosophy Symposium Held at the Ameri-
can University of Beirut, February 6–10, 1967 , edited by Charles Malik. Beirut, Lebanon: 
American University of Beirut, 1972, 45–82. 
 Yamani, Maha A. Z.  Polygamy and Law in Saudi Arabia . Reading, UK: Ithaca, 2008. 
 al-Yassini, Ayman.  Religion and State in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia . Boulder, CO: West-
view, 1985. 
 Social Classes and Ethnicity 
 OVERVIEW 
 In Saudi Arabia, social class and ethnicity have not followed the precise lines of pre-
modern and modern Western societies. Although there is a royal family and a distinc-
tion between the privileges of that family and those of other Saudi Arabian citizens, 
the family’s preeminence derives from its tribal status and political success in unifying 
modern Saudi Arabia. The idea of royalty in Saudi Arabia is not that of kings who 

 Chapter 5 Society
200 |
claim rule by divine right, as in early Europe. Instead, the royal family’s higher politi-
cal status was claimed through tribal conquest, and they must simultaneously meet 
traditional and tribal Islamic and modern expectations of governance. They possess 
special privileges and responsibilities and are subject to scrutiny and family censure. 
Some members have become extremely wealthy as a result of business activities, but 
the wealthiest groups in Saudi Arabia are actually a mixture of social elements. 
 Traditional diff erences in social status have arisen from geographic origins; tribal 
or nontribal and sedentary, partially sedentary or nonsedentary backgrounds; oc-
cupation; former slave or nonslave status; wealth or poverty; and gender. The dif-
ferences between groups based on past or present modes of production were not 
perfectly distinct, as the families of tribal  amirs  began to see themselves separately 
from the bedouin at least by the early 1980s (Fernea 1987, 311). 
 Formal studies of Arabian society and anthropological studies are much scarcer 
than political studies. Early Western sources, anthropological studies of nomads, 
and other studies undertaken as part of the governmental development plans provide 
the most information, and diff erent types of historical studies in Arabic provide other 
data and insights. The  sijilaat , or court records, have been a very important source 
for understanding Ottoman-governed societies. The parallel for Arabia resides in 
arguments about certain key legal cases; more research on these would help us un-
derstand social relations through the lens of legal disputes. 
 BIAS IN SOCIAL INFORMATION 
 Travelers, missionaries, and adventurers who became famous in Europe for their 
memoirs of experiences in the East provided information about the groups and peo-
ples they encountered and tended to generalize from them. These visitors came from 
highly stratiﬁ ed, patriarchal societies and viewed the Arabs as a race rather than 
an ethnicity. Although some of their descriptions, such as the Dutch scholar and 
government advisor Christiaan Snouke Hurgronje  (1857–1936), who was permitted 
to go on the  hajj to Mecca, were invaluable, as was his collection of then-current ar-
tifacts, he and others held individualistic and rather set theories about their subjects. 
Arab records of the time are not concerned with the matter of Arabians’ ethnicity 
or race and social particularities but rather pertained to the impact of the Wahhabi 
reform movement. The lifestyle of the bedouin nomad fascinated and preoccupied 
Western adventurers (Blunt 1985; Burckhardt 1831; Doughty 1968; Burton 1907), as 
did the supposed inferiority of Eastern women and their veiling, presence in harems, 
segregation, and poor manners (Malmignati 1925; Hume-Griffi  th 1909). While the 
travelers’ accounts are very useful as historical and anthropological records, many 
problems arise from their perceptions of the bedouin as a noble or a miserable savage. 
The aristocratic Blunts, a couple who traveled through Arabia and Mesopotamia, 
admired the Shammar tribe, comparing Ibn Rasheed with Richard III of England, 
whereas the Turkophobe Lady Blunt disliked Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman gover-
nor, because of his reforming zeal and greatly preferred the Arabs to the Persians 
or Shi‘a (Melman 1992, 298–300). British diplomat Gertrude Bell, ambitious but far 

Ethnicity versus Nationality | 201
less racist than her compatriots, remained preoccupied with her purpose, writing that 
(being a woman) she could not travel like Richard Doughty, a well-known explorer 
of Arabia, nor race through the country without “a free hand to work at those things 
she cared about” (politics)—for “it’s a bore being a woman when you are in Arabia” 
(Bell 2000, 74). 
 Women travelers tended to misunderstand the rarity of harems and see a false sub-
missiveness in Arab women that blinded them to similar issues in their own society, 
which they carried with them (Mabro 1991, 1–3; Melman 1992, 16, 17). Polygamy 
brought forth “horror, disgust and pity” but was seen as exclusively Muslim, which 
it is not (Melman 1992, 198–199). These same themes recur whenever Saudi Arabian 
women are reviewed in mainstream Western media. 
 MODERN SOCIETAL STUDIES 
 A task of modern anthropologists of Saudi Arabian society is to make sense of these 
preoccupations and recenter studies on the issues that are of importance to their 
subjects. This can be seen in Soraya Altorki’s work on upper-class women, Saddeka 
Arebi’s studies of women writers, and Mai Yamani’s survey of youth (Altorki 1986, 
2003; Arebi 1994; Mai Yamani 2000) and in ongoing studies about the use of the 
Internet and social media. 
 Some eff orts have been made to connect lack or loss of social status with ten-
dencies toward opposition or militancy. Researchers have looked at self-provided 
data from the Saudi Arabian militant opposition, extracted from Internet postings 
(Hegghammer 2006), to see if there was a connection to geographic origin or tribal 
identity. In studies where the Saudi Arabian government provided data, these issues 
were apparently seen as highly sensitive (Ansary 2008), but they have been used to 
build a psychological program to retrain or reprogram that opposition in prison (see 
Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues). Put bluntly, it is possible that certain tribes such 
as the ‘Utayba, some of whom were part of the 1979 uprising, could be targeted by 
militants, or individuals coming from disaff ected regions of the country, because 
personal networks are usually part of recruitment. Also, those without jobs, univer-
sity plans, or suffi  cient money to marry are likely to be disaff ected, and so part of 
the government strategy has been to provide for these needs for those who leave a 
reeducation program in prison aimed at erasing militant tendencies (Zuhur 2010). 
 ETHNICITY VERSUS NATIONALITY 
 Ethnic divisions concern Arab or non-Arab backgrounds; however, this is less im-
portant than the dividing line of Saudi Arabian citizenship. Most Saudi Arabian 
citizens are Arabs, but some, an estimated 10 percent, are of African or Asian ori-
gin, often mixed with Arab lineage. The large size of the foreign worker community 
has meant a signiﬁ cant presence of non–Saudi Arabian Arabs or non-Arabs in the 
 country, who lack the civil and political rights of citizens. What is important is  jin-
siyya , which means both origins and nationality; some groups may ignite negative 

 Chapter 5 Society
202 |
feelings, but discrimination among Saudi Arabians on the basis of ethnicity is not 
common at all. Discrimination on the basis of religious sect, possibly geographic 
origin, or gender is far more common, although the general and the speciﬁ c forms of 
any inequalities need to be understood. 
 TRIBALISM 
 Tribal affi  liation goes back at least to the  jahilliya , the pre-Islamic period. However, 
it has been subject to historical movements and changes. The  qabila , or tribe, has 
come to mean tribes of noble blood who claimed to descend from ‘Adnan or Qa-
htan, the ancestors of the southern or northern Arabs. (This lineage is claimed not 
only by tribes in Saudi Arabia but also by those ﬂ ung farther north and not only 
by Muslims.)  Qabyala , or tribal status, is a very complex idea and pertains today to 
the former lifestyle of most members, as so few groups are living a purely pastoral 
lifestyle. Families trace descent through the father’s line. In the past, manual labor 
as carried out by those mining gold, silver, antimony, and salt in al-Yamamah  under 
the Ummayyad Caliphate was not as respected as the tribal lifestyle, and the Bahila 
people, who specialized solely in mining, were not regarded highly by other groups 
(al-Askar 2002, 37, 49, 50). Certain other occupations such as tanning hides would 
not be willingly chosen by those of tribal status. The separation between tribal and 
settled or agricultural groups is not as clear. Some Western scholars sharply divided 
in theory all  qabila  from  khadira  (nontribal free men). Yet historians also show us 
that many tribes were already practicing agriculture throughout the year, or part 
of the year, from the time of the Islamic conquest, such as the Banu Hazzam, Banu 
Tamim, one branch of the Banu Nadir, and the Banu Ka‘b. In addition, tribal as 
well as nontribal people engaged in trade. Certain types of artisans were typically 
not  qabila , but others might be. The  saluba , tinkers and traders in the desert, were 
not  qabila . It is not entirely clear that claims made in the modernization literature 
on Saudi Arabia—that the tribal people found work ignoble—were really based on 
fact. However, when Egyptian or Philippine laborers began to be imported to work 
on farms at relatively low wages, questions were asked as to why Saudi Arabians 
were not being hired. 
 ENDOGAMY 
 The  ashraf , or those who claimed descent from the Prophet, were important in the 
Hijaz area (see Chapter 2, History), and some of them claimed the guardianship of 
the holy cities. Among the  ashraf , as for all groups of tribal descent and others as well, 
endogamy (in-group marriage) was practiced and served to maintain social status. 
The preferred marriage partner was the father’s brother’s daughter ( bint ‘amm ), but 
other female cousins through the father’s line, or possibly the mother’s line, might be 
considered as well. On the other hand, marriage was also used to stabilize relations 
between rival tribes and groups or between families that had allied in the past. Ibn 
Sa‘ud married women from other clans of the al-Sa‘ud, from a rival tribe, and from 
the al-Shaykh family. 

Merchants | 203
 TRIBAL VALUES 
 Tribal descent unites individuals and is the basis of social loyalty. If a member of the 
tribe is wronged, then a member of his or her lineage avenges him or her and pays 
out compensation to others who are wronged. Most tribal groups who still camped 
together in summertime considered themselves tribal members, and their animals 
were branded with the tribe’s symbol. Donald Cole’s 1968 study of the al-Murrah 
nomads showed that seven clans related patrilineally make up the tribe; however, the 
clans can add additional kin or claim relationships through marriages (Cole 1975, 
1980). Many disputes arose over grazing and water rights. Certain grazing lands have 
been retained, but others have been given over to agriculture, based on claims of 
cultivation (see Chapter 4, Economy). Tribes that developed a water source usually 
claimed primary rights. They might travel to use it only once a year, so if another 
tribe claimed the water source or improved it, a clash developed. Tribal rights were 
fairly well allocated and understood by the beginning of the 20th century. They were 
altered in some areas with the establishment of the nation and were impacted later on 
by the loans available in the 1970s and thereafter (Altorki and Cole 1989). 
 RELIGIOUS ELITE 
 The  ‘ulama (religious scholars) are another important social elite group constituted 
on the basis of occupation. The religious scholars serve as judges, preachers, notaries, 
educators, and authorities on Islamic doctrine. Many serve in the government, and 
Islamic education remains important in Saudi Arabia, whereas it has been displaced 
by modern educational systems elsewhere in the region (followed by a revival of new 
private Islamic educational institutes). In the literature on Saudi Arabian society that 
emphasized modernization, religious scholars tended to be juxtaposed with those 
with special technical or professional skills, who might make higher incomes. Mus-
lims from international communities might remain in the Hijaz following pilgrim-
age, and some studied with particular scholars. This trend continued in the modern 
era, as students from certain countries with or without a tradition of higher Islamic 
learning wanted to study in the kingdom and could do so in the Islamic institutes or 
universities. 
 MERCHANTS 
 Merchants attained elite status through wealth, and being involved in trade did not 
detract from tribal status. However, merchants might come from other than tribal 
backgrounds. Traditional merchant families were located in the Hijaz and the East-
ern Province as well as Najd. Some of these were originally from other parts of the 
world, and had relocated due to sea trade with Arabia, or resettled after coming to 
Arabia as pilgrims. New merchant and business groups from Najd have become more 
ascendant since the establishment of the modern kingdom. The modern business class 
is fairly distinct from the more traditional shop owner or merchant in several ways. 
Access to technology, knowledge of foreign languages, market study, and knowledge 

 Chapter 5 Society
204 |
of changing opportunities mark the newer entrepreneurs. Long-distance traders and 
caravaneers were tribal people (see Chapter 4, Economy), but they have no place in 
the modern economy. 
 RELIGIOUS MINORITIES 
 The social status of minority religious groups, namely, the Shi‘a Muslims of the East-
ern Province, the Nakhawila of Medina, and the Isma‘ilis, was lower than that of the 
majority Sunni group. This was complicated by the rise of opposition movements 
after 1979, because many became political prisoners. The Shi‘a Muslims were in-
creasingly drawn into government service and promised equity. Another opposition 
movement, the neosalaﬁ sts, opposes rights for the Shi‘a. Since the outset of militant 
opposition to the government in 2003, they now compose the majority of political 
prisoners but may not be categorized as such, since some are obviously guilty of 
bloodshed and others of complicity or conspiracy. 
 SLAVERY 
 Slavery was the outcome of war at the beginning of the Islamic era, and only later, 
in the premodern era, did it signiﬁ cantly involve the African slave trade. Slaves also 
came, as elsewhere in the Ottoman Empire, from other areas of the world (Circassia, 
the Caucasus, and so on), but this white slavery ended before the African slave trade 
did. Slaves were imported into Saudi Arabia until abolition in 1962. They may have 
made up as much as 10 percent of the population, an estimated 450,000 in the 1950s. 
They were very important in agricultural cultivation and in the pearl-diving industry 
of the Arabian Gulf and the Red Sea (Hopper 2006, 2010). Others were household 
servants and were usually brought up with their masters. The arguments over aboli-
tion in Saudi Arabia are best understood in a regional and international context, in 
which European pressure was brought to bear on the Ottoman sultan to end slavery; 
however, the Ottomans had not easily conquered the Arabian Peninsula and were 
not to retain control there. An 1857 Ottoman  ﬁ rman (edict) to end the slave trade in 
Africans was observed everywhere (orders to halt the Georgian and Circassian trade 
were issued in 1854 and 1855) except in the Hijaz, because the Ottoman sultan had 
good reason to anticipate a serious rebellion over the issue (Ochsenwald 1980; Lewis 
1990, 80; Shehata 1997). In 1855, a group of merchants in Jeddah wrote to the  ‘ulama 
about the regulations claiming they were anti-Islamic. When the governor of Hijaz 
sent a direct order to the  ‘ulama and the  sharif s in 1855, Shaykh Jamal issued a  fatwa 
(at the instruction of the  sharif of Mecca), which decreed that it was lawful to kill the 
Ottoman Turks since they were un-Islamic in banning the slave trade and other ac-
tions (Lewis 1990, 80). 
 Slavery ( ‘ubudiyya ) was permitted in Islam if the slave came from outside the  dar 
al-Islam  (lands of Islam) or was the child of existing slaves. A 1936 document, “Instruc-
tions Concerning the Trade in Slaves,” indicates that slave dealers held documents for 
the slaves they purchased showing they were slaves in that other country at that time, 

Racial Relations | 205
that owners had to register their slaves, and that Saudi Arabians could not be enslaved 
(Lewis 1990, 167–169). Other forms of slavery (called elite slavery) have altered the 
ethnic pool in the Middle East, including the trade of Georgian and Circassian women 
who were purchased for marriage and the enslaved and converted groups who became 
warriors ( mamalik ) and members of the Ottoman administration. Such slavery con-
trasted with the use of slaves for plantation or household labor or for service as pearl 
divers or oarsmen on the Arabian Peninsula (Ze’evi 1995, 79–81; Lewis 1990). The pearl 
industry could not have been economically undertaken without slave labor (Hopper 
2010). Slaves were also held by the bedouin and by the tribal leaders, and nearly each 
person that Bell (2000) encountered was served or accompanied by slaves. The slaves 
were therefore protected by the tribal system without being part of its social class. Some 
entered particular traditional occupations in the Hijaz, such as that of the watercarrier, 
but following abolition, all occupations and specializations opened to them. 
 RACIAL RELATIONS 
 Arguments over the degree of intermarriage between the races and its social mean-
ing confront the fact that Islam proclaims the equality of believers and that dark 
complexions were considered equally worthy to light ones. The Qur’an proclaims: 
“O mankind, we have created you male and female, and appointed you races and 
tribes, so that you may know one another. Surely the noblest among you in the sight 
of God is the most godfearing of you” (49:13). In the Prophet Muhammad’s ﬁ nal 
sermon while on pilgrimage, he stated, “All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an 
Arab has no superiority over a non-Arab nor a non-Arab has any superiority over an 
Arab; also a white has no superiority over black nor a black has any superiority over 
white except by piety and good action. You know that every Muslim is the brother 
of another Muslim.” These messages are underscored in Prophetic hadith. Yet be-
liefs about social status sometimes contradicted this overall religious principle. The 
principle of  kafa ‘ a , or equality of status, could be used as a reason to refuse a groom 
(or, less often, a bride). In the Maliki school of law, this was intended to disqualify 
an impious spouse or one of bad character, but in the other schools it pertained to 
descent, wealth, and freedom (Lewis 1990, 86). Also, Muslim men were permitted to 
have concubines and had children with them, upon whom they could confer legiti-
macy. Even if these women were slaves, the children were then free. Some observers 
therefore argue that intermarriage has been very extensive and that race is not, for 
religious reasons, a distinguishing principle of social status the way that it is or has 
been in the United States. The Swiss traveler John Lewis Burckhardt remarked on the 
yellow-brown skin of the Meccans and Jeddawis, attributing it to intermarriage, fre-
quently with Abyssinian concubines, whose children were equal to those of free Ara-
bian women (Burckhardt 1972, 182–187; 1829, 243). Bernard Lewis, however, insists 
that the slaves left little mark on the Middle Eastern population (a broad statement) 
and speculates this is because the male slaves were eunuchs or married among their 
own kind (1990, 84); elsewhere, he states that it may be because of  frequent manumis-
sion and frequent illness of the slaves (1990, 10). In these comments, one may surmise 

 Chapter 5 Society
206 |
that he refers ﬁ rst to the slave eunuchs of the Ottoman court. Others wrote that only 
the  khadira (nontribal people) intermarried with slaves and that debased their lineage 
(Doumato 1993, 62), but this idea appears contradicted by the frequent unions be-
tween members of elite and middle-class families and slaves, a notable example being 
that of Bandar ibn Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. Similarly, Soraya Altorki, who provided 
the ﬁ rst anthropological study in English of modern Saudi Arabian urban women, 
reported the views of elite women in Jeddah. They explained that “good” descent 
meant the absence of slaves,  mawalid (off spring of slaves and nonslaves),  takruni 
(Africans), and Yemenis in one’s family, and they attributed one attractive young 
woman’s failure to marry to her mother’s slave background (Altorki 1986, 16, 144). 
 Muslims are supposed to abhor racism or chauvinism by any one group, and the 
manumission of slaves was considered to be a good deed. It may be appropriate to 
understand the institution of slavery as a far-reaching economic system, just as it was 
in the Americas. The Saudi Arabian princes who ﬂ ed to Egypt in 1962 included the 
presence of slavery in the kingdom in their criticisms of the Saudi Arabian rulers. 
They claimed that slaves were even put to work for the oil companies; the companies 
paid the slave’s wages to his master. Slavery ended with more ﬁ nality in Saudi Arabia 
than in the United States, where Jim Crow laws continued on until the civil rights 
movement of the 1960s (ironically, the same period when Saudi Arabian slaves were 
freed). The distinction of race between those of Arab and African origin is no longer 
a social marker among Saudi Arabians. However, it should be noted that beauty 
standards vary, from acceptance and appreciation of local features and coloring to 
a consistent identiﬁ cation with and desire for Western standards spread through 
the media. Highlighting, bleaching, or lightening of hair color, or straightening its 
frequently curly or frizzy texture to become “silky,” is popular (although in Clairol’s 
advertisement designed for Saudi Arabian women, a black hair dye is recommended 
[Zirinsky 2005, 83–87]). Skin bleaching, cosmetic surgery on noses, and emulation of 
tall, thin body types are fairly pervasive and speak to a racialization of beauty images 
(Hunter in Das Gupta, et al., eds., 2007, 313). 
 In addition, those who are not Saudi Arabian by nationality are exposed to some 
racist attitudes, and these include Africans and Asians. A well-known Saudi Arabian 
blogger (Saudi Jawa of the  Sandcrawler blog) is of Javanese descent (  jawa is the 
Saudi Arabian term for a person from Southeast Asia) and is a native of Mecca. He 
admits that there are racist attitudes in Saudi Arabia, but these are mitigated toward 
those of Saudi Arabian nationality as compared to foreign workers. 
 TRADITIONAL SOCIAL VALUES 
 Social values are said to derive from the noble tribal groups.  Muruwwa , or chiv-
alry, meant devotion and loyalty to family, adhesion to certain norms of behavior, 
upholding of the honor of family and tribe, courage, self-sacriﬁ ce, generosity, and 
hospitality. It was expressed in the code of warfare between tribes as well as social 
relations outside of war. Some of these values carried over into Islamic society, but 

Age | 207
the ideal was loyalty to the brotherhood and sisterhood of Islam and an end to tribal 
feuding. Women represented the honor of their men, and violations of their sexual 
honor were punished by their male kin. 
 Because women must protect their sexual honor, segregation of women has been 
practiced by those economically able to do so. Devotion to society and the nation 
in the philanthropy practiced by their rulers, their creation of new institutions such 
as colleges and universities, and women’s increasing educational and professional 
skills are all reasons that segregation by gender is beginning to break down in some 
circumstances, but it is being maintained in others. 
 Social and religious values combine in the case of philanthropy and charitable 
giving. Beyond this, people recognized those dependent on them economically—for 
business, the care of servants, unemployed family members, and the aged and poor 
people in the community. Upholding these social values as well as religious values 
imparts social status. 
 Other social values are changing as a result of the shift from extended family 
households to nuclear family households, which began in the 1970s. Women main-
tain reciprocal social relations ( wafa’    ) through visits to networks of  wufyan (formal 
networks) and  sudqan (close friends), both for formal, invited occasions ( wu ‘ ud ) and 
informal visits. But these now include unmarried women as well as married women. 
Women also now spend more time with their own husbands than in the past, just as 
it is now more common for spouses to share a bedroom. Sons are now raised together 
with daughters, and male servants may come into the female parts of the household 
(Altorki 1986, 32, 33 109–121). Women are now acquiring information through other 
means than their female networks, like television or, possibly, their workplaces and 
the Internet. 
 AGE 
 Age provides status to men as well as women. Deference is given to older family 
members, whether the father, grandfather, elder brother, or mother-in-law. A father 
typically decided what his children should study and whether they could travel for 
higher education, and a large percentage of families determined marriage partners 
for their sons and daughters. 
 The Sa‘udi royal family is headed by its senior princes, most of whom are septua-
genarians at least. While the aging power structure is aging, Saudi Arabian society 
as a whole is increasingly youthful, with a much lower median age than in Western 
countries. (Some sources claim that the population under 18 is higher than the fol-
lowing estimates.) The total estimated population of 28,686,633 includes 5,576,076 
nonnationals. Since the nonnationals who are counted are all adults, this slightly 
skews measurements of the youth bulge. Other sources estimate far more foreign 
residents, at approximately 9.5 million. Out of the total (nationals and nonna-
tionals), 38 percent are age 14 or younger, 59.5 percent are age 15 to 65, and only 
2.5 percent are age 65 or older. 

 Chapter 5 Society
208 |
 GENDER AND SOCIAL STATUS 
 Women who bore sons might have greater social status than others, depending on 
their children’s achievement and closeness to them. Women who were childless might 
ﬁ nd themselves divorced, or their husband might take another wife. These conse-
quences still pertain more than in the West but less so for some than in the past. 
Saudi Arabian women’s fertility rate is 3.77 children per woman. This shows quite 
a reduction from the past. In the premodern period, women “without men” existed; 
this was a primary rationale for women’s necessary work, but marriage was consid-
ered the norm. 
 The section on women later on in this chapter discusses many of the restrictions 
women face in the kingdom. They are not, however, automatically of lower status 
than men. Rather, much depends on other aspects of their social location. In general, 
the sexes are seen as complementary, and gender diff erences are biologically based. 
Gradually, women have argued, in some cases, against the belief that they are not 
capable of certain types of work, but they have accepted situations where they will 
work in segregated circumstances until conditions change. Many people diff erenti-
ate between the status quo and the ideal role of women in either an authentic or an 
enlightened Muslim society. As the trends toward religiosity increased and the con-
servatives and neosalaﬁ sts gained more adherents in Saudi Arabia, the debates over 
women’s status heightened. Some women called for a refusal of the reforms Western 
feminists wanted for them. Sohaila Zain al-Abedin, a prominent Saudi Arabian es-
sayist, supported the wearing of the  hijab  (Islamic head covering) in addition to the 
TABLE 5.2 Demographics
Total Population 
28,686,633
country comparison to the world: 41 
Note: This number includes 5,576,076 nonnationals (July 2010 est.).
Age Structure
0–14 years: 38% (male 5,557,453, female 5,340,614)
15–64 years: 59.5% (male 9,608,032, female 7,473,543)
65 years and over: 2.5% (male 363,241, female 343,750) (2010 est.)
Median Age
Total: 24.9 years
Male: 26 years
Female: 23.4 years (2010 est.)
* Males exceed females in each age category. Two reasons exist for this situation; one is the 
presence of foreign workers, who include more men than women. Also there is a preference 
for male children. It is possible that modern sex-selection techniques have had some impact, 
but it is also common for more boys to be born than girls (in many societies) and the infant 
mortality rate for boys is higher than for girls.
Source: “Saudi Arabia,” CIA World Factbook 2010.

Foreign Workers | 209
 abaya , domesticity for women, and segregation, and she opposed sexual permis-
siveness. However, she simultaneously opposed the abuse of Islamic privileges like 
polygamy (Zain al-Abedin 1982; Arebi 1994, 236–239). 
 MODERNIZATION AND SOCIETY 
 From the 1970s through the 1990s, a major theme in sociological or anthropo-
logical studies concerned the struggle between tradition and modernization—Saudi 
 Arabia’s struggle to retain its own values in the face of its rapidly expanding cities and 
changing rural areas. Rural and urban societies changed radically. In the 1960s, the 
remaining fully pastoralist groups were often impoverished and malnourished and at 
the same time were gradually being settled. By the early 1980s, oil income had made 
it possible to settle more of the bedouin, and the expansion of irrigation and impor-
tation of workers were changing the rural economy (Altorki and Cole 1989; Fernea 
1983 in Fernea and Fernea, eds., 1987, 293–316 ), and Saudi Arabia shared various 
problems with its fellow developing nations. Some of the settlements did not take into 
account the preferences and needs of the rural people, and, in succeeding planning 
stages, the government contracted anthropologists to survey the bedouin. The results 
of resettlement were positive in terms of stabilizing income, but some critics noted 
uninhabited projects in Riyadh that were not designed for large families. Also, in 
Nassim, some enterprising folks had received land grants and built property that they 
rented out, thereby avoiding any need to work (Mackey 1987, 220–221). Other kinds 
of dislocation took place; the male Saudi Arabians were often displaced from their 
wives and children, as they moved to work in the cities and towns or in the National 
Guard. Some people had more access to the resources of the country than did oth-
ers, whose access was limited due to illiteracy, their unfamiliarity with bureaucratic 
structures, or physical distance (Doumato in Metz, ed., 1993). Social debates over the 
positive and negative aspects of progress continued and were reﬂ ected in literature 
that had implications for public policy (Abdul Aziz 1994; Fabietti 2000; Finan and 
al-Haratani 1998). Urbanization was seen as having mixed outcomes, but clearly, at 
least by 2000, the eff ects of modern living, employment patterns, and social concep-
tions were more crucial to the measured success of the government (Akers 2001) than 
the previous focus on the transition of bedouin communities.  
 FOREIGN WORKERS 
 Two approaches to foreign workers or illegal immigrants to Saudi Arabia are com-
mon in the literature; one concerns their mistreatment and supposes racism, which 
may actually be discriminatory behavior arising from disputes due to the legal status 
of the worker or immigrant. The other trend in the literature supports Saudization 
policies and seeks to understand why foreign labor continues at high levels. Because 
both illegal and legal immigration to Saudi Arabia are ongoing, a person’s residency 
and occupational status is very important as well as his or her country of origin. 
Checkpoints on roads or city streets require drivers to produce legal documents. 

 Chapter 5 Society
210 |
 Apparently, the largest group of illegal immigrants are Yemenis, who like the Saudi 
Arabians are mostly of Arab descent, and Somalis and Eritreans, who usually cross 
over from Yemen. Other groups from Asia, South Asia, and Africa manage to enter 
the country as well. 
 The lowest of the low in the illegal immigrant groups are children who are stolen 
in their home country and taken over the border to beg in Saudi Arabia, turning 
over some of their earnings to adults. Some have run away from their smugglers but 
have no recourse but begging. They are often beaten and may be mutilated. There 
are thousands of street children in Jeddah, and a smaller number can be found in 
Riyadh. Some sources claim they are nearly all boys and come from Yemen, Soma-
lia, Chad, India, and Pakistan. However, other sources note that girls are also on 
the streets and that many of these are Saudi Arabians of poor families. The Yemeni 
government admitted that about 300 children per month were crossing the border 
into Saudi Arabia, and a center for rescued children was opened in 2007 at the Harad 
border crossing (BBC Two, March 27, 2007). 
 Approximately 240,015 Palestinian refugees live in Saudi Arabia ( CIA World 
Factbook 2010 ). On the one hand, Palestinians have received political support from 
Saudi Arabia and badly need that support. Nevertheless, some have legitimately 
complained about their second-class status in the country. They must renew their 
residence permits every two years for a fee of 2,000 riyals and be sponsored by a 
URBAN ANNUAL GROWTH RATE IN SAUDI ARABIA
Saudi Arabia’s population has moved into cities and towns, making it primar-
ily an urban population. The speed of urbanization has slowed; however, the 
population continues to increase, and foreign workers live in the urban areas 
as well. The visual transformation of urban areas has been profound.
Year  Urban Annual Growth Rate (%)
1975–1980 
8.04
1980–1985 
7.81
1985–1990 
5.73
1990–1995 
2.85
1995–2000 
2.92
2000–2005 
2.81
2005–2010 
2.51
2010–2015 
2.31
2015–2020 
2.10 (estimated)
Source: UN Population Division, 2008/2009.

Foreign Workers | 211
Saudi Arabian citizen in order to work or own a business or property. To change 
jobs, a Palestinian (like other foreign workers) needs to change sponsors, again for a 
fee, and receive a release letter. University attendance may or may not be permitted; 
those admitted cannot choose their own major ﬁ eld of study. 
 An estimated 1.2 million Egyptians work in Saudi Arabia in a variety of sec-
tors ( al-Masry al-Yom , May 10, 2010). In 2008 and 2009, labor protests began in 
Saudi Arabia involving many types and situations of foreign labor. Some disputes 
have occurred in previous years, and it was often written that Arab labor became 
less desirable than Asian labor in some sectors due to the political views of the 
Arab workers, particularly Egyptians and Palestinians. This is not entirely true, 
as their labor was not completely supplanted. Egyptians have long migrated to 
Saudi Arabia to work in professional jobs (for example, as engineers and doctors) 
and also lower-paying positions (as service and hotel workers, construction work-
ers, drivers, salespersons, and agricultural laborers). Egyptian women have also 
migrated to work as nurses, doctors, teachers, and servants. Egyptians, whether 
in low-  paying or professional jobs, have reported diffi  culties in changing jobs 
and problems with certain employers who delay salaries. Some violent incidents 
have occurred, including attacks on Egyptian doctors and the shooting of two 
Egyptians, one of whom was a journalist, in July 2010, resulting in their deaths. 
An Egyptian driver was murdered in August, and there have been other incidents 
that appear to be the actions of young Saudi Arabians who previously had no 
acquaintance with their victims. 
 Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Indians, Sri Lankans, Nepalese, Indonesians, Filipinos, 
and other Asian nationalities are also employed in Saudi Arabia. Their status de-
pends on a variety of factors: if they are Muslims or not, if they speak Arabic and 
are literate, and what type of occupation they are engaged in. Some South Asians or 
Southeast Asians are longtime or even historic residents of Arabia and have much a 
higher social status than the foreigners working on temporary contracts. 
 The fourth-largest group of foreign workers in Saudi Arabia come from the Phil-
ippines. Filipinos began immigrating to Saudi Arabia for work in 1973. Evidence of 
their long presence is reﬂ ected in 24 Philippine schools in the country. They work 
in the health ﬁ elds as doctors and nurses, in the oil and manufacturing sector, in 
services, and in homes, as servants. As with the other groups, their status varies 
considerably based on the nature of their work and their employers. One point of 
tension for certain Philippine immigrants is their religion and the restrictions on 
public worship. 
 Other reports indicate widespread mistreatment, including some horrendous 
physical abuse, rape, and attempted murder; sometimes nonpayment; and con-
ﬁ nement of some domestic workers (migrants who work in domestic service are 
estimated to number 1.5 million). Kenyans, Indonesians, Nepalese, Sri Lankans, 
Filipinos, and others have been targeted, because they are vulnerable inside private 
homes (Human Rights Watch 2008, September 2, 2010), and labor laws had not 
addressed their situation. In response, the Saudi Arabian government created its 
own commission for human rights, which includes the minister of social aff airs and 
others. 

 Chapter 5 Society
212 |
 Western workers and their families number under 100,000 (one estimate in 2004 
gave skilled workers at 38,000). Many Americans, Britons, and other Europeans 
considered their jobs and living conditions in Saudi Arabia to be excellent as most 
were employed in high-paying skilled positions, enjoyed tax beneﬁ ts, and had hous-
ing and schooling provided by their companies. However, when Westerners were 
targeted in attacks by Saudi Arabian militants in Riyadh, Khobar, and Yanbu in 
2003 and 2004, large numbers of foreigners left, including all 90 employees of ABB-
Lummus in Yanbu, after a serious attack killed six ( Christian Science Monitor , 
May 4, 2004). 
 POVERTY 
 Poverty exists in Saudi Arabia’s cities, villages, and rural areas. Offi  cial government 
statistics and reports claimed that nomadic and peasant poverty had been eradicated. 
These had not kept up with the growth of poverty due to the price increases in the 
oil boom period and the eff ects of the ﬁ rst and second oil price drops. Poverty can-
not be measured from the appearance of older areas but rather from the speciﬁ c 
circumstances of the inhabitants. Those without jobs; those who are no longer in 
school; the unemployed who are now married, widowed, or divorced; and those with 
disabilities are the obvious categories to have fallen into poverty, but they are not 
the only poor groups. Crown Prince ‘Abdullah acknowledged the situation in 2002 
and made a visit to poor residents in Riyadh. A national strategy to combat poverty 
was announced early in 2003, in which new poverty guidelines were to be developed. 
The government issues social security payments to families without breadwinners 
(men), but this amount is only about $5,000 and ceases under some circumstances. 
A Saudi Arabian opposition leader in London claimed that the level of poverty 
was at 25 percent or even 30 percent ( Los Angeles Times , May 16, 2003). As Saudi 
Arabians sought to identify the causes of the terrorist attacks in 2003, some thought 
that the poor and unemployed might be more susceptible to recruitment by Islamist 
militants. At the very least, the existence of poverty and corruption in Saudi Arabia 
were grievances exploited by the extremists (since a fully Islamic government should 
address the needs of the poor). 
 THE ROYAL FAMILY 
 The Islamic model of leadership has almost always exceeded the capabilities of rulers; 
some of these were pious and administratively eff ective, but others were not. A tribal 
leader might have the status of  amir (a prince or ruler; the plural,  umara , applies to 
the princes and princesses of the royal family) and was assisted by an  amin , who col-
lected taxes. The  amir also had to fulﬁ ll the function of a  shaykh in deliberating over 
disputes. The leader had noble blood but also a noble character, and he ruled men 
who considered themselves his peers. He could not task or penalize them without 
reason, and they were permitted to criticize him and give him counsel. 

| 213
 Today, the al-Sa‘ud family is so large that it can be seen as a social class of its own. 
However, unlike the case of royalty or the aristocracy of England or France in the 
premodern era, certain egalitarian norms are embedded in Arabian society, partially 
via religious belief and tribal custom. Special titles are given to the off spring of ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, because they are the ruling clan of the family and the nation, and 
they are addressed His (or Her) Royal Highness. Other members of the family are 
simply addressed as Your (or His) Highness or Prince ( amir ). Like other royalty, the 
al-Sa‘ud family has the disadvantage of living life in the public eye; consequently, 
family members are under greater scrutiny and subject to more familial criticism than 
other members of society. Any dishonorable behavior is treated seriously. Cohesion 
and cooperation are expected of family members. 
 Prince Al-Walid ibn Talal al-Sa‘ud is the world’s eighth-richest man, with an 
estimated net worth of $20 billion; however, not all of the royal family are wealthy, 
and most of the other extremely wealthy Saudi Arabian businessmen are not al-Sa‘ud 
family members. Conspicuous consumption and building have marked Saudi Ara-
bia’s wealthy groups since the ﬁ rst oil boom. 
 The family members of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud were appointed to governmental posi-
tions but were expected to demonstrate skill and wisdom in these positions. Their ap-
pointment was not so much a matter of nepotism, as critics accused, as a way of meeting 
the social expectations that the ruler would ensure attention and good governance by 
the assigning of those closely related to him. Sometimes important duties or an espe-
cially delicate or politically troublesome task were assigned by one brother to another, 
while others were given to the sons of powerful princes. An example might be the per-
sonal intervention of the king following the Intifadhat 1400 in the eastern provinces, 
who assigned the investigation and mediation into the condition of the Shi‘a  to his son. 
 In general, the principle of succession follows along seniority and reﬂ ects a con-
sensus of the key family members (Kechichian 2001; also see Chapter 2, History, and 
Chapter 3, Government and Politics). Over time, many nonroyals with professional 
credentials were also appointed to key governmental posts, a fact adding to the le-
gitimacy of the al-Sa‘ud rather than detracting from it. 
 Acquiring proximity to those in elevated social and political positions is desirable 
in Saudi Arabia for a variety of reasons. The growing bureaucracy was diffi  cult for or-
dinary persons to navigate so they might seek or resort to a  wasta (a connection or in-
termediary) if a problem or a crime were to occur. Grievances could also be presented 
personally, but the cultivation of such connections, whether to deal with a grievance 
or obtain aid, is still considered important, just as it is in other Arab societies today. 
 REFERENCES 
 Abdul Aziz, Moudi Mansour.  Settling the Tribes: The Role of the Bedouin in the Formation of 
the Saudi State . London: Al Saqi, 1994. 
 Akers, Deborah S. “The Tribal Concept in Urban Saudi Arabia.” PhD diss., Ohio State 
University, 2001. 
 Alsanea, Rajaa.  Girls of Riyadh . Translated by Marilyn Booth. New York: Penguin, 2008. 
References

 Chapter 5 Society
214 |
 Altorki, Soraya. “Sisterhood and Stewardship in Sister-Brother Relations in Saudi Arabia.” 
In Nicholas Hopkins, ed. “The New Arab Family.” Special issue of  Cairo Papers in Social 
Science 24, nos. 1–2 (2003), 180–200. 
 Altorki, Soraya. “The Concept and Practice of Citizenship in Saudi Arabia.” In  Gender and 
Citizenship in the Middle East , edited by Suad Joseph. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University 
Press, 2000, 215–236. 
 Altorki, Soraya. “At Home in the Field.” In  Arab Women in the Field: Studying Your Own 
Society , edited by Soraya Altorki and Camillia Fawzi El-Solh. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press, 1988, 49–68. 
 Altorki, Soraya.  Women in Saudi Arabia: Ideology and Behavior among the Elite . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 Altorki, Soraya, and Donald P. Cole.  Arabian Oasis City: The Transformation of ‘Unayzah . 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. 
 Ansary, Abdullah F. “Combating Extremism: A Brief Overview of Saudi Arabia’s Approach.” 
 Middle East Policy 15, no. 2 (Summer 2008), 111–142. 
 Arebi, Saddeka.  Women and Words in Saudi Arabia: The Politics of Literary Discourse . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 
 al-Askar, Abdullah.  al-Yamama in the Early Islamic Era . Reading, UK: Ithaca, 2002. 
 Bagader, Abu Bakr A., and Ava Molnar Heinrichsdorff , eds. and trans.  Assassination of 
Light: Modern Saudi Short Stories . Washington, DC: Three Continents, 1990. 
 al-Baz, Rania.  Disﬁ gured: A Saudi Woman’s Story of Triumph over Violence . Translated by 
Catherine Spencer. Northampton, MA: Interlink, 2008. 
 BBC Two. “The Child Slaves of Saudi Arabia.” This World. BBC. March 27, 2007. 
 Bell, Gertrude.  The Arabian Diaries, 1913–1914 . Edited by Rosemary O’Brien. Syracuse, NY: 
Syracuse University Press, 2000. 
 Birks, J. S., and C. A. Sinclair.  Saudi Arabia into the 90s . Durham, UK: Mountjoy Research 
Center, University of Durham, 1988. 
 Blunt, Anne Noel.  A Pilgrimage to Nejd, the Cradle of the Arab Race, a Visit to the Court of 
the Emir and “Our” Persian Campaign . London: Century, 1985. (Originally published in 
1881.) 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis.  Travels in Arabia Comprehending an Account of Those Territories 
in Hedjaz Which the Mohammedans Regard as Sacred . London: Henry Colburn, 1829; 
reprinted, Beirut, Lebanon: Librairie du Liban, 1972. 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis.  Notes on the Bedouin and the Wahabys . London: Henry Coburn and 
Richard Bentley, 1831. 
 Burton, Richard Francis.  Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and Meccah . 
2 vols. (Originally written 1855–1856 and ﬁ rst published in 1857.) Memorial Edition 1893; 
London: George Bell and Sons, 1907. 
 Cole, Donald P. “Pastoral Nomads in a Rapidly Changing Economy: The Case of Saudi 
Arabia.” In  Social and Economic Development in the Arab Gulf , edited by Tim Niblock. 
New York: St. Martin’s, 1980, 106–121. 
 Cole, Donald P.  Nomads of the Nomads: The Al Murrah Bedouin of the Empty Quarter . Chi-
cago: Aldine, 1975. 

| 215
 Cole, Donald P. “Al Murrah Bedouins: The Pure Ones Roam Arabia’s Sands.”  Nomads of 
the World , edited by Gilbert Grosvenor. Washington, DC: National Geographic Society, 
Prepared by the Special Publications Division, 1971, 52–71. 
 Cole, Donald P., and Soraya Altorki. “Production and Trade in North Central Arabia: 
Change and Development in Unayzah.” In  The Transformation of Nomad Society in the 
Arab East , edited by Martha Mundy and Basim Musallam. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2000, 145–149. 
 Dickson, H.R.P.  The Arab of the Desert: Bedouin Life in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia . London: 
Allen and Unwin, 1949. 
 Doughty, Charles M.  Travels in Arabia Deserta . Abridged by Edward Garnett. Gloucester, 
MA: Peter Smith, 1968. 
 Doumato, Eleanor A.  Getting God’s Ear: Women, Islam and Healing in Saudi Arabia and the 
Gulf . New York: Columbia University Press, 2000. 
 Doumato, Eleanor A. “Environment” and “Society.” In  Saudi Arabia: A Country Study , ed-
ited by Helen Chapin Metz, Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. Washington, 
DC: Library of Congress, 1993. 
 Fabietti, Ugo. “State Policies and Bedouin Adaptations in Saudi Arabia, 1900–1980.” In  The 
Transformation of Nomad Society in the Arab East , edited by Martha Mundy and Basim 
Musallam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000, 82–89. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth.  In Search of Islamic Feminism: One Woman’s Journey . New York: Double-
day, 1998. 
 Fernea, Robert. “Hail, Saudi Arabia” and “The Anthropologist in the Field.” In  The Arab 
World: Personal Encounters , by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea and Robert Fernea. Garden 
City, NY: Anchor Books, 1987, 293–316. 
 Finan, Timothy Joseph, and E. R. Al-Haratani. “Modern Bedouins: The Transformation of 
Traditional Nomad Society in the Al-Taysiyah Region of Saudi Arabia.” In  Drylands: 
Sustainable Use of Rangelands into the Twenty-First Century , edited by V. R. Squires and 
A. E. Sidahmed. Rome, Italy: International Fund for Agricultural Development, 1998. 
 Gordon, Murray.  Slavery in the Arab World . New York: New Amsterdam Books, 1989. 
 Hamdan, Amani. “Women and Education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges and Achievements.” 
 International Education Journal 6, no. 1 (2005), 42–64. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas. “Terrorist Recruitment and Radicalization in Saudi Arabia.”  Middle 
East Policy 13, no. 4 (Winter 2006), 39–60. 
 Hoggarth, David P.  The Penetration of Arabia: A Record of the Development of Western 
Knowledge Concerning the Arabian Peninsula . Beirut, Lebanon: Khayats, 1966. (Originally 
published in 1905.) 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “Pearls, Globalization and the African Diaspora in the Arabian Gulf in 
the Age of Empire.” Paper presented at the 124th Annual Meeting of the American Histori-
cal Association, San Diego, January 9, 2010. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “The African Presence in Arabia: Slavery, the World Economy, and the 
African Diaspora in Eastern Arabia, 1840–1940.” PhD diss., University of California, Los 
Angeles, 2006. 
 Hopwood, Derek. ed.  The Arabian Peninsula: Society and Politics . Totowa, NJ: Rowman and 
Littleﬁ eld, 1972. 
References

 Chapter 5 Society
216 |
 Human Rights Watch. “Saudi Arabia: Domestic Worker Brutalized.” September 2, 2010. 
http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2010/09/02/saudi-arabia-domestic-worker-brutalized 
 Human Rights Watch. “As If I Am Not Human.” July 7, 2008. http://www.hrw.org/en/
reports/2008/07/07/if-i-am-not-human-0 
 Hume-Griffi  th, M. E.  Behind the Veil in Persia and Turkish Arabia: An Account of an English-
woman’s Eight Years’ Residence amongst the Women of the East . London: Seeley, 1909. 
 Hunter, Margaret. “Color and the Changing Racial Landscape.” In  Race and Racialization: 
Essential Readings , edited by Tania Das Gupta, Carl E. James, Roger C.A. Maaka, Grace-
Edward Glabuzi, and Chris Andersen. Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press, 2007, 301–315. 
 Ingham, Bruce.  Bedouin of Northern Arabia: Traditions of the Al-Dhaﬁ r . London and New 
York: Kegan Paul, 1986. 
 Jones, Toby. “Saudi Arabia’s Not So New Anti-Shi’ism.”  Middle East Report  242 (Spring 
2007). 
 al-Juhany, Uwaidah M.  Najd before the Salaﬁ  Reform Movement: Social, Religious and Politi-
cal Conditions in the Three Centuries Preceding the Rise of the Saudi State . Reading, UK: 
Ithaca, 2002. 
 Katakura, Motoko.  Bedouin Village . Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1977. 
 Keane, John F.  Six Months in the Hejaz: An Account of the Mohammedan Pilgrimages to Mec-
cah and Medinah. Accomplished by an Englishman Professing Mohammedanism . London: 
Ward & Downey, 1887. 
 Kechichian, Joseph.  Succession in Saudi Arabia . New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
 Kupershoek, Marcel.  Arabia of the Bedouins . London: Al Saqi, 2001. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle for 
Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 Lancaster, William.  The Rwala Bedouin Today . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1981. 
 Lewis, Bernard.  Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry . New York: 
 Oxford University Press, 1990. 
 Long, David E.  Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 
 Mabro, Judy.  Veiled Half-Truths: Western Travellers’ Perceptions of Middle Eastern Women . 
London: I. B. Tauris, 1991. 
 Mackey, Sandra.  The Saudis: Inside the Desert Kingdom . New York and Scarborough, ON, 
Canada: New American Library, 1987. 
 Malmignati, Countess.  Through Inner Deserts to Medina . London: Phillip Allan, 1925. 
 Melman, Billie.  Women’s Orients: English Women and the Middle East, 1718–1918 . Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992. 
 Nicholson, Reynard A.  A Literary History of the Arabs . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1977. (Originally published in 1907.) 
 Ochsenwald, William. “Muslim European Conﬂ ict in the Hijaz: The Slave Trade Controversy 
1840–1859.”  Middle Eastern Studies 16, no. 1 (1980), 115–126. 
 al-Rasheed, Madawi, and Robert Vitalis, eds.  Counternarratives: History, Contemporary So-
ciety, and Politics in Saudi Arabia and Yemen . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. 

| 217
 Rugh, William. “Emergence of a New Middle Class in Saudi Arabia.”  Middle East Journal 
27, no. 1 (Winter 1973), 9–20. 
 al-Sa’ud, Norah bint Muhammad, al-Jawhara Muhammad al-’Anqari, and Madeha Mu-
hammad al-’Atroush, eds.  Abha, Bilad Asir: Southwestern Region of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: By the editors, 1989. 
 Shehata, Talaat. “Abolition in Asia.” In  Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery , edited by 
Junius P. Rodriguez. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1997. 
 Al-Shetaiwi, Abdullah S. “Factors Aff ecting the Underutilisation of Qualiﬁ ed Saudi Women 
in the Saudi Private Sector.” PhD diss., Loughborough University, 2002. 
 Snouck Hurgronje, Christaan .  Mekka in the Latter Part of the Nineteenth Century, 1885–1889 . 
Translated by James Henry Monahan. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1931. (Reprinted in 
1970.) 
 2008 Annual Arab Public Opinion Poll. Survey of the Anwar Sadat Chair, University of 
Maryland with Zogby International. Conducted March 2008 in Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, 
Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. 
 Vidal, Frederico.  The Oasis of Al-Hasa . Vol. 2 of  Aramco Reports on Al-Hasa and Oman 
1950–1955  by William E. Mulligan, Frederico Vidal, and George S. Rentz. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Archive Editions, 1990. 
 Yamani, Maha A. Z.  Polygamy and Law in Saudi Arabia . Reading, UK: Ithaca, 2008. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Cradle of Islam: The Hijaz and the Quest for an Arabian Identity . London: 
I. B. Tauris, 2004. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Changed Identities: The Challenge of a New Generation in Saudi Arabia . Lon-
don: Royal Institute of International Aff airs, 2000. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Changing the Habits of a Lifetime: The Adaptation of Hejazi Dress to the New 
Social Order.” In  Languages of Dress in the Middle East , edited by Nancy Lindesfarne-
Tapper and Bruce Ingham. Richmond, UK: Curzon, 1997, 55–66. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Some Observations on Women in Saudi Arabia.” In  Feminism and Islam: Legal 
and Literary Perspectives , edited by Mai Yamani. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1996, 263–281. 
 Zain al-Abedin, Sohaila.  Bina’ al-usra al-Muslima . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-Dar Sa’udiyya 
li-Nashr wa-Tawzi’, 1984. 
 Zain al-Abedin, Sohaila.  Masirat al-mar’a al-Sa’udiyya ila ayna? Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-
Dar Sa’udiyya li-Nashr wa-Tawzi’, 1982. 
 Ze’evi, Dror. “Slavery.” In  Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World , edited by John Es-
posito. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995, 79–81. 
 Zirinsky, Roni.  Ad-Hoc Arabism: Advertising, Culture and Technology in Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Peter Lang, 2005. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Ideological and Motivational Factors in the Defusing of Radical Islamist Vio-
lence . Carlisle, PA, and Cairo: Institute of Middle Eastern, Islamic, and Strategic Studies, 
2010. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Considerations of Honor Crimes, FGM, Kidnapping/Rape and Early Mar-
riage in Selected Arab Nations.” Paper prepared for “Good Practices in Legislation to 
Address Harmful Practices against Women,” United Nations Division for the Advance-
ment of Women and United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia, May 25–28, 2009. 
References

 Chapter 5 Society
218 |
 Women and Marriage 
 When the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was proclaimed in 1932, women’s roles reﬂ ected 
the Arab cultural ideals of honor and the premodern gendered division of labor. In 
Arab societies, male honor is linked to women’s chastity and modesty. Women may 
bring shame on their entire family for violating gender norms. Therefore, women’s 
family members socialize them to strict norms and enforce these. Early, arranged, 
and endogamous marriages were preferred, and marriage is expected for both men 
and women. Men were active in the economic sphere, and women were responsible 
for home and family; however, women in bedouin groups still involved in herding, or 
those in agricultural communities, contributed their labor. Segregation from all men 
who are not closely related to women (a  mahram , one a woman cannot marry) is the 
ideal and the law. This custom was reﬂ ected in living patterns, customs, and the or-
ganization of work, but it came to be more strictly enforced later in the 20th century. 
 Saudi Arabia follows Islamic law, in particular, the Hanbali  madhhab , or school 
of Islam; a minority follow the Maliki  madhhab . Also resident in Saudi Arabia are 
Shi‘a and Isma‘ili Muslims who follow their own legal teachings. In all four existing 
schools of Sunni Islam and in Shi‘a Islam as well, men’s rights and responsibilities 
diff er from women’s. Men are the legal guardians of women and may restrict women 
from numerous activities unless they give permission. Based on custom and also 
Islamic law, the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia therefore reads: “The family is the basic 
unit of Saudi society and the guardian (male) should be obeyed” (Article 40). Women 
also possess rights under Islamic law. They keep their own names and control over 
any property that is theirs and need not cede or share this with their husbands. They 
have rights to divorce if men fail to support them economically and under certain 
other conditions, although they have not always had the ability to pursue their legal 
rights. Women have spiritual rights equal to men’s and religious duties. They are not 
supposed to be mistreated by their husbands, and they typically resorted to their own 
relatives to support them in such situations. Unfortunately, these relatives might not 
be supportive or economically capable of providing a refuge. 
 Due to the historic alliance of the Sa‘udi family and the religious elite, the deeply in-
grained cultural ideals of gender, and also a religious revival and offi  cial intensiﬁ cation 
of religious demeanor and rules that began in the 1980s, Saudi Arabian women have 
not been treated as equal citizens with men. They are not permitted to vote or stand for 
offi  ce. Only in 2009 was a woman appointed in a deputy ministerial post, and they are 
precluded from working in many occupations. They cannot drive, must cover their bod-
ies and hair in all public places, and cannot mix with unrelated men, with only certain 
exceptions. Conservatives have sought to restrict women’s ability even to approach the 
Ka‘ba at the  hajj , whereas women had previously been free to walk and pray alongside 
men while attending that ritual. Women have made strides in certain professional areas, 
particularly education and health, but due to the system of sex or gender segregation 
and tensions over women’s roles, this progress has not been without obstacles. 
 The history of women’s roles in Arabia is complex. The 19th-century scholar 
Robertson Smith proposed that the Arabian tribes showed evidence of matrilocal 

| 219
Women and Marriage
and matrilineal practices (Ahmed 1992, 43). In addition, there were even plural forms 
of marriage for women as well as men, something that Islam would end. The 20th-
century scholar Montgomery Watt suggested that the mercantile lifestyle and seden-
tarization of the tribes there had promoted a shift to patrilineality (1956, 272–273). 
Patrilineality is supported by marriage customs and rules of behavior introduced in 
the early Islamic community. These customs, such as women’s virginity until mar-
riage and strict ﬁ delity within it, ensure that off spring are indeed their father’s prog-
eny and deserve to inherit from them. Polygyny for men was restricted by Islamic 
rules to four legal wives, and these were to be equally treated and provided for. The 
men beneﬁ ted from multiple family alliances and additional off spring. 
 Women in ancient Arabia were essentially the property of their tribe, could be 
married without their consent, and had very limited rights in some groups (in oth-
ers, they had more power). A school of Western scholarship postulated that the shift 
to patrilineality and patrilocality had worsened women’s situation, as did the shift 
from a barter to a money economy and economic instability in periods of tribal strife. 
However, Islam addressed some harmful practices such as the exposure of female 
infants, forbidding it; Islam also speciﬁ ed that women had to assent to their mar-
riages and that society must uphold morality and control unlicensed sexual behavior. 
Women, who had been treated like chattle, gained particular rights under Islam, even 
though many contemporary non-Muslims view Islam as the factor impeding wom-
en’s agency. Segregation of women was adopted by the Prophet apparently under 
the inﬂ uence of surrounding societies like Byzantium, where it was practiced. Veiling 
was not new in Arabia in Muhammad’s day but was prevalent only among upper 
classes; it was required of Muhammad’s wives but not necessarily other women. In 
fact, historian Leila Ahmed points out that “she took the veil” was the phrase used 
to indicate that a woman had become the Prophet Muhammad’s wife in hadith lit-
erature (Ahmed 1992, 55). 
 The system of segregation by sex in Saudi Arabia is enforced by the religious police 
known as the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice , 
or  mutawa‘in . The  mutawa‘in are supposed to punish all visible violations of Islamic 
law, but in fact they have tended to focus on particular issues such as violations of 
women’s dress code or occasions that men and unrelated women might attend. As a 
journalist wryly noted, the  mutawa‘in  were not knocking on the doors of men who 
deny economic support to their dependents or who abuse their wives. Until 2006, 
when a Ministry of the Interior decree was issued, the  mutawa‘in could beat off enders 
or hold them and interrogate them in their own detention facilities. They might de-
mand to see a couple’s marriage license and arrest them if they lacked one. A foreign 
physician described a thwarted  mutawa‘in  raid during a mixed dinner organized for 
international guests of a medical symposium held in 2000 (Ahmad 2008, 227–247). 
I experienced  mutawa‘in harassment of women entering the Janadiriyya, at a folklore 
festival in 2005, on the day set for women’s attendance. Although the male  mutawa ‘ in 
could not enter the festival grounds, they congregated at the entrance to yell at and 
admonish women they considered improperly dressed, like one of our Western com-
panions. When I defended her and promised to buy her a proper covering, the very 
young  mutawa‘ in his short  thobe , wild hair, and facial expression turned on me and 

 Chapter 5 Society
220 |
complained in a thundering voice that my long skirt worn under my  abaya should 
be an inch longer (my  abaya and my skirt were ankle-length). At the Kingdom Mall, 
where a ﬂ oor is reserved for women, one could observe  mutawa‘in  crowding at the 
escalators on the ﬂ oors just above and below, to chastise women who had not cov-
ered up suffi  ciently. 
 During a ﬁ re at a girls’ school in Mecca in 2002, the  mutawa ‘ in prevented ﬁ reﬁ ght-
ers from entering as they feared the girls were not wearing their  abaya s. As a conse-
quence, 14 girls died, and 52 were injured. In an offi  cial reaction, the Majlis al-Shura 
reportedly balked at budget increases requested by the  mutawa ‘ in  and permitted 
trials to be held in several cases of alleged abuses in 2007. 
 International criticism of women’s status in Saudi Arabia may be met with de-
fensive statements that the country is diff erent from its Arab neighbors or the West. 
Some Saudi Arabian women observe that the government has given ambiguous mes-
sages about the degree of change it wants to promote for women. A longtime observer 
of the kingdom noted that older women’s facilities had not excluded men, whereas, 
now that separate facilities are created for women, they are certainly unequal to 
those for men. For example, women’s facilities at King Sa‘ud University were not 
equal—the women’s library was inconveniently located, communication with male 
professors occurred via telephone and television connections, and women’s prayer 
facilities were less handsome and not equivalent (Doumato 2000, 24). This has been 
a rationale for creating private and public universities restricted to women. 
 Fundamentalism, or neosalaﬁ sm, has inﬂ uenced the question of women’s roles in 
several directions. One example is Islamic feminists, who draw on Islamic thought 
GENDER EQUITY IN SAUDI ARABIA
Women fare poorly in Saudi Arabia as compared to men and women in 
other nations, ranking 129 out of 134 countries in 2010 (Gender Gap Index, 
2010). In 2009, Saudi Arabia’s gender gap ratio was 130.
The female-to-male ratio in the workforce is 22 women to 82 men. Saudi 
Arabia is ranked 132 (out of 134) and scored 0.27 on labor participation.
The female-to-male ratio for tertiary education (college) is high (37 women 
to 23 men). The country ranks ﬁ rst in this area.
Saudi Arabian women rank 65 (out of 134) for healthy life expectancy.
Their rank is 0 in all criteria for political empowerment (but the data have 
not taken account of the one female deputy minister appointed).
Women receive 10 weeks of maternity leave. Ninety-one percent of births 
are attended by medical staff. Saudi Arabia received the worst score (1) for 
paternal versus maternal authority and (lack of) existence of legislation allow-
ing acts of violence against women.
Source: Ricardo Hausmann, Laura D. Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi, The Global Gender 
Gap Report. Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2010, 262–263.

Women and Education | 221
and have created study circles to obtain access to religious knowledge (Mai Yamani 
1996, 263–264). Also, many Saudi Arabian women eschew any desire for enhanced 
rights for women, like driving or additional work opportunities, as they oppose 
Westernization. These women call for stricter covering, including covering of the 
face, and enhanced Islamic education (Mai Yamani 1996, 279–280). Some neosalaf-
ists favor greater political participation for their male supporters but not for their 
female sympathizers. 
 WOMEN AND EDUCATION 
 Schools for women and girls outside their homes were at ﬁ rst controversial and were 
opposed by some of the  ‘ulama on the grounds that this would lead to Westerniza-
tion and the abandonment of women’s domestic duties. However, women’s educa-
tion was strongly supported by Queen Iff at, King Faysal, other moderates in the 
government, and middle-class men who outspokenly defended women’s education 
(al-Baadi 1982). Queen Iff at, who had ﬁ rst established a model school to educate her 
own sons at Ta’if, provided land and funds for a girls’ school in 1956 as an orphan-
age, the Dar al-Hanan. Some Jeddah families enrolled their daughters (Lacey 1981, 
364–366), and the small school eventually served 1,300 students. Queen Iff at opened 
King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (center) laws the cornerstone for the Princess 
Norah bint Abdulrahman University in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia in 2008. This will be the larg-
est women's university in the world, able to accomodate 40,000 students. (AP/Wide World 
Photos)

 Chapter 5 Society
222 |
a teacher-training school in Riyadh to prepare staff  for the girls’ schools that were 
established, even though enrollment was very low; in 1960, only 2 percent of girls and 
20 percent of boys were enrolled (“Education,” in Metz, ed., 1993, 97). Enrollment 
increased substantially, doubling by 1990 and then doubling again in the next decade. 
The female literacy rate, which had been only 2 percent, had risen to 48 percent in 
1990 (Doumato 1993, 96). The female illiteracy rate is currently about 30 percent 
( CIA World Factbook 2009 ). For many years, female education was the responsibility 
of the  ‘ulama -controlled Directorate General of Girl’s Education rather than under 
the Ministry of Education, which supervised boys’ education. Despite protests by 
conservatives, women’s and girls’ education has been restored to the appropriate 
ministry (the Ministry of Education). Women’s matriculation   from secondary edu-
cation outstripped men’s. In undergraduate educational settings, boys were able to 
participate in sports and physical education courses, but girls could not. Girls had 
fewer opportunities for higher education and currently are not permitted to work 
in certain ﬁ elds, such as engineering, law, and journalism, nor are women active in 
military science, strategic studies, or foreign policy, although they could contribute 
to research in these ﬁ elds even with work restrictions. 
 RESTRICTIONS 
 The religious leadership had agreed that women could be employed but only in seg-
regated environments. However, other rules were imposed on women even as more 
attained education and professional standing. The Libyan anthropologist, the late 
Saddeka Arebi noted that in the 1970s the  ‘ulama began to often speak and theo-
rize about women’s “deﬁ ciencies” on the basis of biology. These  ‘ulama included 
the mufti of Saudi Arabia, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Baz (Arebi 1994, 18), who issued a 
 fatwa  claiming women are deﬁ cient in reason and religion. Some of these views 
are also expressed in  fatawa  by members of the Permanent Council for Scientiﬁ c 
Research and Legal Opinions, which claim that a woman invalidates the prayers 
of men if she passes in front of him or follows the imam at the Grand Mosque in 
Mecca (issued by Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahim al-‘Uthaymin). Other  fatawa state that men 
may beat their wives (lightly) and that a husband can forbid his wife from visiting 
her family (Saleh b. Fawzan). Another says women are the majority of those in 
hell (al-Uthaymim), and yet another expresses doubt that university education is 
needed for women, as marriage is preferable (see these opinions in Abou El Fadl 
2001, 272–297). 
 New rules to prevent women from traveling abroad or conducting business with-
out a male representative from their family were imposed following the uprising at 
the Grand Mosque in 1979. Women working as secretaries were ﬁ red, recreational 
areas established diff erent hours for men and women, organizations that had in-
cluded Saudi Arabians and foreigners were disallowed, Western music was not to be 
played in shops, women newsreaders stopped appearing on television at that time, 
and in some places beauty salons were shut down (Doumato 2000, 12–15). Govern-
ment scholarships for women declined. Even when women could travel abroad for 

Employment | 223
advanced studies, women’s families often expected them to agree to marry prior to 
their departure to protect the family’s reputation (Ahmad 2008). 
 EXPANSION 
 Following the cessation of Saudi Arabian student travel to the United States fol-
lowing the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, it resumed in 2007, and female 
students are traveling to the United States, the United Kingdom, and other countries 
for study, although they are supposed to be supervised by a male guardian. The gov-
ernment has opened more colleges for women in the kingdom in the last 20 years. 
King Sa‘ud University created a women’s branch and excluded women only from 
engineering, and King Faisal University and King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz University admit-
ted women. Universities that off er religious education also enroll women, such as 
the Imam Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamic University and Umm al-Qura University. 
The newly created King Abdullah University for Science and Technology enrolls 
men and women. When a religious offi  cial objected to this, he was removed from of-
ﬁ ce. In 2011, the largest women-only university, Princess Norah bint Abdulrahman 
University, was inaugurated and will have space for as many as 40,000 students. If 
the college off ers courses of study in more traditionally male-dominated ﬁ elds, it will 
greatly beneﬁ t women. For example, other Arab and Middle Eastern women have 
moved into all areas of engineering, but Saudi Arabian women have not yet been 
permitted to work in petroleum engineering. 
 EMPLOYMENT 
 The separation of the sexes has enabled the ﬁ elds of education and health care to 
employ many women; however, in the latter ﬁ eld, foreign nurses outnumbered Saudi 
Arabian nurses. Saudization, a policy intended to enhance the employment of nation-
als, is supposed to be addressing this problem, but other policies and practices that 
shape women’s lives are also impeding Saudization. Due to segregation, women’s 
banks operate, which has allowed for an additional employment area (AlMunajjed 
1997, 91–121; Doumato 2000, 16). 
 Saudi Arabia has the lowest female employment rate of any country. The three 
necessary conditions of need, ability, and opportunity are not met. Although there 
was a need for workers, large numbers of foreign workers were ﬁ nanced, even though 
this was recognized as a social and national problem (Hijab 1988, 137). 
 If women were permitted to participate in politics and in areas of the national 
government now closed to them, this would open another arena for them in both an 
economic and a political sense. Women in the past occasionally held political power. 
Burckhardt, the well-known European traveler to the Middle East, chronicled the role 
of an older woman, Ghalya, who governed the Begoums (1831, 268–269). Women 
were also employed in traditional services and arts, for instance, as midwives and 
healers who read the Qur’an (Doumato 2000) and as women musicians (Campbell 
in Zuhur, ed., 1998). However, women worked much more widely in the past than 

 Chapter 5 Society
224 |
is apparent from sources, for example, in the agriculture of ‘Unayzah and also as 
merchants and moneylenders in the  suq al-harim , or women’s area of the market 
(Altorki and Cole 1989, 142–161). 
 Likewise, women’s wages have become important to families and have inﬂ uenced 
social interactions and decision making, and women have greater responsibilities for 
supporting their families (Altorki and Cole 1989, 202–207). This is so even though 
segregation permitted women to work only in certain salaried sectors, whereas ser-
vice positions were largely restricted to men. Offi  cially, the government projected 
that the female labor rate would increase at a higher rate (6.9 percent) than men’s 
(4.5 percent) as it moved into the Fifth Development Plan (AlMunajjed 1997, 84–85). 
However, diffi  culties arise in combining marriage and work. Women have additional 
costs; for example, they must employ a driver. These factors, in addition to severe 
limitations on the types of jobs available to women, have impeded progress in ex-
panding women’s share of the workforce. In 2009, the Ministry of Foreign Aff airs 
was still closed to women, although it had been publicly announced that women 
would be allowed to work there; that announcement was followed by the statement 
that they might at least begin to work there as secretaries. This exclusion means that 
Saudi Arabia is represented internationally by men, even on United Nations com-
mittees concerning women’s rights. Women are excluded from employment in the 
defense sector and in defense or strategic planning, although there are special women 
guards and police utilized at special women-only events and at the airports. 
 Aramco has employed women, although only about one-tenth of those employees 
 were Saudi Arabians in the 1990s. Prince Walid, a highly successful businessman, 
employs women in his own industries in positions they cannot ﬁ ll elsewhere in Saudi 
Arabia, including the job of pilot. In his Kingdom Mall, one ﬂ oor is exclusively for 
women, and several women-owned businesses are located there. I met there with a 
group of businesswomen and other professional women in 2005 who spoke of their 
own pathways to professional success or activism. Many explained that they have had 
family support. They do not see themselves as exceptional, even though navigation 
of their tasks and business with government offi  ces is more complicated than for men 
due to the prevailing rules. Women are also sponsoring training programs and the 
production of traditional Saudi Arabian arts and crafts (Fernea 1998, 240). However, 
even the most illogical service positions are held by men, for example, the selling of 
women’s underwear, some four years after the minister of labor, Dr. Ali Quseibi, ﬁ rst 
called for women to be allowed to sell these items to other women. Reem Assad, a 
college lecturer, has campaigned for women to enter this occupation ( Saudiwoman’s 
Blog , 2010), and by June 2011 it was announced that they would be able to do so. 
 RULES AND EXPECTATIONS 
 Women are expected to be virgins at marriage and obtain a larger  mahr (bride price) 
as a virgin. This custom has several eff ects: It encourages strict control over the sexual 
and social behavior of young women, and it has led to a certain amount of abuse 
of women’s free consent to marriage, which is supposedly guaranteed in Islam, and 

Guardianship and Marriage | 225
to unions with a signiﬁ cant diff erence in age and power. If a woman were known or 
rumored to have been sexually active, she could certainly not marry well. If a woman 
who married later divorced and then wanted to remarry, she would lose custody of 
her children and also receive a lower  mahr . Women would object to their sons’ mar-
riage to a divorced woman, a foreign woman, and, possibly, an employed woman. 
 The custom of female circumcision, usually called female genital mutilation 
(FGM) in the West, has occurred historically and in contemporary Saudi Arabia. It is 
not clear why some groups practiced it, such as the Manasir, the al-Murrah, Qahtan, 
Bani Hajir, al-Saar, and ‘Ajman, and those in Hasa, according to both historical 
and more modern sources (Philby 1933, 81–82; Doumato 2000, 190–194). It is also 
unclear why Saudi Arabian offi  cials deny that it is practiced or claim that only im-
migrants (Africans) practice it. This custom,  tahara , is considered to be purifying and 
to diminish women’s sexual urges. Female circumcision has several forms; the more 
severe version, including inﬁ bulation, was described by St. John Philby’s interlocutor 
(1933). Some do not consider form 1, a partial cliterodectomy, to be FGM, calling 
it instead Islamic or sunnah circumcision. A Saudi Arabian pediatric surgeon dif-
ferentiated this kind of “Islamic circumcision,” claiming that it did not hurt women 
and that he commonly performed it (Akeel 2005). A study of 260 women at King 
Abdulaziz University Hospital from 2007 to 2008 found that half of the women had 
been subjected to FGM; however, critics of that study claimed immigrant women 
were included (Zuhur 2009;  Guardian , November 13, 2008). 
 GUARDIANSHIP 
 Women’s social reputations are the concern of their guardians, ﬁ rst their father or 
other male relative, then their husband, and, if they are widowed, their sons. Various 
rules and regulations restrict women’s access to public procedures, courts, medical 
treatment, and travel based on the guardian’s permission. Women cannot be admit-
ted to a hospital, examined, or provided a surgical procedure, even elective surgery, 
without the guardian’s permission (Mobaraki and Soderfeldt 2010). Women cannot 
travel without a guardian. A Saudi Arabian feminist, Wajiha al-Huweider, tested this 
rule, trying to cross into Bahrain weekly (Human Rights Watch 2009). On the other 
hand, Saudi Arabian women had been going on the  ‘umrah pilgrimage without a 
male guardian since the late 1970s. They are supposed to sacriﬁ ce an additional ani-
mal as compensation for breaking this rule (Altorki 1986, 45). A guardian’s consent 
is required for issuance of a photo identiﬁ cation card. The lack of these cards was 
one reason cited for women’s exclusion from voting in 2005. 
 GUARDIANSHIP AND MARRIAGE 
 Saudi Arabian women expect to marry, and because of the prevalence of polygamy, 
they may be willing to become a second wife rather than remain unmarried. When 
married, they obtain higher social status and usually (but not always) a greater de-
gree of freedom than unmarried women have. Spinsters and bachelors live with and 

 Chapter 5 Society
226 |
sometimes care for aging parents or other relatives, and they are seen as exceptions. 
To live alone would ruin a Saudi Arabian woman’s reputation. 
 A woman’s guardian is involved in arranging her marriage and represents her in 
the engagement and marriage ceremonies, in which a contract is signed. Guardianship 
impacts women’s behavior in many ways. A woman’s father is her  wali (guardian), 
and if he should die, then the responsibility to support her, arrange her marriage, and 
preserve her honor falls on her brother. Once she is married, her husband assumes 
rights by which he can restrict her from working, going out of the house, or studying, 
but she still has responsibilities to her natal family. If her husband dies, leaving her 
widowed, her son should support her and becomes her guardian. The concept has 
been protested by external groups such as Human Rights Watch, because it limits 
women’s legal rights, reducing women to the status of minors. 
 Guardianship also impacts the social structures by which marriages are arranged 
and women’s negotiations to work, study, and visit friends. By the 1970s, social at-
titudes were already changing. Earlier, women might not have been consulted about 
their marriage; their family members and the groom, or the groom’s family members, 
would arrange the union. This was the case even though women had a formal right 
to assent to or reject a husband. Women played an active role in ﬁ nding husbands 
for their unmarried daughters. Middle-aged and older men and women deeply disap-
proved of any potential bride who looked for a husband on her own or who rejected 
a suitor, even if she was older than the customary age for a bride (Altorki 1986, 86). 
Marriage usually brought a degree of freedom for the new wife. Altorki described a 
case where a mother threatened her son with her anger ( ghadab ) and left the house 
when her son rejected a marriage proposal extended to his 35-year-old sister. Her son 
wanted his sister to continue assisting in the raising of his own children. Typically, a 
woman’s interests are pursued only by her mother or another married sibling (Altorki 
1986, 87), and sometimes by her father. 
 The system of guardianship might be abused for economic as well as social rea-
sons, because the bride is supposed to receive the marriage payment called a  mahr 
(bride price). Retaining that wealth is supposed to be one of the purposes of  bint 
‘amm marriage—a man’s marriage to his father’s brother’s daughter or to a second 
cousin from the father’s lineage. For the elite, as Madawi al-Rasheed has shown in 
her study of her own family, there are other reasons for tribal endogamy: developing 
political alliances and maintaining hierarchies while healing political divisions (Al-
Rasheed 1991, 184–200). 
 In 2008, a Saudi Arabian man married off  his eight-year-old daughter to a 47-year-
old man to have his debts forgiven. His wife sought an annulment, which a Saudi 
Arabian judge refused to grant ( CNN.com , January 17, 2009). More recently, the 
girl’s mother retracted her case when her husband, who had left her during the dis-
pute, returned to her. The judge’s argument was that the girl herself could call for a 
divorce when she was old enough (18) and that it was legal to marry off  a girl who 
had reached puberty. The Saudi Arabian government responded to the international 
outcry about the case by saying it may enact a child marriage law. 
 The ﬁ nancial requirements of marriage can delay marriage for men, who must 
work and save for the celebration, bride price, dwelling, and gifts. In the past, a 

Social Equivalence and Polygyny | 227
couple might not meet each other before their arranged marriage. It has become more 
acceptable for them to do so today. In Saudi Arabia, the rate of consanguineous 
marriage (to a close relative, a second cousin or closer, usually a ﬁ rst cousin) is very 
high, at 57.7 percent nationally (El-Hazmi et al. 1995); and other studies indicate it 
is 51.2 percent in Riyadh (Al Hussain and Al Bunyan 1997) and 52 percent in Dam-
mam (al-Abdulkareem and Ballal 1998). Consanguinity in marriage is thought to 
protect women’s rights. It may, however, make it more diffi  cult for women to obtain 
divorces. Men may marry relatives under pressure from their families and then seek 
a second wife outside the family circle. There are public health consequences, because 
genetic diseases lead to higher rates of infant mortality (18.5 per 1,000 in 2005). Some 
1.5 million Saudi Arabians either have or are carriers of inherited blood disorders; 
one is the beta-thalassemia trait (Mobaraki and Soderfeldt 2010). Thalassemia is an 
autosomal recessive blood disease that causes anemia. The beta variant is found in 
peoples of the Mediterranean. Some Saudi Arabian researchers have disputed the 
high rates of genetically related diseases, apparently examining diff erent diseases, 
such as Down’s syndrome and type 1 diabetes, but nonetheless admit a higher rate 
of congenital heart disease among children of consanguineous marriages (El Mouzan 
et al. 2008). 
 SOCIAL EQUIVALENCE AND POLYGYNY 
 It is thought that women should marry men whose level of education and status is 
equivalent to their own. There are many unmarried women of elite status, including 
in the royal family. Polygyny (up to four wives for men) is permitted under Islamic 
law and is often justiﬁ ed by saying that since no relationships can take place outside 
of marriage, this controls social mores. A Saudi Arabian man who had married six 
women was arrested and punished. However, it is obvious that polygyny (often re-
ferred to as polygamy) impacts women more negatively than men. Some arguments 
in favor of polygyny are that there are proportionally more women than men, which 
is untrue; that men whose wives are infertile or ill have a right to another wife to 
produce off spring; or that men simply view it as a male privilege necessary because 
men’s sex drives are stronger than women’s (which is also untrue from a medical and 
physiological stance). The practice impacts fertility rates and discourages the use of 
contraception. Women may bear children to preserve their marriages. Then, they 
may also have a more diffi  cult time in the labor market as employment is more com-
plicated for women caring for larger families. The major argument against polygyny 
is that Islam requires men to treat their wives equally; however, that is not necessarily 
possible from a psychological or material standpoint (Maha Yamani 2008). 
 The United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women opposes polygyny 
in Saudi Arabia, viewing it as a source of gender inequity. It is believed to be a major 
reason for divorce in Saudi Arabia. Typically, a ﬁ rst wife divorces her husband for 
taking a new wife. While Saudi Arabian women may oppose polygyny, some, like the 
writer Sohaila Zain al-Abedin, support polygyny, because Islam allows it; however, 
she does oppose the ways men abuse it (Arebi 1994, 240). 

 Chapter 5 Society
228 |
 Because divorce can bring stigma and become women will likely lose custody of their 
children or are economically vulnerable, more women agree, willingly or not, to the 
introduction of a second wife than one might expect. Public writing critical of polygyny 
has been increasing. Polygyny ensures women’s compliancy and is a source of mental 
anguish or poor emotional health. A Saudi journalist, Nadine al-Badair, recently lam-
pooned the practice in an article about her right to marry four husbands, taking a new 
one when she tired of the old ones (al-Badair 2009). She could not have published the 
article in Saudi Arabia, and conservatives in Egypt, where it was published, attacked it. 
 DIVORCE 
 Women may divorce men, but the procedure is much more diffi  cult than when men 
initiate divorce in Saudi Arabia. There is a stigma against divorce for both men and 
women; it is nearly unthinkable for the older generation, and relatives may try to 
convince a couple not to divorce. The male-initiated divorce takes place with a verbal 
formula and does not require a reason, and he can go later and register the divorce. 
Such a divorce is revocable. A judge must grant women a divorce if they initiate it, 
and the grounds for divorce are very limited. Women may not obtain alimony under 
Islamic law, but they do have the right to the deferred portion of their  mahr (bride 
price) if the man has initiated the divorce. A man is supposed to pay for his wife’s 
and any young children’s maintenance for three months, after which the divorce is 
ﬁ nal. Thereafter, she is not entitled to any money from him, and he is likely to obtain 
custody of all but very young children. If a woman has initiated the divorce, she isn’t 
entitled to any property or income that is in his name, and she may have to return the 
 mahr and any marriage gifts, no matter how long they were married. 
 Some think that Muhammad ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s ideas about women and marriage 
were no stricter than any other form of classical Islamic thought (Delong-Bas 2004, 
159–163). However, others believe they were, as he gained fame when he stoned a 
woman to death who had admitted illicit relations with a man. However, the only 
type of divorce that ‘Abd al-Wahhab permitted women to initiate was  khul‘ , which 
requires them to give up their  mahr (Delong-Bas 2004, 184–185). Women typically lose 
the custody of their children under Hanbali law and the local judicial interpretation 
when a boy reaches the age of seven and a girl the age of nine or when the girl becomes 
sexually mature. 
 Because of the disadvantages women experience in divorce, and the fact that most 
men will not take a divorced woman as a single wife, a large number of couples choose 
to separate without divorcing. However, if this happens, the man may take another 
wife, and yet the separated wife is not free to establish a new life. Divorces have been 
increasing over the last decade, and some sources report that as many as 30 percent of 
marriages end in divorce, mostly in the ﬁ rst few years; the most common reason for 
divorce is that the husband wants to marry an additional wife. In November 2008, 
a public meeting about the stigma and diffi  culties of divorce was held in Dammam 
called the Saudi Divorce Initiative Forum (American Bedu,  http://americanbedu.com/
2009/02/08/saudi-arabia-you-asked-american-bedu-answers/ February 8, 2009). 

Dress | 229
 ABUSE 
 Physical abuse of women by men in Saudi Arabia is an enormous problem. The sub-
ject was rarely broached in public, but in April 2004, the husband of Rania al-Baz, 
a pretty television announcer on the program  The Kingdom This Morning , beat her 
until he thought she was dead and left her outside a hospital. Al-Baz decided to ap-
pear onscreen to show her fractured and swollen face and later was able to obtain a 
divorce from her husband ( Sunday Times , October 16, 2005) and documented her ex-
perience in a book (al-Baz 2009). Women were often treated medically and then sent 
home since it has been considered acceptable for men to abuse their wives physically 
and also verbally or emotionally. Because divorce is diffi  cult for women to obtain, it 
is hard for battered women to ﬁ nd a solution. The government responded to the al-
Baz case with Royal Decree No. 11471, which established a National Family Safety 
Program to provide some services to victims. 
 RAPE 
 In 2006, a young woman, referred to as the Girl from Qatif, was raped by a group of 
men. She had been attempting to reclaim a photograph that a male acquaintance had 
obtained from her since she had become engaged to a diff erent man. He said he would 
not give it to her unless she came to meet him. Once in his car, the two of them were 
captured and raped by a group of men. But the judge sentenced her and her male com-
panion to lashings for defying the law against men and women being alone together. 
When her lawyer appealed, the judge doubled the sentence against them and rescinded 
her lawyer’s license. After the incident, the rapists tried to blackmail her family and 
her intended groom. She obtained justice because her groom’s uncle took the matter to 
the governor of the Eastern Province. King ‘Abdullah pardoned the girl and the man 
with her who had also been raped, and her lawyer was given back his license. Sadly, 
the scandal was too much for the young man to whom she was engaged, whose family 
pressured him to leave the girl, although he stood by her during the trial (Lacey 2009, 
305–315). A similar case involved a woman in Jeddah, who was impregnated during 
a gang rape. She was convicted of  zina’ , although the sentence was postponed until 
she gave birth. Then, she was to receive 100 lashes and spend a year in prison. She too 
had been lured to the location of the rape by getting into a car with a man, and that 
action alone made her guilty from the judge’s perspective. As rapists typically argue 
that their victims are engaging in consensual sex, gang rape is the preferred scenario 
for the men involved as conviction for  zina’ requires statements by eyewitnesses . 
 DRESS 
 The most ubiquitous symbol of Saudi women’s requirement to observe modesty is 
the black ‘ abaya , which must be worn from entry to the country in all public places. 
The ‘ abaya covers a woman’s clothing and may be decorated with embroidery, satin, 
or sequins. It is worn with a black head covering called a  shayla . Some women wear 

 Chapter 5 Society
230 |
 hijab under the  shayla , and others do not. When women are in a private or segregated 
space, they may remove the ‘ abaya . Women are expected to dress more modestly 
than in other countries, even under their outer covering, but not all do. Some also 
cover their hair, legs, forearms, and wear higher necklines and long sleeves, whereas 
others wear more revealing, or tightly-ﬁ tted clothing which cannot be seen in public 
places.
 SERVANTS 
 Women employ servants or household help more frequently than in the West. Given 
the domestic expectations of women, this additional source of labor is crucial for 
working women, but it presents some additional problems. Many servants and 
household workers are contracted employees from Asian countries but not all of 
them. People are expected to hire household labor if they can aff ord to do so. Fami-
lies should entertain and provide food for guests, and in some cases the extended 
family is served meals; in other situations there are multiple families living in a home 
or compound. Public discussion tends to blame women for abandoning their domes-
tic duties; particularly child raising, whether women are actually dedicated parents 
or not. There are also situations where domestic labor is exploited; international 
organizations have urged reforms in this area. 
 Saudi Arabian authors write about the trials of women’s condition in an out-
spoken way, as do reporters, and many people—men and women—have published 
letters in the newspapers about women’s issues. Yet Saudi Arabians do not want 
to lose the unique and closely woven family ties that buttress their social structure, 
and authorities have rejected many of the international human rights standards that 
apply to women. The United Nations special rapporteur on violence against women, 
Yakin Ertürk, visited Saudi Arabia in February 2008 and urged changes in the king-
dom’s legal framework to uphold international human rights standards and include 
a law criminalizing violence against women as well as family law principles that 
recognize these standards. 
 REFERENCES 
 Al-Abdulkareem, A. A., and S. G. Ballal. “Consanguineous Marriages in an Urban Area of 
Saudi Arabia: Rates and Adverse Health eff ects on the Off spring.”  Journal of Community 
Health 23 (1998), 75–83. 
 Abou El Fadl, Khalid.  Speaking in God’s Name: Islamic Law, Authority and Women . Oxford, 
UK: Oneworld, 2001. 
 Ahmad, Qanta.  In the Land of Invisible Women: A Female Doctor’s Journey in the Saudi King-
dom . Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, 2008. 
 Ahmed, Leila.  Women and Gender in Islam . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. 
 Akeel, Mona. “Female Circumcisions: Weight of Tradition Perpetuates a Dangerous Prac-
tice.”  Arab News , March 20, 2005. 
 AlMunajjed, Mona.  Women in Saudi Arabia Today . Houndmills, UK: Macmillan, 1997. 

| 231
References
 Altorki, Soraya. “Sisterhood and Stewardship in Sister-Brother Relations in Saudi Arabia.” 
In Nicholas Hopkins, ed. “The New Arab Family.” Special issue of  Cairo Papers in Social 
Science 24, nos. 1–2 (2003), 180–200. 
 Altorki, Soraya.  Women in Saudi Arabia: Ideology and Behavior among the Elite . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 Altorki, Soraya, and Donald P. Cole.  Arabian Oasis City: The Transformation of ‘Unayzah . 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. 
 American Bedu (Web-blog). “Saudi Arabia: You Asked. American Bedu Answers.” February 9, 
2009. http://americanbedu.com/2009/02/08/saudi-arabia-you-asked-american-bedu-answers/ 
 Arebi, Saddeka.  Women and Words in Saudi Arabia: The Politics of Literary Discourse . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 
 Al-Baadi, Hamad Muhammad. “Social Change, Education, and the Roles of Women in Ara-
bia.” PhD diss., Stanford University, 1982. 
 al-Badair, Nadine. “Ana wa Azawaja Arba’ah” [Me and My Four Husbands].  Masry al-Yom , 
November 11, 2009. http://www.almasry-alyoum.com/article2.aspx?ArticleID=236320&I
ssueID=1616 
 Bagader, Abu Bakr, Ava M. Heinrichsdorff , and Deborah S. Akers, eds. and trans.  Voices 
of Change: Short Stories by Saudi Arabian Women Writers . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 
1998. 
 al-Baz, Rania.  Disﬁ gured: A Saudi Woman’s Story of Triumph over Violence . Translated by 
Catherine Spencer. Northampton, MA: Olive Branch, 2009. 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis.  Notes on the Bedouin and the Wahabys . London: Henry Coburn and 
Richard Bentley, 1831. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment: Visual and Performing Arts of the Middle East. Cairo and New 
York: American University in Cairo Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 Campbell, Matthew. “Interview: Matthew Campbell Meets Rania al-Baz.”  Sunday Times , 
October 16, 2005. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/article578853.ece 
 Delong-Bas, Natana.  Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella. “The Society and Its Environment.” In  Saudi Arabia: A Country 
Study , edited by Helen Chapin Metz, Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. 
Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1993. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella.  Getting God’s Ear: Women, Islam and Healing in Saudi Arabia 
and the Gulf . New York: Columbia University Press, 2000. 
 Al-Ghadeer, Moneera.  Desert Voices: Bedouin Women’s Poetry in Saudi Arabia . London: 
Tauris Academic Studies, 2009. 
 Hamdan, Amani. “Women and Education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges and Achievements.” 
 International Education Journal 6, no. 1 (2005), 42–64. 
 El-Hazmi, M. A., A. R. Al-Swailem, A. S. Warsy, et al. “Consanguinity among the Saudi 
Arabian Population.”  Medical Genetics 32 (1995), 623–626. 
 Hijab, Nadia.  Womanpower: The Arab Debate on Women at Work . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988. 

 Chapter 5 Society
232 |
 Human Rights Watch. “Saudi Arabia: Women’s Rights Promises Broken. Evidence Shows 
Male Permission Still Being Required for Surgery, Travel.” July 8, 2009. http://www.hrw
.org/en/news/2009/07/08/saudi-arabia-women-s-rights-promises-broken 
 Al Hussain, M., and M. Al Bunyan. “Consanguineous Marriages in a Saudi Population and 
the Eff ect of Inbreeding on Perinatal and Postnatal Mortality.”  Annual Review of Tropical 
Paediatrics 17 (1997), 155–160. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle for 
Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 Mobaraki, A.E.H., and B. Soderfeldt. “Gender Inequity in Saudi Arabia and Its Role in Pub-
lic Health.”  Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal 16, no. 1 (January 2010). 
 El Mouzan, M. L, A. A. Al Salloum, A. S. Al Herbish, M. M. Qurachi, and A. A. Al Omar. 
“Consanguinity and Major Genetic Disorders in Saudi Children: A Community-Based 
Cross-sectional study.”  Annual of Saudi Medicine 228 (2008), 69–73. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  The Empty Quarter: Being a Description of the Great South 
Desert of Arabia Known as Rub' al Khali . London: Constable & Company, 1933. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi.  Politics in an Arabian Oasis: The Rashidi Tribal Dynasty . London: I. B. 
Tauris, 1991. 
 el-Sanabary, Najat. “Women and the Nursing Profession in Saudi Arabia.” In  Arab Women: Be-
tween Deﬁ ance and Restraint , edited by Suha Sabbagh. New York: Olive Branch, 1996, 71–83. 
 Saudiwoman’s Blog. http://saudiwoman.wordpress.com/ 
 Al-Shetaiwi, Abdullah S. “Factors Aff ecting the Underutilisation of Qualiﬁ ed Saudi Women 
in the Saudi Private Sector.” PhD diss., Loughborough University, 2002. 
 Watt, W. Montgomery.  Muhammad at Medina . Oxford, UK: Clarendon, 1956. 
 Yamani, Maha A. Z.  Polygamy and Law in Saudi Arabia . Reading, UK: Ithaca, 2008. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Muslim Women and Human Rights in Saudi Arabia: Aspirations of a New 
Generation.” In  The Rule of Law in the Middle East and the Islamic World: Human Rights 
and the Judicial Process , edited by Eugene Cotran and Mai Yamani. London: Tauris, in 
association with the Centre of Islamic Studies and Middle Eastern Law, SOAS, University 
of London, 2000. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Some Observations on Women in Saudi Arabia.” In  Feminism and Islam: 
Legal and Literary Perspectives , edited by Mai Yamani. Reading, UK: Ithaca, 1996. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Considerations of Honor Crimes, FGM, Kidnapping/Rape and Early Mar-
riage in Selected Arab Nations.” Paper prepared for the Expert Group Meeting on “Good 
Practices in Legislation to Address Harmful Practices against Women,” United Nations 
Division for the Advancement of Women and United Nations Economic Commission for 
Africa, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, May 25–28, 2009. 
 Education 
 Education in premodern Arabia took place within the family; in the  kuttab , or 
Qur’anic school; and in the  madrasah , an Islamic academy usually founded through 

Overview | 233
a  waqf  (endowment; see Glossary). Not everyone was literate, yet many memorized 
part or all of the Qur’an, and a lengthy tradition of oral literature, poetry,  storytelling, 
and oracular display continued into the 20th century. Medina had attracted scholars 
of Islamic learning for centuries. As the Wahhabi reform movement grew, the ﬁ elds 
of Islamic learning were impacted by the transition within the scholarly class, and 
their concerns also shaped education after the country’s uniﬁ cation by Ibn Sa‘ud. 
 No formal separation was thought necessary between the learning of sciences or 
other nonreligious material and knowledge of religious material. Vocational learn-
ing came about through apprenticing and performance. The relationship of educa-
tion and childhood was also conceived of diff erently than in our own time. Young 
children were treated aff ectionately in Arabian culture; they were valued because 
they carried on the lineage and brought prestige to their parents. Yet many families 
desperately needed income, and children had to assist with their livelihood, running 
errands or working full-time. 
 Childhood was a period in which to learn values and manners ( adab ). Children 
learned their own lineage and acquired information about the values supported by 
the Prophet Muhammad; ﬁ rst among those were respect and kindness for one’s par-
ents. Children are taught that the Prophet Muhammad was consistently kind to 
children, orphans, and animals (Yamani   in Fernea, ed., 1995, 121). 
 OVERVIEW 
 Saudi Arabia provides free public education through the national system, and private 
education is also available. Saudi Arabia has largely replaced traditional  madaris (the 
plural of  madrasah , the secondary level of education, or an Islamic academy) with mod-
ern schools and universities with an Islamized curriculum. Islamic knowledge is taught 
at the primary and secondary levels; in universities, courses in Islamic studies are taught 
over all four years of the program to reinforce the principles already learned. At the Is-
lamic University of Madinah, the subjects are similar to those in the historical  madaris , 
but instruction is delivered through modern teaching methods. In the formation of the 
national educational system, some institutions were intended to focus on modern sciences 
and knowledge, and preparation for such studies was provided throughout the arts and 
sciences curriculum, without neglecting the students’ religious or moral development. 
 Boys’ education had been established prior to the creation of Saudi Arabia; in 
1901, the Falah schools were established by Hajji Abdullah Alireza. These private 
schools were endowed by Alireza and were tuition-free (Lacey 1981, 188). In the 
Hijaz, then a province of the Ottoman Empire, there were 78 public elementary 
schools by 1915. The ﬁ rst governmental school under the authority of the al-Sa‘ud 
was set up in 1925, with schools thereafter multiplying as the demand for education 
rose; there were 20,000 students by 1949 (Nyrop 1977, 98–99; Dohaish 1978). As 
education expanded, it served as an equalizer between regions and social groups. 
 Arguments about girls’ education were similar to those launched in the West be-
fore the widespread establishment of girls’ schools—that it was unnecessary to their 
future as wives and mothers and that schools would damage their morals.  Proponents 

 Chapter 5 Society
234 |
of women’s education argued that Islam encourages the pursuit of knowledge; that 
women would be better wives, mothers, and members of society if they were edu-
cated; and that they, in turn, could teach other women. Princess Iff at al-Thunayan 
and King Faysal organized the Dar al-Hanan school for girls in 1955; the direc-
tor was Cecil Roushdie, who remained for many years. Eventually, public schools 
for girls were established under the authority of the General Presidency for Girl’s 
Education, beginning in 1964, and girls’ schools were built throughout the country 
by the 1990s. Private and public schools had to be coordinated under the General 
Presidency for Girl’s Education, whose senior leadership was the  ‘ulama (religious 
scholars). This was thought to help with criticism by ultraconservatives since the 
religious scholars would maintain Islamic standards and the separation of the sexes 
and still provide women an education. 
 The Supreme Committee for Educational Policy was formed in 1963. The Minis-
try of Education, the Ministry of Higher Education, and the General Organization 
for Technical Education and Vocational Training are responsible for the delivery 
and assessment of education. As of February 28, 2010, Prince Faysal ibn  ‘ Abdullah 
ibn Muhammad was minister of education, replacing  ‘ Abdullah al-Obaid. On the 
same date, the ﬁ rst woman deputy minister in Saudi Arabia, Nora bint  ‘ Abdullah 
al-Fayez , became responsible for girls’ aff airs in the Ministry of Education, replac-
ing Prince Khalid ibn  ‘ Abdullah ibn Muhammad. The new deputy minister for boys’ 
aff airs was Khalid ibn ‘Abdullah al-Sabli (Ministry of Education, Saudi Arabia, 
2010). Formerly, the General Presidency for Girl’s Education was independent of 
the Ministry of Education and supervised all girls’ schools, colleges, teacher-training 
colleges, women’s vocational schools, and literacy training. Control over girls’ and 
women’s education was returned to the Ministry of Education in 2003, and the Gen-
eral Presidency for Girls Education was dissolved. 
 The Ministry of Education indicates that 31,798 schools now instruct 5,019,007 
students and have an academic staff  of 425,343. (Male students are estimated at 
2,522,658 and females at 2,496,349; Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Ara-
bia. Projected Summary, 1428–1429 h./2010–2011; note that this does not include 
private schools or the schools administered by the National Guard or armed forces.) 
By 2006, 14 large public universities were operating, and other new private and pub-
lic institutions provided educational opportunities. By 2010, 29 universities (some 
formed from former colleges) were operating. In addition, the 24 colleges and the 
Faculty of Medicine at King Fahd Medical City, the Institute of Public Administra-
tion, and the Prince Sultan Aviation School off er instruction. Some are described 
later on. 
 Academic books are free, and health facilities are available in the schools; more-
over, unmarried students at the college and university levels are given a stipend allow-
ing them to study exclusively. Students attend kindergarten, six years of elementary 
school, three years of middle school, and three years of high school, vocational 
school, or a religious high school. In high schools, which have a curriculum of arts 
and sciences, students must take comprehensive examinations off ered twice a year 
by the Ministry of Education. 
 The school year in Saudi Arabia is 153 days, beginning in September and ending 
in June. Kindergarten is attended by children ages 3 to 5 but is not mandatory for 

Overview | 235
enrollment in primary school. Only 11.1 percent of boys (51,364) and 10.4 percent 
of girls (49,350) attended kindergarten in 2007 (UNESCO 2005–2007). In the Ten-
Year Educational Plan developed by the Ministry of Education, the education of 
young children (ages 4 to 6) is to be treated as an independent stage of learning 
with its own syllabi, which suggests that it is recognized as an important period 
for the development of learning skills and socialization. Many nursery schools and 
kindergartens grew out of women’s centers established in the early 1970s. The ﬁ rst 
was set up in 1963 in Riyadh by Princess Iff at and King Faysal’s daughters. These 
centers were necessary for women who were employed. They received royal subsi-
dies and also governmental funds; in addition to children’s programs, they off ered 
Montessori teacher training, childcare, nutrition, and health classes (Bird in Fer-
nea, ed., 1995, 289). As women’s employment expands, pre-primary education may 
also grow. 
 Primary schools admit children who are at least 5 years and 9 months of age. 
The primary school curriculum has consisted of Arabic, geography, history, home 
economics, art education, mathematics, physical education, science, and Islamic 
studies. From sixth grade through high school, a course in civics is off ered to boys. 
Students obtain a general elementary school certiﬁ cate upon completion. The same 
subjects at a more diffi  cult level are off ered in middle school, with the addition of 
English. 
 In high school, those students attending an arts and sciences high school have a 
common curriculum in the ﬁ rst year. If they score 60 percent in all subjects, they may 
choose between a scientiﬁ c and a literary stream for the remaining two years. Those 
scoring under 60 percent enroll in the literary stream. Biology, chemistry, and physics 
are studied in high school. 
 The students who choose an Islamic high school study Arabic language and lit-
erature, geography, history, Islamic studies, general culture, and English. To all of 
the above, the government has added computer training. Students can also enroll 
in a vocational or technical program, a commercial program, or an agricultural 
program in the vocational and technical schools, which are supervised by the Gen-
eral Organization for Technical Education. The vocational and technical subjects 
include electrical skills, machine mechanics, auto mechanics, metal mechanics, radio 
and television, and architectural drawing, as well as Arabic, chemistry, English, and 
math. The commercial curriculum includes bookkeeping and accounting, econom-
ics, ﬁ nancial mathematics, management and secretarial studies, Arabic, English, and 
religious studies. The agriculture curriculum includes agronomy, animal husbandry, 
farm management, horticulture, agricultural economics, applied biology, applied 
chemistry, applied physics, Arabic, English, marketing, and plant nutrition. Stu-
dents (and adults) may also apply for technical training courses if they have the 
middle school–leaving certiﬁ cates. These courses take a year or a year and a half to 
complete. 
 Private schools are also supervised by the Ministry of Education. Their students 
also receive free books and stipends from the government. A few international schools 
have been in operation for years, attended by children of expatriate workers. These 
have a completely separate curriculum geared to prepare students for university stud-
ies abroad. Some 24 Philippine schools operate in Saudi Arabia as well. 

 Chapter 5 Society
236 |
 Students who graduate from the general or arts and sciences high schools may 
attend universities, women’s colleges, or teacher-training colleges. In addition, there 
are certain technical and scientiﬁ c programs that last two years and off er a technical 
degree or lead to a bachelor of sciences. It should be understood that there is signiﬁ -
cant pressure on girls to marry and to do so before attending graduate school; but 
to get married and successfully complete graduate school is extremely diffi  cult. This 
social pressure means that it is somewhat easier and more likely for young men to 
obtain professional or graduate degrees than for young women. 
 The 10-year strategic plan of the Ministry of Education (2004–2014) is geared to 
making the Saudi population competitive internationally while retaining their Is-
lamic identity. The plan has many speciﬁ c goals, which include increasing kinder-
garten enrollment to 40 percent, making basic education compulsory, improving 
teacher education and special-needs education, planning girls’ technical educa-
tion, and reducing dropout rates (UNESCO, International Bureau of Education 
2010). 
 UNIVERSITIES 
 King Sa‘ud University was established as Riyadh University in 1956 as the ﬁ rst non-
religious institution of higher education. Enrollment was at 52,187 in 2010, includ-
ing both men and women, and all courses are free. Instruction is in Arabic for all 
subjects except medicine and engineering, which are taught in English. The university 
is ranked highly in the Arab world and has 18 libraries and 14 research centers. The 
faculty have been trained abroad or in Saudi Arabia (or both), and they are expected 
to produce research and publications in addition to teaching. The university is made 
up of multiple science colleges, health colleges, humanities colleges, and two commu-
nity colleges. A branch of the university that opened in Qassim is now independent. 
 King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz University , in Jeddah, was founded in 1967 as a private uni-
versity and became a state university in 1971. Men and women attend, and while it is 
smaller than King Sa‘ud University, it is still a very large institution. By 2001, more 
than 37,000 undergraduates were enrolled, several thousand graduate students, and 
500 doctoral candidates. 
 King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals was proclaimed in 1963 and 
began operations in 1964 with 67 male students. Enrollment has now expanded to 
6,000 with an additional 2,000 in a preparatory yearlong English-language program. 
The university is connected to two community colleges. King Fahd University spe-
cializes in higher-level training and research in the ﬁ elds of engineering, science, 
and management, aimed at the petroleum and mineral industries. The university is 
located in Dhahran, about seven kilometers (4.349 miles) from al-Khobar, between 
the Dhahran Air Base and the headquarters of Saudi Aramco. It lies on top of the 
dome where oil ﬁ rst emerged in large quantities at Dammam Well No. 7, which is 
located just off  campus. King Khalid University is located in Abha, and King Faisal 
University, established in 1975, has two branches, the main one in al-Hasa and an-
other in Dammam. 

Universities | 237
 King Abdullah University for Science and Technology was founded in 2009 at 
Thuwal on the Red Sea coast, about one hour from Mecca. It is a graduate-level 
research university with instruction in English. It is guided by a board of trustees and 
an international advisory council, and it intends to produce cutting-edge science and 
research in a number of ﬁ elds new to the nation. It is coeducational, and a Museum 
of Science and Technology in Islam has been opened on the campus. King ‘Abdullah 
was personally involved in the planning and creation of this university. 
 Saudi Arabians have traveled abroad for educational studies for decades. Students 
began to travel to the United States after World War II and to the United Kingdom 
for university studies. In addition, some studied in Egypt at the large national Cairo 
University, other regional universities, and the private American University in Cairo 
and in Lebanon at the private American University in Beirut. 
 Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, student visas (as well as 
other forms of visas) were restricted. Some Islamic studies educators and others were 
forced to return to Saudi Arabia from the United States, as Muslim institutions and 
motives were attacked. Beginning in 2007, visas were reissued to Saudi Arabian stu-
dents in large numbers (sources indicated 7,000 to 9,000), resuming the educational 
relationship of the two countries. 
 Academia in Saudi Arabia diff ers in some respects from its counterparts in other 
countries. There is no guaranteed academic freedom per se. Peer governance is less 
important than rights of seniority, although committee structures are utilized, as are 
practices like peer review. There is a great deal of self-censorship and caution. Politi-
cal science, contemporary history, and sociology are new areas of study, but Saudi 
Arabian academics cannot engage in the kind of stringent criticism that North or 
Latin American or European academics launch at their own governments. A few ex-
ceptions have emerged who are allowed to be somewhat more outspoken as internal 
reform began and measures were taken against terrorism. But these expressions have 
limits, depend on the setting, and in turn are limited to particular themes and topics. 
Also, for some years, academic publication standards, in some cases, were not as 
stringent as in top Western universities, reﬂ ecting a paternalistic approach to educa-
tion, the fact of English/Western-language imperialism over academic knowledge, 
and educators’ status as national servants. On the other hand, the upper echelons of 
academia were required to publish outside Saudi Arabia. At top Western research 
universities, very little teaching is done by top scholars—to the detriment of students, 
while the Saudi Arabian faculty’s energies are also claimed in professional activities 
and service on government bodies, as well as teaching and research, and it is not clear 
how that impacts education. 
 Finally, there has been little innovation in pedagogies; the lecture method in an 
authoritative style is far more common than cooperative or active learning models. 
Cheating, grade inﬂ ation, and failure and dropout rates are other concerns but 
probably no more so than in other Arab countries, and these are also common, 
if not fully disclosed, problems in West. Students are concerned about unemploy-
ment, and the uncertain young people Mai Yamani interviewed in the 1990s are 
now adults (Yamani 1999), so the pathway from education to employment deserves 
study as well. 

 Chapter 5 Society
238 |
 SEPARATE GENDER EDUCATION 
 Rules and customs that separate women and men result in special challenges. The 
idea of separation by sex is accepted by educators (el-Sanabary 2002; al-Manea 
1984; AlMunajjed 1995); external criticism engenders a strong defense of the prac-
tice. Wherever possible, girls are educated by women. This has created a great incen-
tive to train Saudi female teachers, although other Arab women (and men) came to 
teach in Saudi Arabia despite various restrictions. By about 1989, nearly 40 percent 
of teachers were non-Saudis, mostly Arabs, and nearly half were Egyptians (Dou-
mato in Metz, ed., 1993). In certain subjects in the universities, male professors were 
viewed by video in adjoining rooms, and their female students could ask questions 
by telephone (Bird in Fernea, ed., 1995, 286–287). All-female institutions have the 
advantages of women’s colleges in the West: that women tend to perform better 
without interaction with or competition from male students. Women are said to 
learn more about their own preferences and abilities in same-sex education. Some 
disadvantages occurred at institutions where both women and men studied (together 
but separately) in that laboratory and library resources for women were less ad-
equate than those for men. At the all-female institutions, advanced curricula were 
restricted by the need for highly qualiﬁ ed female instructors, until these instructors 
were prepared and hired. On the other hand, women need the advanced training in 
scientiﬁ c areas of study that they can receive at King Abdullah University for Sci-
ence and Technology. This is the reason the government took a senior cleric’s criti-
cism of the admittance of women at that new university very seriously and removed 
him from his position. 
 Today, girls make up slightly more than 50 percent of all Saudi Arabian students. 
In 2006, 53 young women graduated from Eff at College in Jeddah, a private institu-
tion that Princess Iff at (Eff at), along with a team of experts, opened with 30 students 
just prior to her death in 1999. The campus includes part of the grounds of Dar al-
Hanan. By 2006, 250 young women were enrolled in the liberal arts curriculum taught 
in English. Sciences are taught as well, including degrees in electrical and computer 
engineering, the ﬁ rst time such programs were off ered to women in Saudi Arabia 
(Campbell, January/February 2007). The college transitioned to become Eff at Uni-
versity by royal decree in 2009, and it now has colleges of humanities, engineering, 
and business. Construction on the Princess Norah bint Abd al-Rahman University 
for Girls began in 2008, and it was inaugurated in 2011. This all-woman institution 
will off er courses in medicine, pharmacy, languages, and computer sciences. 
 In 2005, the government had begun to develop programs for gifted students. Phys-
ically and mentally handicapped students are off ered programs under the Special 
Education Department of the Ministry of Education. A director of one of the many 
private schools for the handicapped explained that the ministry programs are, in 
fact, not automatically available at these schools. Also, due to transportation issues, 
families may send students to private schools. The offi  cial information tells us that 
the private institutions also receive government subsidies, but this appears not to 
apply to many smaller schools that need support for needy disabled students (who 
cannot aff ord tuition) and can off er no teacher training in special education. The 

Education and Aramco | 239
jurisdiction over such a private school for the disabled was disputed, so its director 
was shuttled between the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Social Aff airs 
(Interview conducted March 10, 2005, in Zuhur 2005–2008. ). 
 The Ministry of Defense and Aviation and the Ministry of the Interior as well as 
the National Guard have operated their own schools, and these most probably have 
never been included in the statistical information from the Ministries of Education 
and Higher Education. 
 Education is credited with improving literacy and development. According to the 
Saudi Arabian government, the literacy rate for men is now 90 percent (however, 
other sources list 84 percent;  CIA World Factbook 2010 ) and just over 70 percent 
for women. The rate for children under 15 years of age is 89.2 percent for boys and 
93.2 percent for girls (Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia, Washington, DC, 2010). 
 INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLS 
 When Western workers ﬁ rst arrived in the kingdom, some sent their children to Bei-
rut, Lebanon, for schooling. One of the earliest international schools in Saudi Ara-
bia was Riyadh International School. Also in Riyadh are the British International 
School and King Faisal School. Saudi Aramco developed its own schools, and the 
international schools group in Dhahran and the Dhahran British Grammar School 
serve foreigners. In Khobar, the British International School of al-Khobar and al-
Hussan Academy operate; in Jeddah, the American, British, and Dutch Interna-
tional Schools are accompanied by the Jeddah Preparatory and Grammar, al-Waha 
International School, and Continental School; and there are International Schools 
in Jubayl and Yanbu (which was attacked in 2004). These are college-preparatory 
schools with a signiﬁ cant tuition paid for by the workers’ companies, and they were 
not open to Saudi students. They helped perpetuate cultural enclaves that diff ered 
from the rest of the country. 
 EDUCATION AND ARAMCO 
 Aramco’s labor needs eventually led to the formation of an elite among its Shi‘a 
workers. At the outset, the Shi‘a of the eastern region accepted industrial employ-
ment and were nonskilled workers in harsh working and living conditions. They 
protested these circumstances in the 1953 strikes. Aramco’s desire for a loyal, well-
trained workforce resulted in company-off ered training and higher education for 
some employees, in addition to other beneﬁ ts (Louër 2008, 42–43). Thousands of 
Shi‘a employees moved into the managerial strata, and their children, in turn, are 
encouraged to attend university and gain professional status. Some of them work for 
the company in highly skilled technical specialties. 
 The strikes and legacy of frustrated trade union eff orts led to a current of leftist 
opposition among some of the Shi‘a, and the ﬁ rst political prisoners and exiles, and 
opposition parties, such as the Communist Party of Saudi Arabia (Al-Rasheed 2002, 
100; Louër 2008, 42–44). This trend was off set by the religious revival among the 

 Chapter 5 Society
240 |
Shi‘a but, more important, by the loyal elite engendered through Aramco’s largely 
benevolent if self-serving policies. 
 SHI‘A HIGHER EDUCATION AND ACTIVISM 
 Activist Shi’ism likewise reached Saudi Arabia through education. Although the 
prominence of ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s reform movement in Saudi Arabia ensured quiet-
ist, nonconfrontational stances in Shi‘a worship and religious study, some  ‘ulama 
families and others attracted to scholarship left Saudi Arabia to study in Iraq, Iran, 
and the other Gulf states. Iraq developed two activist strains of Shi’ism, one known 
as the Shiraziyyin, who represented the  marja ‘ iyya  (Shi‘a religious leadership) of 
Karbalah and whose political party became the Munnazamat al-Amal al-Islami (the 
Islamic Action Organization) after 1979. The other trend came from the  marja ‘ iyya 
of the city of Najaf, and its activist political elements formed al-Da‘wah, a party 
represented in the post-Saddam leadership of Iraq. Saudi Shi‘a studied in the 1970s 
at the Hawza of the Supreme Prophet in Bneid al-Gar, Kuwait, a center of the Shira-
ziyyin, and political education was off ered by Muhammad Taqi al-Mudarissi, whose 
Message Movement was later known as the Islamic Action Organization. Some of 
these cadres, also from Kuwait and Bahrain, acquired military training in Lebanon 
from the Palestine Liberation Organization (Louër 2008, 124–125). The Saudi Shi-
razi ﬁ gure Hassan al-Saff ar recruited Saudi students to study in Kuwait, and he also 
created institutions and attracted followers in Oman. All this shows that the political 
repression of the Shi‘a community led to a pattern of Shi‘a higher religious education 
necessarily moving in and out of the country, which activated revolutionary ideas. 
The ﬁ gures discussed are atypical of the majority of the Saudi Arabian Shi‘a, who 
acquired religious education as a quiescent minority but who would like to see greater 
acceptance of their community in Saudi Arabian society. 
 ISLAMIC EDUCATION 
 Specialized Sunni Islamic education is provided for all citizens of Saudi Arabia and 
for many non-Saudi Muslims who travel to the kingdom for this purpose. Religious 
education begins with families and continues through the entire educational sys-
tem. At the level of higher education, some important programs are at the Islamic 
University of Medina, the Umm al-Qura University, Dar al-Hadith al-Khayriyya 
in Mecca, which specializes in the teaching of  ﬁ qh (jurisprudence), and the al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn Sa’ud University  in Riyadh, with an enrollment of more than 24,000 
students. 
 The Islamic University of Medina , established in 1961, which enrolls more than 
6,000 students, is tuition-free. It off ers undergraduate and graduate-level degrees and 
a certiﬁ cate program. It also provides a small stipend and a yearly ticket home and 
return for students from abroad. Married students who cannot live in the dormitory 
must cover their own costs; consequently, there are Saudi Arabian male students who 
are married and have families, but there are apparently diffi  culties for non–Saudi 

Critiques of Islamic Education | 241
Arabians to get visas for their wives. The Umm al-Qura University, in Mecca, admits 
men and also women who can show proof and approval of an accompanying male 
guardian,  mahram (see section on Women or the Glossary). It is tuition-free and 
provides free housing and a ticket home for single students living in the dormitory; 
married students pay additional costs. Dar al-Hadith provides studies in the sunna h 
and  shari‘ah for graduates of middle school, high school, and college with knowledge 
of the Qur’an and does not include Arabic courses, so it is not attended by foreign 
students unless their Arabic is up to the norm. Imam University off ers courses for 
non-Arabic speakers; tuition and housing are free for single students. 
 A much larger proportion of students in Saudi Arabia specialize in Islamic stud-
ies than in other countries, and part of this interest enables the perpetuation of a 
scholarly class. Historically, this form of knowledge came about when students ap-
prenticed themselves intellectually to a senior scholar, learning whatever they could 
from him and receiving a  shahadah , or certiﬁ cate, for the completion of certain stud-
ies, or the right to teach that subject to others. The great medieval academy al-Azhar 
in Cairo transitioned to a college and then a university, and it taught all four of the 
Sunni Islamic legal traditions, as well as the Ja‘fari    madhhab . However, not all Sunni 
scholars, by any means, were educated there, nor did they lack for other senior schol-
ars with whom to study. To some degree, the royal initiative in opening the King 
Abdullah University of Science and Technology (and other regional universities) 
is a response to the charge that too many Saudi Arabian students pursue religious 
studies and too few enter scientiﬁ c and technological pursuits, which are demand-
ing ﬁ elds but necessary to the country’s future. It is also an aspect of Saudization. 
In fact, both religious and scientiﬁ c education are necessary in the special Islamic 
environment that is the kingdom and to perpetuate Islamic knowledge in the broader 
Muslim world. 
 CRITIQUES OF ISLAMIC EDUCATION 
 Many Western critics of Islamic education targeted Saudi Arabia for fostering “ji-
hadist tendencies” like the al-Qa’ida movement. Reform-minded leaders such as then 
crown prince ‘Abdullah had already initiated some reform of religious textbooks 
used in the educational system, a part of the 10-year education plan. The critique 
of the texts shows some antipathy to the overlap between Wahhabist salaﬁ sm and 
mainstream Sunni thought and is mostly concerned with preventing exclusivism and 
exclusion of other religious and Muslim groups. Reviews of these materials in the 
West have become media tools; the MEMRI Institute in the United States, which 
employs Israeli researchers, looks for outrageous statements in Muslim-authored 
publications, media sources, or individual statements and publishes them in trans-
lation on its website. The textbook material was also reviewed in more depth by a 
Western-trained specialist on Saudi Arabia, who faulted certain texts for claiming 
the unity of Islam and Muslims; this is seen as willful ignorance of Islam’s numer-
ous forms or as promotion of uniformity and salaﬁ sm (Doumato 2008, 154–155). 
Arguably, to a Muslim reader, promoting the unity of the  ummah (the Muslim com-
munity) is a positive trend, if an ideal. A quotation about limiting the use of the 

 Chapter 5 Society
242 |
jurist’s personal opinion,  ra’y and  ijtihad (see Glossary or the section on religion 
and law in this chapter), is said by the reviewer to be ignoring the legal tradition 
of jurisprudence (Doumato 2008, 155). This is misleading because while  ra’y and 
 ijtihad  were juridical methods in the past, it is also true that jurists argued against 
their use for speciﬁ c reasons. The standard position of the Hanbali legal school  is 
to avoid  ra’y but not necessarily  ijtihad ; this passage in the Saudi Arabian textbook 
appears to call for respect for the learning of the  ‘ulama and to not issue, as jihadists 
do, independent rulings. A history text,  The Life of the Prophet and the History of 
the Islamic State (2003), is criticized for constantly warning against idolatry ( shirk ), 
for portraying enemies to Islam as a constant threat, and for not discussing Turkish, 
Iranian, or Moghul civilization (Doumato 2008, 158–159). The reviewer’s concerns 
were about textbooks that might promote intolerance to non-Muslims and cause 
Saudi Arabians to not befriend or employ them and to avoid mimicking them (by 
celebrating birthdays, practicing ﬁ ne or performing arts, or engaging in sports) as 
expressed throughout a 2002 text,  Tawhid . She found that the reformed 2003 ver-
sion does not negate the earlier monotheistic traditions and leaves out attacks on 
non-Muslims (Doumato 2008, 161–165). A civics text is praised for assigning “new” 
values to Islam, such as inclusiveness and teaching about public service and how to 
maintain civil harmony (Doumato 2008, 164–166). 
 LEARNING BY OTHER MEANS 
 Television exerts an educational inﬂ uence from preschool years. In the 1970s, a Ku-
waiti-based Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) eff ort bought the rights to the  Sesame 
Street model for nine years and launched  Iftah Ya Simsim , which introduced the 
beloved characters of Nu’man, a camel; Yaqut, a female lavender-colored monster; 
Abla, a cat; and Malsun, a parrot. The show is supposed to be relaunched, to the 
delight of many who grew up with it, and the characters will also teach a program 
on safe driving in Saudi Arabia. Children’s television is now broadcast from other 
Gulf countries, and, like adult television, it entertains, shows advertisements, and 
sometimes shapes opinions. 
 Books are popular in Saudi Arabia and are published in literature, religious topics, 
social science, and other subjects. Books from all over the Arab world and the West 
are available; however, there is quite a bit of censorship. Bookstores such as the al-
Jarir chain or older-style book stalls may be found, and book fairs or international 
book fairs are held in Riyadh, Jeddah, and Medina. Internet learning is also available 
but is monitored and censored in Saudi Arabia (for other forms of education, see 
Sports and Leisure in chapter 6  ). 
 Military and defense learning takes place in Saudi Arabia in training environ-
ments but also through coordination with other militaries. The U.S. Central Com-
mand is part of the U.S. Military Training Mission (USMTM), a joint military 
training mission to assist Saudi Arabia and its defenses. It was established in 1953 
and is headquartered in Riyadh. It has a directorate staff  and four service divisions: 
Land and Air Defenses, Naval Forces, U.S. Marine Corp Technical Assistance Field 

| 243
Team, and the Air Force division; as well as a joint advisory division. Members of 
Saudi Arabia’s armed forces and National Guard (SANG) have also been travel-
ing to the United States for higher-level military and strategic learning for decades. 
These include short courses at the senior or executive level at the National Defense 
University or courses for medical defense personnel at the U.S. Army Medical Col-
lege and Center at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas, and at other service 
institutes. Master’s degrees in strategic studies may be earned by those who qualify 
in English at the U.S. senior service colleges; however, with only one representative 
per some foreign countries, only a tiny number of Saudi Arabian offi  cers have this 
opportunity each year. That, in turn, was a rationale for the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment to institute its own War College in 2009, which had been planned for several 
years and is to be coordinated through the USMTM. Foreign contractors (male) 
who are graduates of U.S. service colleges or have combat experience were joining 
the college staff  during 2010. The college has been encouraged to add a specialized 
research facility for strategic studies; since 2006, a civilian university institute has 
been producing some research on strategic studies. 
 REFERENCES 
 al-Attas, Syed Naguib.  Aims and Objectives of Islamic Education [Findings of the First World 
Conference on Muslim Education, 1977]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 1979. 
 Al-Baadi, Hamad Muhammad. “Social Change, Education, and the Roles of Women in Ara-
bia.” PhD diss., Stanford University, 1982. 
 Bird, Jerine. “Revolution for Children in Saudi Arabia.” In  Children in the Muslim Mid-
dle East , edited by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995, 
290–294. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Eff at’s New Roses.”  Saudi Aramco World , January/February 2007. 
 Dohaish, Abdullatif Abdullah.  History of Education in the Hijaz up to 1925: Comparative and 
Critical Study . Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-Arabi, 1978. 
 Doumato, Eleanor A. “Saudi Arabia: From Wahhabi Roots to Contemporary Revisionism.” 
In  Islam and Textbooks in the Middle East , edited by Eleanor A. Doumato and Gregory 
Starrett. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 2008, 153–176. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth W.  In Search of Islamic Feminism: One Woman’s Global Journey . New 
York: Doubleday, 1998. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth W., ed.  Children in the Muslim Middle East . Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 1995. 
 General Presidency for Girls’ Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Tawhid . Grade 10. Gen-
eral Presidency for Girl’s Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 1996/1997. 
 Hazaa, Abdulaziz Mohammed al. “Scenario Projections for Women in Saudi Arabia: Their 
Changing Status, Educational and Employment Opportunities by the Year 2010.” PhD 
diss., University of Minnesota, 1993. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 Louër, Laurence.  Transnational Shia Politics: Religious and Political Networks in the Gulf . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
References

 Chapter 5 Society
244 |
 al-Manea, Azeezah A. “History and Contemporary Policies of Women’s Education in Saudi 
Arabia.” PhD diss., University of Michigan, 1984. 
 Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  The Life of the Prophet and the History 
of the Islamic State . Grade 10. Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2003. 
 Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  al-Tarbiyya al-Wataniyya . Grades 6, 8, and 
10, Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2003. 
 Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Shaykh Saleh ibn Fawzan ibn Abdullah 
ibn Fawzan.  Tawhid . Grade 10. Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2003. 
 AlMunajjed, Mona.  Women in Saudi Arabia Today . Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 1995. 
 Nyrop, Richard F.  Area Handbook for Saudi Arabia . Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi  ce, 1977. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi.  A History of Saudi Arabia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2002. 
 Roy, D. “Saudi Arabian Education: Development Policy.”  Middle Eastern Studies  28, no. 3 
(1992), 477–508. 
 Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia. Washington, DC. Information Offi  ce. Health and Educa-
tion. (Information appears to be circa 2007.) 
 Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia. “Index of Master’s Theses and Doctoral Dissertations of 
Saudi Graduates from Universities in the United States.” Washington, DC: Royal Em-
bassy of Saudi Arabia. 
 el-Sanabary, Nagat. “The Saudi Arabian Model of Female Education and the Reproduction 
of Gender Divisions.” Working Paper No. 16. G. E. von Grunebaum Center for Near 
Eastern Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, 2002. 
 UNESCO, International Bureau of Education. “Saudi Arabia.” Proﬁ le derived from  World 
Data on Education , 7th ed., 2010/2011. UNESCO, IBE, 2011. http://www.ibe.unesco.org/
en/services/online-materials/world-data-on-education/seventh-edition-2010-11.html  
 UNESCO, International Bureau of Education. “Saudi Arabia.”  World Data on Education , 
6th ed., 2005–2007. UNESCO, 2007. Updated February 27, 2007. Available at http://www.
ibe.unesco.org/ﬁ leadmin/user_upload/archive/Countries/WDE/2006/ARAB_STATES/
Saudi_Arabia/Saudi_Arabia.htm 
 Yamani, Mai.  Changed Identities: The Challenges of the New Generation in Saudi Arabia . 
London: Royal Institute of International Aff airs, 1999. 
 Yamani, Muhammad Abdo. “Teach Your Children the Love of God’s Messenger.” Trans-
lated by Farha Ghannam in  Children in the Middle East , edited by Elizabeth Fernea. 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995, 118–123. (An excerpt from Muhammad Abdo 
Yamani,  Teach Your Children the Love of God’s Messenger [Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-
Sharika al-Sandiya lil-Abhath wa-l-Taswiq, 1991].)  
 al-Zaid, Abdulla Mohamad.  Education in Saudi Arabia . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Tihamah, 1981.   

245
 CHAPTER 6 
 Culture 
 Language 
 Arabic is the national language of Saudi Arabia. Arabic is also the dominant lan-
guage from Morocco and Mauritania eastward to Iraq, but it is not spoken in these 
countries exactly as in Saudi Arabia. What these countries share is a rich tradition 
of literature, religious and historical texts, and offi  cial and media information. The 
Arabs of the pre-Islamic era had a poetic tradition, yet they were not literate—and 
had no written literature. Nonetheless, Arabic, the language of a relatively tiny num-
ber of people in northern Arabia in the seventh century, is today a mother tongue for 
an estimated 280 million people and a second language for about 250 million people. 
Arabic has had an extraordinary inﬂ uence on the Islamic regions and culture, because 
it was the medium of conquest and faith and it had the capacity for keen description, 
eloquence, and use in scholarship. Although a limited dialect at the outset of its new 
state, Arabic became as signiﬁ cant as Latin in creating an entire intellectual domain 
through the eff orts of its grammarians, poets, literary ﬁ gures (Badeau in Hayes, ed., 
1992, 12), religious scholars, and philosophers, and it became an offi  cial language. 
 Arabic is a diglossic language.  Diglossia refers to a language that is essentially two 
languages or occurs in two or more forms. Arabic has a vast vocabulary and complex 
grammar particular to its historic and modern written, formal forms. It also has a 
diff erent vocabulary, grammar, and syntax in its oral, colloquial forms, or dialects. 
The literary, written, and formal Arabic is based on a classical language,  fusha , the 
language of the Qur’an. An updated formal Arabic is used in literature, the media, 
and formal addresses. Also called  fusha (pronounced fus-Ha) in the Arab world is 
a form of classical Arabic that is given the name Modern Standard Arabic in the 

 Chapter 6 Culture
246 |
West; the diff erences between modern and classical  fusha primarily lie in vocabulary. 
Many older Arabic words have become obsolete, and certain loanwords have been 
introduced. Spoken Arabic,  ‘amiyyah (ordinary language; colloquial), exists as dif-
ferent dialects that vary quite substantially from country to country and also within 
countries between rural or bedouin and city dwellers’ (sedentary) forms. In Saudi 
Arabia, the dialects correspond to geographic regions: Najdi, Hijazi, Eastern (Gulf ) 
Arabic, and Janubi (from the south), and as just described, whether the speakers 
are pastoral or formerly pastoral, or city or town residents. This means that lit-
eracy may depend on the mastery of two (or three) “languages,” for example, Hijazi 
urban spoken dialect,  fusha (Qur’anic), and modern  fusha , or standard Arabic. A 
Saudi Arabian may also understand Egyptian dialect, because Egypt has dominated 
the Arab ﬁ lm, television, and music industries. In addition to Arabic, English is 
taught in schools in Saudi Arabia, and many businessmen speak English; however, 
English is not spoken in many city neighborhoods and in the countryside. Other lan-
guages are in use, such as Urdu, Somali, Bangladeshi, Chinese, Tagalog, and other 
Arabic dialects spoken by immigrants, refugees, foreign workers, and others. Signs 
and maps are rendered in Arabic, thus complicating a situation where many drivers 
from South and East Asian countries do not know how to read the language. 
 Arabic is a Semitic language, a language family whose origins are disputed. Some 
scholars held that a proto-Semitic mother language emerged in the Arabian Penin-
sula, but it is now thought that this location might have been eastern Africa. Arabic 
and Amharic are the most recent Semitic languages. A South Arabian language ex-
isted before the rise of Islam, and various inscriptions may be found in it. The dynas-
ties corresponding to this southern language were the Sabaeans and the Himyarites in 
today’s Yemen (Nicholson 1977). This South Arabian language and Aramaic, to the 
north and east, became extinct after Mudari, or northern Arabic, spread with Islam in 
the seventh century. The South Arabian language was written in the epigraphic  mus-
nad , as were inscriptions in the northern Arabian language dating back to the eighth 
century BCE in Hasa in eastern Saudi Arabia. However, southern Arabic was more 
distinct from northern, or Mudari, Arabic, the language of the Quraysh, the Prophet 
Muhammad’s tribe, just as Italian and French are not merely dialects of one another. 
 The Nabataeans to the north of Arabia were Arabs who spoke Arabic but used 
Aramaic for their script (see Chapter 2, History). They have left examples of their 
language and distinctly Arab names in inscriptions. The Lakhmids of southern Iraq, 
the Kindites in central Arabia, and the Ghassanids in the Syrian areas produced pre-
Islamic poetry and inscriptions in Arabic. Among the most famous pre-Islamic poetry 
were the Mu’allaqat, known as the Golden Odes, composed by diff erent poets, includ-
ing Imru’ al-Qays and the black knight, ‘Antarah ibn Shaddad. These poems typically 
had a preface in the form of a lament and a main subject. This epic poetry was memo-
rized and recited by professionals and transcribed only later. The vocabulary used was 
rich in verbs and in words that described the environment; however, not all of these 
words remained in use. The link between this tradition and post-Islamic Arabic was 
the poetic form known as the  qasidah (a stanza form of divided lines [hemistiches] 
in a special meter followed by a brief refrain), which has survived up to the present. 
 The spread of Arabic was accomplished through the Islamic conquest, which 
moved through the peninsula up into Mesopotamia, crossed over to North Africa, 

| 247
Language
and also invaded territory to the east, where other Indo-European languages were 
utilized. The political impetuses to learn Arabic were accompanied by religious mo-
tivations. Since the Qur’an was delivered to the Prophet of God, Muhammad, in 
Arabic, it was recited in Arabic, and all those who became Muslim studied Arabic, 
if they did not already speak the language, in order to understand the Qur’an and 
other religious commentaries and teachings. 
 The oral tradition of Arabic presented a special problem in the transcription and 
preservation of the Qur’an. Folk literature and even great and well-known epics were 
sometimes recited with some diff erences of pronunciation, which might extend to 
the meaning of words. The early Qur’an reciters were intent on preserving the ver-
sion of the Qur’an received in oral form by the Prophet Muhammad. But there were 
some diff erences in the pronunciations or oral readings of the Qur’an. After a battle 
in which quite a few Qur’an reciters were killed, the caliph Abu Bakr approved the 
creation of a single, authorized version. This was later recensed and rearranged by a 
committee working for the caliph ‘Uthman. Importantly, certain verses were with-
drawn (including the now-infamous Satanic Verses, the Gharaniq), and particular 
variant letters were stabilized. All other versions were destroyed, and by the ninth 
century, the offi  cial version was completely vocalized; that is, the vowels, which were 
normally not written, were added to the text to clarify its meaning. Nonetheless, 
it is said that the Prophet approved seven diff erent readings of the text, which are 
performed in  tajwid , chanting or singing of the text, and these variants exist until 
now (Murphy and Zuhur in Tucker, ed., 2010). Not even native speakers of Arabic 
understand all of the language of the Qur’an, or its religious and symbolic mean-
ing. This has been provided in detailed interpretations with commentary, which are 
called  tafsir . 
 Likewise, to comprehend or emulate the poetic traditions inherited from the past, 
one must be educated in the traditional vocabulary. The ancient Arabs acknowl-
edged their poet ( sha’ir ), who composed in meters; their tribal orator or spokesman 
( khatib ), who spoke without being restricted by meter; and their soothsayers ( kahin ), 
who used rhyming, enigmatic language (Pellat in Lewis, ed., 1970, 141). 
 The bedouin dialects of the Hijaz, Najd, and Asir, and the related sedentary (town 
dwellers’) dialects of Najd and Asir, are the closest to the classical Arabic of the 
Qur’an. This is not true of the city dialects (Jeddawi and Makkawi) in the Hijaz. 
This is explained by reasoning that the former have had less contact with languages 
like Turkish and Persian as compared to Iraq or other Arab areas, whereas the Hi-
jazi cities have been decidedly inﬂ uenced by Egypt and the many pilgrims who have 
settled in these areas. The dialects of Najd and Asir certainly retained grammatical 
features of  fusha , although the word endings (nunation) are omitted in oral form, 
and in Najdi Arabic, the consonant “qaf” is pronounced as a hard “g” sound (as in 
 garden ). There is a scholarly dispute about the wide diff erentiation of Arabic, with 
one group positing that a kind of lingua franca was adopted in some cities but that 
the bedouin continued speaking dialects closer to the original Mudari Arabic of the 
Quraysh tribe. Previously, the opposite claim had been asserted—that the bedouin 
dialects constituted a kind of lingua franca, which is not strictly the case; however, 
these dialects share certain tendencies. It is a fact that the Muslim armies of the Is-
lamic expansion set up camps that developed into cities; however, the Arabic spoken 

 Chapter 6 Culture
248 |
in these cities diff ers widely, and not all settlement was accomplished this way, as 
bedouin moved into rural areas not far from these regions. 
 LANGUAGE FEATURES 
 Arabic is written horizontally from right to left, except for numbers, which are writ-
ten from left to right. Arabic has 28 letters; some were added by the addition of dots 
above or below the letter to indicate diff erent sounds. The letters have a diff erent 
appearance depending on whether they are an initial (at the beginning of a word), 
medial (in the middle of a word), or ﬁ nal letter. 
 Tables 6.1 and 6.2 show the Arabic script, the names of Arabic letters in Arabic, 
and the corresponding letter names and transliteration in English. The ﬁ rst line of 
Table 6.1 shows the Arabic letter beginning on the right and reading to the left. The 
second line provides the name of the Arabic letter in Arabic. The third line provides 
its sound (the ﬁ rst letter, ‘alif, is simply an aspirated  ah , which, when voweled, may 
shift to a  ’ih  sound or  ’uh sound). The fourth line provides the transliteration of the 
Arabic letter in English. 
 Arabic is usually written as a script. The initial consonant is not connected to the 
previous word but connects to the medial consonants, and then the ﬁ nal consonant has 
a diff erent shape; a small space intervenes before the next initial letter (see Table 6.3). 
 Some Arabic sounds do not exist in English; these include the consonant ‘ ain , 
which is like a growl in the middle of the throat carrying a vowel; the letter h.  a , with 
a harsh breath out; the letter  kha ; and the letter  dhad , which is a  d but pronounced 
TABLE 6.1 Arabic Script
ﺭ
ﺫ
ﺩ
ﺥ
ﺡ
ﺝ
ﺙ
ﺕ
ﺏ
ﺍ
rāȽ
d-hāl
dāl
khāȽ
h.āȽ
jīm
thāȽ
tāȽ
bāȽ
Ƚalif
r
dh
d
h˘ 
h. 
j
tֿ Ƚ
t
b
Ƚ(a)
ﻑ
ﻍ
ﻉ
ﻅ
ﻁ
ﺽ
ﺹ
ﺵ
ﺱ
ﺯ
fāȽ
ghayn
Ⱦayn
khāȽ
t.āȽ
d. ād
s.ād
shin
sīn
zāy
f
gh
Ⱦ
   h
t.
d. 
s.
š /sh
s
z
 ء
ﻱ
ﻭ
ﻩ
ﻥ
ﻡ
ﻝ
ﻙ
ﻕ
 
 
hamza
yāȽ
wāw
hāȽ
nūn
mīm
lām
kāf
qāf
 
 ‘
y
w
h
n
m
l
k
q
TABLE 6.2 Vowel Diacritics and Doubled Letter Symbols
ﻻ
lā
bbu
bbi
bba
bb
b
bū
bī
bā
bu
bi
ba

Language Features | 249
TABLE 6.3 Consonants in Diff erent Positions
Final
Medial
Initial
Isolated
Final
Medial
Initial
Isolated
Final
Medial
Initial
Isolated
ﻖ
ﻘ
ﻗ
ﻕ
ﺰ
_
_
ﺯ
ﺎ
_
_
ﺍ
ﻚ
ﻜ
ﻛ
ﻙ
ﺲ
ﺴ
ﺳ
ﺱ
ﺐ
ﺒ
ﺑ
ﺏ
ﻞ
ﻠ
ﻟ
ﻝ
ﺶ
ﺸ
ﺷ
ﺵ
ﺖ
ﺘ
ﺗ
ﺕ
ﻢ
ﻤ
ﻣ
ﻡ
ﺺ
ﺼ
ﺻ
ﺹ
ﺚ
ﺜ
ﺛ
ﺙ
ﻦ
ﻨ
ﻧ
ﻥ
ﺾ
ﻀ
ﺿ
ﺽ
ﺞ
ﺠ
ﺟ
ﺝ
ﻪ
ﻬ
ﻫ
ﻩ
ﻂ
ﻄ
ﻃ
ﻁ
ﺢ
ﺤ
ﺣ
ﺡ
ﻮ
_
_
ﻭ
ﻆ
ﻈ
ﻇ
ﻅ
ﺦ
ﺨ
ﺧ
ﺥ
ﻲ
ﻴ
ﻳ
ﻱ
ﻊ
ﻌ
ﻋ
ﻉ
ﺪ
_
_
ﺩ
ء
_
_
_
ﻎ
ﻐ
ﻏ
ﻍ
ﺬ
_
_
ﺫ
 
 
 
 
ﻒ
ﻔ
ﻓ
ﻑ
ﺮ
_
_
ﺭ
Source: Adapted from Ager (Omniglot, n.d.) and Wehr (1976). In Ager’s work, some letters are rendered for a different dialect.

 Chapter 6 Culture
250 |
with the tongue in the back of the throat, and the  ta , a hard  t in the back of the throat. 
Because the sound of the   ﺽdhad is so unique to it, Arabic is sometimes called the 
language of   ﺽd. ād . The letter  ghain (   ﻍgh) has no counterpart in English but is close 
to a Parisian  r . The  hamza ,  ,ءshown in English by an apostrophe, is a glottal stop 
and counts as a consonant. It carries a vowel sign and may sit “on the chair” of the 
letter ‘alif. The letters  Ta  ﻁand s.ād  ﺹare pronounced further back into the mouth 
as compared to the other (softer)  t letter, the  ta .  ,ﺕand “s” character  sin  .ﺱLikewise, 
Hebrew possesses a more and less strongly pronounced  t sound, the  ta versus the 
 tal , and the Hebrew letter  samekh is similar to the  s.ād ; both languages have speciﬁ c 
letters for the  kha sound and the  ‘ain. 
 Arabic has only three vowels, an  a ,  i , and  u , but these may alter, becoming long 
vowels with the addition of a consonant (then, they are pronounced  aa ,  ee , and  oo ), 
and there are two dipthongs,  ai (or  ay ) and  aw . Previous forms of transliteration 
based on French or English sometimes transliterated the  i as an  e and the  u as an  o ; 
and in some cases, individuals may use these letters, for instance, in the spelling of 
their own names (for example, I spell my own name Sherifa instead of Sharifa) or 
of place-names. 
 NUMBERS 
 The Arabic numbers are written from right to left on the top line: 
٠١   ٩  ٨  ٧  ٦  ٥  ٤  ٣  ٢  ١  ٠
 sifr wahid ithnayn thalatha ‘arba’ khamsa sitta sab’a thamanya tis‘a ‘ashara 
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7   8  9  10 
 Although numbers are written left to right, after the number 20, they are verbalized 
starting with the lower numbers and moving to the higher numbers. Thus, in English, 
one writes  twenty-two or  22 , whereas in Arabic one writes  22  but reads or says  two 
and twenty ( ithnayn wa-  ٠ashrin ). Also, numbers occur in masculine and feminine 
forms, and special rules apply when they deﬁ ne a noun. The numbers 1 and 2 precede 
the noun, and speciﬁ cally for these two numbers the masculine form of the number 
is used with a masculine noun.  Wahid is the masculine form of the number one. To 
make it feminine, you must add a  ta marbuta , which makes it  wahidah . “One book” 
would thus be  kitab wahid (or, with nunation [a case ending that indicates nomina-
tive, genitive, or accusative case],  kitabun wahidun ), and  bintun wahidatun means “one 
girl.” Arabic has a special dual form that is used for two of anything; hence,  baytayn 
means “two houses” (a pair of houses). For the numbers 3 to 10, a masculine noun 
takes a feminine form of the number and vice versa.  Thalath (= 3) is the masculine 
form. Adding the  ta marbuta  produces  thalathah , the feminine. Also, from 3 to 10, 
numbers precede the nouns they deﬁ ne. In Arabic,  thalathatu awlad  means “three 
boys,” and  thalath banat  means “three girls.” Other rules apply for numbers in the 
teens and numbers above 20. 

Features of Arabic | 251
 FEATURES OF ARABIC 
 Arabic words are divided into syllables. Syllables always begin with a consonant; 
even when a word begins with an  ‘alif  (like  a ), this is considered a consonant. Arabic 
is a rhythmic language rather than a tonal language like Chinese. Rhythms come 
from the dynamism of long and short syllables. Syllables are long if they have a long 
vowel, such as the word  KAA-tib (“author”), in which the long vowel occurs because 
of the  ‘alif following the  kaf . Stress normally falls, if there is no syllable with a long 
vowel, on the penultimate syllable; for example, the second-to-last syllable is stressed 
in  fa-HIM-tu (I understood) and in  Di-RIY-yah (the ﬁ rst settlement ruled by the 
 al-Sa‘ud near Riyadh) where there is a long vowel. 
 A primary feature that Arabic shares with other Semitic languages is the use of 
trilateral verbs as the building blocks of the language. Verbs usually consist of three 
consonants such as the Arabic verb  fa-ha-ma , which means “he understood.” This 
is called the ﬁ rst form, or Form I, of the verb. Form II consists of a doubled second 
consonant indicated by a  shadda  over the  ‘ha , yielding  fahhama , with the meaning 
“he caused (something or someone) to understand.” Each form of a verb has a dif-
ferent meaning and sometimes multiple meanings. For example,  kha-ra-ja , a Form 
I verb, means “to go out or leave,” and along with a preposition,  ‘ala , “to rebel.” 
Form IV of  kha-ra-ja means “to move out,” “to exile (someone),” or “to produce (a 
play).” Form X also means “to move out,” or it can mean “to extract, or to discover 
(from something).” Some verbs have up to 10 forms; others possess only some of 
these forms. The verbal roots are often similar to those in other Semitic languages 
(Hebrew or Amharic). 
 Verbs must indicate singular, plural (or formal), and gender, unlike in English. 
This is accomplished by adding letters and vowels; one must write  tifhami  for “you 
(female) understand,” or  tifhamu for “you (plural) understand.” The feminine noun 
ending is often a “tied  ta ” ( ta’ marbuta ), which is only pronounced with the vow-
eled ending in classical Arabic, thus,  shajaratun (nominative case, meaning a tree), 
 shajaratan (accusative case), or  shajaratin (genitive case). Although this letter is pro-
nounced as a  t in the grammatical construction known as an  idhafa (a noun plus a 
noun that indicates possession), it is otherwise pronounced  a  or  ah , for example, 
 mudarrisa ( t ) for “female teacher” or Makka(t) for “Mecca.” Other feminine endings 
are a ﬁ nal  a form, called the  ‘alif maqsura (the short  ‘alif  ). However, many words 
have irregular plural forms. These include some words that are singular collectives 
but stand for the plural. 
 The 10 possible verbal forms also create verbal nouns, often in regular patterns. 
For example,  ka-ta-ba means “he wrote.” If one adds a long vowel, the letter  ‘alif , 
following the  kaf , this becomes  kaatib , or “author.” By prefacing  mim and the vowel 
 fatha  before the trilateral root, one creates the noun  maktab (“offi  ce”), and adding a 
 ta’ marbuta  (the feminine ending) to that yields  maktabah (“library or bookstore”). 
This form is the verbal noun of place or action. 
 Sometimes verbs derive from a quadrilateral root, and these are thought to come 
from Persian or perhaps another language. Verbs with an onomatopoeic quality are 

 Chapter 6 Culture
252 |
quadrilateral, hence  zalzala (zain, lam, zain, lam), “to quake, as in an earthquake,” 
and  yuwasisu and  waswasa (he whispers and he whispered). 
 Arab governments set up the Academy of the Arabic Language in Cairo, the 
Damascus Academy, and the Iraqi Academy, which made an eff ort to obstruct the 
rampant borrowing from other languages by creating Arabic terms for neologisms. 
However, these have not taken hold (Wehr 1976, viii). Many loanwords are em-
ployed for technical or recently introduced items, concepts, or actions, for instance, 
the word  ﬁ lm  and its plural,  aﬂ am (preceded by the European word  sinima ). Saudi 
Arabia, with its large number of religious scholars and offi  cials, also tended to coun-
ter the use of loanwords or borrowed phrases informally but with little success. As 
Hans Wehr explains in one of the most widely utilized dictionaries of classical Ara-
bic, Arab authors also tended to include classical words or phrases that had become 
archaic, and they included explanations of these terms, but writing styles now aim 
for readability (Wehr 1976, ix). 
 To a Western person, Arabic is especially diffi  cult to learn because most written 
materials are printed without vowels. Only the Qur’an, children’s written materials, 
and, in some cases, poetry are printed with vowels. The reader must know what the 
actual, invisible vowels are in order to comprehend the case and grammar of a sen-
tence, and sometimes vowels diff erentiate between words with the same consonantal 
spellings. 
 Cases are used in Arabic. In the classical language these are indicated through 
vowels, but many of the ending vowels drop off  in dialects. The cases are nomina-
tive, accusative, and genitive. Nominative case is usually indicated with the vowel 
 damma , which has the sound  u . Some words and names do not take the nominative 
case, so it is indicated by a diff erent vowel, but that is the exception. Arabic does not 
require the verb “to be” as in English. So a simple sentence might include a noun 
in the nominative case and an adjective in the nominative case with  tanwin , which 
grants a deﬁ nite form. Subtracting  tanwin makes the phrase indeﬁ nite, but adding 
the  ‘alif-lam  makes it deﬁ nite without implying “is.”  Kitabu jamilun  means “the book 
is beautiful,” while  kitabu jamilu means “a beautiful book,” and  al-kitab al-gamil 
ισ “the beautiful book.” When the deﬁ nite article  ‘alif-lam ( al ) is used, the vowel 
never has  tanwin ; it is never  un but  u . The accusative case is indicated with a  fatha , 
the sound of a short  a . It is used for the object of a verb, as in  fa-ta-ha al-baba (“he 
opened the door”). The genitive case, indicated by the  kasra , an  i  sound, is used for 
all objects of prepositions, for example,  min al-siyyaratin (“from the car”). It is also 
used for the  idhafa construction, which shows possession or ownership, as in  dar al-
amiri (“house of the prince”). 
 The deﬁ nite article  al is aff ected by the next consonant. The Arabic consonants are 
either  huruf shamsiyya , sun letters, or  huruf qamariyya , moon letters; those marked 
by the sun overrule the  l of the  al , and the  l becomes like the ﬁ rst letter of the word; 
for instance, the  shin creates  ash- in the name ash-Sharif. However, the word is still 
written with an  ‘alif lam ; it is only pronounced  ash as in ash-Sharif. The sun letters 
are  , ﺙ , ﺩ , ﺫ , ﺭ , ﺯ , ﺱ , ﺵ , ﺹ , ﺽ , ﻁ , ﻅ , ﻝ , ﻥand   .ﺕThe other 14 consonants are 
moon letters and retain their own sound.   However, in the written language, the 
al- is retained no matter how the following letter is pronounced orally, so one writes 
al-Najd, but it is correct to pronounce the word  an-Najd.

Features of Arabic | 253
 Arabic nouns have a diff erent form for the plural and singular (unlike English, which 
simply adds an  s to most words) and also a dual noun and verbal form. The dual (like 
the English word  twain ) is indicated by adding the ending  ayn  to a singular noun, as in 
 babayn (“the two houses”), and all of these change with the case. Usually, the plural 
form is a broken plural, or an irregular form, which can be predicted based on the verb. 
Otherwise, the plural ending is  un for males and  aat for females. The male plural ending 
changes in the accusative and genitive cases to  in (pronounced  een ), as in  mujahidin.  
 Many special grammatical features occur in both classical and colloquial Arabic. 
This similarity has given Arabic both consistency and great variety. For example, 
the vocative form is used and modiﬁ es the noun to the accusative case:  Ya amir (“O 
prince!”),  Ya laha min arus jamila!  (What a beautiful bride she is!), or  Ya latif! (How 
beautiful (or wonderful)!). The word  inna  (“in/so that /for . . . such and such”) and 
several similar words referred to as the “sisters of  inna ” ( anna ,  li’anna ,  ka’inna ,  laissa ) 
can be moved to the beginning of a sentence to emphasize the noun; it places that 
noun in the accusative case, for example,  innaha raahit ila waladaiha  (“for she went 
to her parents”).  Laissa is a negative but converts the noun to accusative case. The 
usual preferred sentence order in Arabic is verb, subject, object, in contrast with En-
glish. In a simple sentence, the word order is noun, adjective (or adjectival phrase). 
In a verbal sentence, the preferred word order is verb, subject, object which might be 
followed by an adverb or prepositional phrase. In sedentary dialects the word order 
may less often conform with this pattern. 
 In Arabic, unlike English, it is considered beautiful to elaborate, adding adjec-
tives and ﬁ nding diff erent ways to express the same sentiment several times. Prose 
may seem ﬂ owery to those unfamiliar to the language, but it is considered especially 
creative to compose novel word images in this way, within stylistic restrictions. 
 There is a perfect and an imperfect tense. The perfect implies a completed action, 
and the imperfect is used with the present or preceded by a syllable indicating the fu-
ture. Classical Arabic has both an active and a passive voice; the passive is indicated 
with diff erent voweling, but the passive does not occur in colloquial Arabic. 
 The negative is indicated by the word  ma (“not”),  la (“not”), or  lan (“never,” 
used with the imperfect) preceding the verb, for example,  Ma dhahaba  (“he did not 
go”),  la yiktibha  (“he isn’t writing it”), and  lan tiktibi  (“don’t write it,” the jussive 
form). This is also the form used in colloquial speech in Saudi Arabia (in contrast to 
a split negative employed in Egypt with the syllable  ma and consonant  sh ﬂ anking 
the negated word, as in  ma’rafsh or  mish ‘arif  [“I don’t know”]). The imperative is 
formed from the Form I verb, by prefacing the root letters with an  ‘alif  with an  a or 
 a  voweling (but sometimes  u ), for example,  Iktib! (“write!”) and  Iqra’! (“read!”). The 
form diff ers when it derives from a higher form of the verb. 
 Arabic consists of both a connected, or cursive, script and various styles of block 
printing where the letters are not connected. Diff erent styles of script have developed; 
an early form is the Kuﬁ c script. Classical and modern standard Arabic is quite elab-
orate and diffi  cult, but the regularity of the language—even irregular verbs occur in 
quite regular patterns—is helpful. Due to its diffi  culty, children do not read or write 
well until they are in their fourth or ﬁ fth year of study. The complexities of grammar 
are essential to an understanding of the Qur’an, and so grammar was a specialized 
subject in the  madaris (academies). 

 Chapter 6 Culture
254 |
 Arabic calligraphy is still practiced; the skilled calligrapher can form designs, ob-
jects, or even animal shapes from words. Various scripts have been used historically, for 
ordinary communication or design as calligraphy. To be literate, individuals must learn 
a cursive script and the forms of printed Arabic used in books and newspapers, which 
can vary greatly in painted or graphic signs and titles. A nonnative speaker must usually 
study for three to four years before gaining some mastery of the classical language or 
modern standard Arabic, but colloquial forms may be absorbed more quickly. 
 The transliteration of Arabic varies widely, as the French and British/Indian sys-
tems predated a closer Romanization now utilized. For example, the French used 
Coran, the British wrote Koran, and, more recently, Standard International Trans-
literation forms used by Middle East scholars render the book’s title Qur’an. In 
Saudi Arabia, it is common for people to use two  o ’s ( oo ) to transliterate the long 
vowel  damma with the letter  waw , as in Mahmood, as in the Indian or British-Indian 
system of transliterating English; however, it is considered more correct today, with 
the advent of Standard International Transliteration to use a  u and write Mahmud. 
 In Saudi Arabia, Arabic is utilized everywhere; there is less translation or trans-
literation than in some other countries. Since some other Arabs are not literate in 
Arabic script (for instance, Lebanese who were educated in French or have a poor 
grounding in written Arabic), they communicate on the Internet with a transliterated 
form of Arabic. Quite a few Saudi Arabians use this form too, which incorporates 
the number 3 to stand for the letter ‘ ain and the number 7 for the  Ha . 
 In Saudi Arabian dialects, certain letters may be pronounced diff erently than in 
classical Arabic; the letter  qaf  is usually pronounced as a hard  g — gaf —and in the 
eastern region and among some tribes, the  kaf  becomes a  ch  (as in Iraq). In Riyadh, 
the consonant  t.h.a is pronounced  za by some speakers, as in  bi zabt  (“precisely, ex-
actly”). Most dialects have extra, ﬁ ller words, and in Saudi Arabia, one is  tara , which 
means “know” or “let it be known to you,” used for emphasis, as in  tara al-sajan harr 
(“Make sure you know the plate is hot”). 
 Literature is almost always written in  fusha ; however, some poetry and the ma-
jority of sung folk poetry may be written in colloquial Arabic. Numerous perfor-
mances of oral poetry and music are available, but these, along with storytelling, may 
COMMON ARABIC PHRASES HEARD IN SAUDI ARABIA
Anyone traveling to Saudi Arabia might do well to learn the following useful 
phrases. Saudi Arabians are usually very happy to hear someone trying to use 
their language and will graciously compliment you on your Arabic, even if you 
are capable of nothing more than such phrases. Try to remember the gender-
ending format: nouns or adjectives ending in a consonant = m.(masculine 
[usually]) and nouns and adjectives that end in an a sound or ah are feminine. 
When using a verb, you need the i (ee) sufﬁ x for the feminine form; for the past 
tense, the ending sound a is masculine, and the ending sound at is feminine.

Features of Arabic | 255
Greetings: Marhaba! “Welcome” and/or
As-salaam ‘alayk (to a man) or ‘alayki (to a woman) “Peace be with you” (the standard 
Muslim greeting)
Wa-‘alaykum as-salam (to plural) “And peace be upon you!”
Ya hala! “Welcome.” Ya hala ﬁ ik! “Welcome to you!” (to a man) Ya hala ﬁ iki! (to a 
woman)
Hayaak Allah! “God has praised you.” Ya hala wa marhaba! “Welcome and wel-
come.”
Shlunak (colloquial, to a man) Shlunik (to a woman) “How are you?”
Tayyib(a) al-hamdulillah. “Good, thanks to God.”
Esh bak? (to a man) Esh bik? (to a woman) Makkawi/Jeddawi colloquial. “How are 
you?”
Na‘am. “Yes.” Eeh na‘am. “Yes.” (in Riyadh)
La. “No.” Min fadhlak. “Please.” Law samaht . . . (followed by phrase) “If you would 
allow . . .” Law samahti (to a woman)
Shukran. “Thank you.” Mashkur. (to a man) Mashkura. (to a woman) “You are 
thanked.”
‘Afwan. “Excuse me.” (or) Law samaht. “I’m sorry.” Or ‘Asif. “I’m sorry”
Faynak? Ma hadd yishufak/yishuﬁ k. “Where have you been? No one has seen you.” 
(conveys some reproach to one who neglects his visits)
Ma afham al-lughat al-‘arabiyya. “I do not understand Arabic.”
Ma ﬁ  mushkila. “No problem.” Mabruk! “Congratulations.”
Atamna lakum kull khayr wa mustagbal mushrag. “I wish you all the very best wishes 
and a bright future.” (said at a celebration or wedding)
Sabah al-khir “Good morning.” or Sabahak Allah bil-khir. “May God create a good 
condition for you in the morning.”
Sabah in-nur “Good morning” (said in response; literally, “morning of bright light”)
Ma‘asalaama. “Goodbye” or, literally, “Peace be with you.”
Nshufak ‘ala khair. “See you later.”
Masa’ al-khir. “Good evening.”
nahar/layl “day/night”
mughlaq/maftuh “closed/open” (a door, or a shop)
harr/barid “hot/cold”
qarib/ba‘id “near/far”
bakir/muta’akhir “early/late”
hishri/hishriyya “nosy or inquisitive”
marbush/marbusha “lacks poise”
‘Ayn ‘alayki barda (followed by a compliment). “May the evil eye not touch you” (liter-
ally, “may the eye be cold on you”). Said by women.

 Chapter 6 Culture
256 |
be forgotten or altered if not transcribed. To this end, Lamia Baeshen produced a 
 collection of folktales told in diff ering versions and written in Jeddah’s unique dialect 
(Jeddawi), entitled  al-Tabat wa al-Nabat (Baker 2007). 
 REFERENCES 
 Ager, Simon. “Arabic.” Omniglot.com. http://www.omniglot.com/writing/arabic.htm 
 Badeau, John Stothoff . “The Arab Role in Islamic Culture.” In  The Genius of Arab Civiliza-
tion: Source of Renaissance , edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 
1992, 5–15. 
 Baker, Razan. “Tales of Old Jeddah.”  Arab News , January 25, 2007. 
 Holes, Clive.  Dialect, Culture and Society in Eastern Arabia . Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 
2001. 
 Ingham, Bruce.  Najdi Arabic: Central Arabian . Amsterdam: John Benjamin, 1994. 
 Murphy, Keith B., and Sherifa Zuhur. “Qur’an.” In  Encyclopedia of U.S. Middle Eastern 
Wars , edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010, Vol. 3, 1013–1015. 
 Nicholson, Reynold A.  A Literary History of the Arabs . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1969, reprinted 1977. 
 Pellat, Charles. “Jewelers with Words: The Heritage of Arabic Literature.” In  Islam and the 
Arab World: Faith, People, Culture , edited by Bernard Lewis, New York: Albert Knopf, 
1970, 141–160. 
 Wehr, Hans.  A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic . Edited by J. Milton Cowan. 3rd ed. 
Ithaca, NY: Spoken Language Services, 1976. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Cradle of Islam: The Hijaz and the Quest for an Arabian Identity . London: I. 
B. Tauris, 2004. 
 Etiquette 
 Etiquette in Saudi Arabia has evolved from the culture, religion, and lifestyle. Eti-
quette upholds the values of generosity, courage, and honor. Society attributes these 
values to kinship groups: families, clans, and tribes. Hospitality expressing gener-
osity is legendary in the country. In the past, it was understood that since anyone 
might require food or shelter in a harsh desert environment, these should be off ered 
without question. Even enemies should be hosted for several days. The host’s duty 
to protect guests was nearly sacred, and it was shameful if he failed in this regard. 
This tenet of protecting one’s guests may extend to contemporary business dealings, 
diplomacy, and foreign relations, but at the same time, the host does not anticipate 
overt criticism from his guests. 
 Social and linguistic expressions in Arabic are deﬁ ned by these values of gener-
osity, courage, and honor. Additionally, they are impacted by Islamic values and 
constantly reﬂ ect the fact that the primary social loyalty is to the family unit. Family 
is the highest priority, not employers, acquaintances, or the government. Respect 
for elders in general and one’s parents in particular is expected, and the latter is a 

| 257
Etiquette
religious requirement. Respect for religious principles and duties is also required and 
impacts daily etiquette. For instance, it would not be prudent to telephone someone 
just as the call to prayer is given. 
 Social hierarchies matter, diff erentiating those in tribal groups, the intellectual 
elite, merchants or businesspersons, the royal family, and expatriate workers. The 
royal family are held in high esteem and have special privileges. A request by a higher-
ranking member of the royal family cannot be turned down, at least not easily, by 
his own family member or a nonroyal. In general, men obtain special prerogatives as 
compared to women, and there are systems of etiquette emanating from the gender 
system, as well as the practice of separating the sexes in order to maintain modesty 
and virtue. 
 Normally, an older person takes precedence over a younger person, even if the 
latter has a higher status. The ﬁ rst greeting in a social situation is given to the elder 
person, who is served food or drinks before others. If a prince or princess of the 
royal family is present, this general principle may be overlooked, but often the royal 
person may choose to defer to the older person present. The place of honor is to the 
host’s right or on the right side. It is polite to allow one’s host, or another attentive 
friend, to make introductions to others. Social gatherings may vary when attended by 
Saudi Arabians exclusively, and between small groups of friends or family and larger 
gatherings. More formalities may be observed outside of the family circle. When 
foreigners are present who might not understand the more formal rules of etiquette, 
these rules might be relaxed for the foreigners. 
 An older brother or father, or a mother, must be respected and not opposed, 
at least not directly. Children are supposed to provide their parents  rida (parental 
contentment), avoid their anger ( ghadab ), and not mistreat siblings (Altorki 1986, 
73–74). While some of the formalities that the younger generation observed toward 
their elders had relaxed by the 1970s, it was still thought rude for daughters to cross 
the room with their shoes on when their mothers were seated, to raise their voices 
toward them in conversations, or to discuss intimate matters, just as sons would not 
smoke in their father’s presence or continue reclining if he entered the room (Altorki 
1986, 75–76). This does not mean that youth always agree with their parents or share 
the same views (Yamani 2000; Long 2005), and they might resort to subterfuge to 
avoid conﬂ ict. 
 Modesty and chastity are social virtues in Islam; hence, etiquette requires that 
men do not converse directly with women who are not their relatives, nor do they 
socialize with them and vice versa. Many believe that men and women should not 
shake hands at all. It is normal to refrain from even touching a family member of 
the opposite sex, once a person has completed his or her ablutions, which necessarily 
precede the prayers that are observed ﬁ ve times daily. Separation of the sexes impacts 
numerous aspects of public and social life. On social visits, men may meet solely with 
men, while women entertain each other in a diff erent space. However, social events 
where foreigners are invited may be attended by men and women, or Saudi Arabian 
men might attend without their wives. Social visits are reciprocal and, if not carried 
out, can signal the demise of a relationship. Formal, prearranged visits called  wu ‘ ud 
allow women to invite those who owe them a visit to a common appointment, usually 
ritualized and held in the late afternoon or early evening. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
258 |
 Respect and care for the family have an enormous impact on many aspects of 
life, from the psychology of families to legal thinking, customs, and the conduct of 
politics. For instance, the element of consultation that the al-Sa‘ud rulers observe 
helps to invest more family members in the stability of the regime. The appearance 
of family solidarity has restrained the al-Sa‘ud, according to Robert Lacey, from 
exposing their disputes to outsiders (Lacey 1981, 350). One such incident that we do 
know about—the forced abdication of King Sa‘ud—came about only after the family 
grouping of senior princes informed Faysal of their intent and convinced Sa‘ud to 
abdicate (Lacey 1981, 356). 
 Respect for the family and concern for daughters who do not obtain alimony 
on divorce are among the underlying reasons for arranged marriages and dislike of 
divorces; parental input into their children’s selection of careers and the value of the 
collective over the individual are acceptable actions and values and impact etiquette. 
Endogamous marriages were preferred by tribal and clan groups, especially marriage 
to cousins (a man would marry his father’s brother’s daughter). This helped to keep 
property and interests within the family, even though in the Islamic system of mar-
riage, spousal property remains separate. In addition, care for the elderly and the 
physically and mentally disabled falls on the family. That meant that institutions for 
the care of the disabled were not prevalent; the justiﬁ cation was that families pre-
ferred to handle their care. A major institution dedicated to the care of the disabled is 
now sponsored by the royal family. Nevertheless, many disabled students are served 
only by private schools, and, with the fairly high poverty rate in Riyadh, many fami-
lies lack the income to enroll their children in the existing programs. 
 Aspects of Islam are ﬁ rmly woven into the pattern of Saudi Arabian life. During 
the month of Ramadan, when Muslims fast from dawn to dusk, non-Muslims should 
also refrain from eating, drinking, or smoking in public and should be conservative 
in their dress and behavior at this time. Non-Muslims are not required to observe the 
fast; however, in Saudi Arabia, Islamic law is ﬁ rmly upheld for Muslims. In the past, 
the religious police ( mutawa ‘ in ) might actually interfere with, hit, or arrest those who 
did not conform to the dress code or who otherwise transgressed Islamic norms. They 
could detain and beat them, and some died in their custody, until they were discour-
aged from carrying out arrests in 2007. These offi  cial or volunteer morals police are 
still present and continue to verbally confront off enders, particularly women. 
 Etiquette combined with culture and religion impact visitors to the kingdom in 
other ways. Visitors may obtain pilgrimage ( hajj ) visas if they are Muslims. Others 
can obtain business visas, and foreign workers may be contracted through sponsors 
who obtain visas for them. However, ordinary tourist visas are not forthcoming, 
and other special categories such as students or scholars require sponsors. It is the 
etiquette of the  hajj , and the status of the kingdom and its government as guard-
ians of the Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina, that thus far has restricted tourism. 
The performance of the  hajj involves numerous rites which are discussed separately 
(see Pilgrimage). 
 Greetings and initial small talk are expected to precede any serious business or 
social matter. The standard greeting is  As-salaam alaykum (“peace be with you”), 
and the response is  wa alaykum as-salaam . On entry to a home or business, guests or 
customers hear  Ahlan wa sahlan  or  Marhaba (“welcome”), and the response is  ahlan 

| 259
Etiquette
ﬁ k(i) or  marhabtayn , followed by polite inquiries. One should not discuss unpleas-
ant topics, and men should not ask about a Saudi Arabian man’s wife, nor should a 
woman ask about another woman’s husband. 
 The Arabic language is revered, so rhetorical eloquence and elegance are es-
teemed. Often, indirect references or euphemisms are employed to avoid being im-
polite. Someone may describe himself as being a little tired, which means he has been 
ill, possibly quite ill. At a social event, attendees may be curious about any foreigners 
attending and ask personal questions about their age, marriage status, or religion, 
which are not thought to be rude. One should respond to these questions. It is not 
polite to say anything negative or rude about one’s own family members, because 
this will be taken as a negative character trait. A foreigner may be addressed as Mr. 
or Dr. First Name rather than by his last name. 
 Couples usually start their families early, and the birth of children is an occasion 
of celebration. The mother and the father may then be addressed by the name of their 
ﬁ rstborn son, or that of their ﬁ rstborn daughter until a son is born. For example, a man 
named Muhammad Abdullah would be called Abu Hassan (father of Hassan) and his 
wife, Umm Hassan. Friends or family might address him this way, and the reason is 
that the birth of a son (Hassan) endows higher status on both a man and a woman. 
 Men often attend  majlis es ( majalis ), or meetings with those in authority, or for busi-
ness, social, or political reasons. In a prince’s or other important person’s  majlis , a par-
ticular etiquette is observed. Many persons may attend with requests, and in the case 
of meetings with royals, these are often written and handed to the royals, although 
the petitioner ﬁ rst orally presents his request. The bedouin and Islamic tradition of al-
lowing a public audience and access to authority means that, verbally and psychologi-
cally, there is less obsequiousness or pomp and circumstance surrounding a prince, 
or even the king, who may be addressed simply by his ﬁ rst name, “Ya ‘Abdullah,” by 
the petitioner. The host may curtly dismiss the petitioner or require the petition to be 
presented in writing so as to save time, but he has a duty to look into the matter. This 
allows an opportunity to settle conﬂ icts and deal with needs or grievances. 
 The importance of etiquette in the Arabic language and the nuances of etiquette 
that the language provides cannot be easily described in brief. To begin with, Arabic 
deﬁ nes gender in the verb form, as well as distinguishing between a plural “you” 
and a singular “you.” More formal or classical language, or more colloquial lan-
guage, can be employed to diff erent purposes. The vocative—“O [you] Name of the 
 Person”—is used in entreaty or praise but also for emphasis. Saying that one will do 
something in the future tense does not necessarily imply a promise or even an intent; 
it may imply only desire to take that action. 
 Westerners who frequently swear or use obscene words in their own language 
should refrain from doing so, as Saudi Arabians may not understand if this is in-
tended casually and consider it insulting. This includes expressions like “holy crap,” 
“Jeeze,” or “bloody so-and-so,” expressions not considered extremely obscene in 
the United States or the United Kingdom that are off ensive in Saudi Arabia. For 
instance, Jesus is considered a prophet and not to be called on in anger, nor should 
any slurs be made about Muslims or aspects of their faith. 
 Saudi Arabians greet each other and close non–Saudi Arabian friends with kisses, 
usually on the right cheek, and several times on the left cheek, and sometimes on 

 Chapter 6 Culture
260 |
the nose or forehead following that. The kissing patterns can vary depending on the 
geographic or tribal origin of the individuals. In the past, kisses could be given to 
the right shoulder or to the hand of a royal. Often, Saudi Arabians will shake hands 
with foreigners who are unfamiliar with the kissing patterns, but they might expect 
a returning friend to greet them with the same kisses on each cheek and hug that 
they receive. However, Saudi Arabians will not, as already explained, kiss or shake 
hands with the other sex. Men may hold hands and embrace each other in addition 
to greetings, which is a sign of friendship and not anything else. 
 Etiquette at larger public gatherings,  majlis es ( majlis literally means “a place for 
sitting and meeting”; various individuals or princes may host their own  majlis es 
whose attendees make requests or present grievances to them), festivals, or funerals 
is more speciﬁ c. Generally, guests should not depart too early, but in long, multihour 
events, some may depart, and at the majlises held to commemorate the dead and 
convey condolences to their relatives, guests come and go. Speciﬁ c formal greetings 
are expressed. If a royal is hosting the event, one may be presented to him or her. If 
entertainment in the form of poetry recitation, music, or dance is off ered, conversa-
tion may go on at the same time. 
 Saudi Arabians are less aloof and give more time to their friendships than some 
Westerners may be accustomed to. Loyalty is essential, and friendships may well be 
mixed with business relationships. Privacy is not as important as in the West, and 
friends are expected to visit and keep in touch. Once a friendship is established, a 
person might drop in or might telephone and expect to be seen as soon as possible. 
Conversely, failing to keep in close touch can be perceived as an off ense. E-mail and 
text messaging have become popular and are another way of expressing friendship. 
 Favors are expected, and this works on both sides of a friendship, which may be 
based on a business relationship. Westerners might ﬁ nd that Saudi Arabians are 
unlikely to decline a request, even if they do not, or cannot, follow through and 
know that at the time of the request. Because of the intense Saudi Arabian desire to 
maintain pride, it is important not to excessively pressure Saudi Arabians, even (or 
especially) in business, for while they may give the impression of being amenable to 
a request, they may have simply not wanted to decline. Therefore, the response of 
“yes” usually means “perhaps” or “possibly.” Praise is essential, and criticism should 
be off ered only in a very indirect manner. In general, Saudi Arabians will attempt to 
avoid confrontation and want to save face, and the crux of good etiquette is behav-
ing so that this can occur. Saudi Arabians may not admit to doing anything wrong 
or that any mistakes were made. Because the isolated lifestyle of the Westerner is 
not the norm, Saudi Arabians expect a great deal of personal interaction with fam-
ily, friends, and business acquaintances. However, they are usually averse to pub-
licity and any notoriety, for example, of rumored or controversial business deals, 
especially anything involving or reﬂ ecting on the royal family or the government. 
This has various implications, ranging from traditional suspicions of advertising to 
withdrawal from major business transactions if any negative aspects of these were 
to be publicized. 
 Saudi Arabians may invite a friend or acquaintance without much notice and 
may not want to commit to a plan too far in advance. A guest could decline such 
a last-minute invitation a few times but should then accept. It is polite to arrive on 

Coffee | 261
time; however, on the other hand, Saudi Arabian guests may be hours late. As Saudi 
Arabian men socialize separately from women, a dinner invitation might be extended 
only to men, and it is worth checking in advance whether others are bringing their 
spouses. 
 In Saudi Arabia, the ﬁ rst name is often that person’s own single name, followed 
by  ibn  (son of ) or  bint (daughter of ), then the father’s name, and ﬁ nally the grand-
father’s ﬁ rst name. In some areas a lengthier form of descent is represented in the 
name, whereas in the Hijaz, just the person’s, father’s, and grandfather’s names are 
used. Sometimes, the last name may indicate the tribe or place of origin, but in other 
instances, the tribal name may not be used. Also, in some families a boy may be given 
the ﬁ rst name of Muhammad or Ahmad in addition to his ﬁ rst (given) name, so he 
may be referred to by these two ﬁ rst names. Saudi Arabians use the same naming 
system for others, calling their business friends by their ﬁ rst name preceded by Mr. 
It is polite to do likewise and, as one becomes more familiar with the person, to drop 
the use of the preceding “Mr.” Members of the royal family may be introduced and 
usually introduce themselves with their ﬁ rst name and then their father’s name, but 
those directly descended from the king’s family should be addressed as Your Royal 
Highness or Your Highness. Other royals may be spoken of as Prince First Name. 
Other government offi  cials can be addressed as Excellency. Women keep their own 
father’s name after marriage, as in Sarah bint Muhammad. 
 The traditional style of serving food is on platters served on a  sufra (circular mat) 
on the ﬂ oor; food is eaten with the ﬁ ngers of the right hand. The ﬁ ngers should not 
touch the mouth or tongue when one is eating from a shared plate. The guest might 
be given special morsels of food, and it is not polite to refuse these. Today, plastic 
sheeting may be used in place of the circular mat for sitting on the ﬂ oor. A guest 
might be entertained in a Western-style seating arrangement at a table with chairs 
and cutlery. A host will off er large amounts of food, but it is considered polite to 
leave food half-eaten on the plate. Prior to eating, the words  Bismillah ar-rahman 
ar-rahim (“in the name of Allah, the Merciful and Beniﬁ cent”) are said and, after eat-
ing,  al-hamdulillah (“thanks be to Allah”). Guests say  An ‘ am Allah ‘ alaykum kathir 
‘ ala khirkum (“May Allah greatly bless you for your goodness”). Following a meal, 
Saudi Arabians may smoke cigarettes or a water pipe ( arghileh or  shisha ). Guests do 
not linger and usually depart after dinner and the burning of incense. 
 In restaurants, Western-style tables have often replaced traditional seating. One 
will ﬁ nd restaurants with private rooms, where women can enter without being seen 
by other restaurant customers. Some restaurants or hotels have women’s or family 
sections for eating. 
 COFFEE 
 Saudi Arabians serve coff ee as part of the greeting ritual in homes, offi  ces, and at 
some public events. Coff ee preparation is described in more detail in the section 
on food, but it may be Turkish coff ee, which is black, or Arabic coff ee, made from 
roasted green coff ee beans with cardamom, which is quite light in color. It is consid-
ered polite to accept at least a cup of coff ee, using only the right hand; to indicate 

 Chapter 6 Culture
262 |
that no more is wanted, one turns the cup from side to side or covers it with the palm. 
Dates may be off ered with the coff ee, and tea, or herbal teas, follows it. Then coff ee 
will be off ered again after the tea. Then, Saudi Arabians may burn incense,  ma’moul , 
or scented wood called  ‘ud , in a censer called a  madkhana , fanning the smoke to 
perfume the guests. 
 GESTURES 
 Showing the soles of the shoes or placing feet up on a desk is considered very rude, 
and it is more polite to sit with legs uncrossed. Beckoning someone with one ﬁ nger 
is not polite. Saudi Arabians gesture with the ﬁ ngers together, palm up, moving the 
hand outward, indicating one should wait a little or be patient. A nod upward and 
back while raising the eyebrows and tutting the tongue means “no, not at all.” 
 GIFTS 
 Gifts should not be given on a ﬁ rst meeting of business associates, unless it is a token 
item, except for certain offi  cial exchanges, as with military or governmental offi  cials, 
when Saudi Arabians will likely bring offi  cial presents; similar items should be pre-
sented to them on the same occasion. At special occasions, a gift may be given to all 
attendees or to some. Saudi Arabians may present acquaintances with gifts of value, 
and it is important, if possible, to accept the gift. You might return a gift of equal 
value in the future, but it is not expected. Foreign military or government offi  cials 
bound by ethics rules constraining them to decline gifts (for instance, U.S. govern-
ment employees are not to receive gifts exceeding $20 in value) should endeavor to 
gracefully accept such gifts and explain the circumstances to their agencies, as these 
are not intended as bribes or a breach of ethics. Gifts of dates at Ramadan are com-
mon. Gifts to children are welcome, but one should not off er gifts to the wife of a 
Saudi Arabian. A Saudi Arabian recipient of a gift might not acknowledge or make 
a fuss over it or might not even open it until the guest has departed. Gift giving takes 
place at the ‘Id al-Fitr (at the end of Ramadan), at ‘Id al-Adha, and at weddings and 
births but not usually on birthdays, although the Western form of birthday celebra-
tions is catching on. Gifts of jewelry from the  arham , or affi  nal relations to a new 
bride, are expected. Many stories circulate in which guests of Saudi Arabians admire 
something and then the host feels he must present the guest with the admired item. 
While this is not always the case, one should be aware of this possibility. 
 CLOTHING 
 Dress also expresses elements of etiquette as well as indicating urban or rural status 
or special occasions. Saudi Arabian men wear a white  thob or long cotton robe, 
and they may wear darker colors (gray or brown) in the winter, as well as a white 
headcloth ( ghutra   ) or a red-and-white checked cloth (shmagh) at all times. It is not 

Clothing | 263
polite to ask a Saudi Arabian man to remove his head covering. Most men wear 
a black  iqal (a braided cord) to hold the  ghutra  or  shmagh  in place. Very religious 
men, the  salaﬁ yya and the  mutawa ‘ in , may wear a headcloth without the  iqal and 
slightly shorter  thobe s. In the winter, a jacket or a tailored coat called a  diglah  is worn 
over the  thobe . For special occasions men wear a  bisht , which is a wool or camel-hair 
cloak. Men wear leather sandals or European-style shoes, and they are not supposed 
to wear gold jewelry. When Saudi Arabian men are overseas, they often wear West-
ern dress. Western businessmen should dress formally for meetings, with jackets and 
ties, and avoid wearing shorts. Saudi Arabian men may hold prayer beads ( sibha ), 
and it is acceptable for men attending a  majlis to ask to borrow  sibha and then re-
turn them. Shoes may be removed, especially when entering a home. Shoes must be 
removed when entering a mosque. It is considered impolite to point the sole of the 
shoe toward anyone. 
 Women are expected to wear the black ‘ abaya over their clothing and the  shayla , 
or black scarf (or the head covering of the Hijaz, the  tarha , a long black headscarf ), 
A Saudi Arabian woman wearing an 
embroidered ‘abaya in the old city of 
Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, 2007. ‘Abayas 
are routinely black, but some women 
wear versions decorated with crystals, 
sequins, gold ribbon, or even some areas 
of color. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 6 Culture
264 |
and they may or may not wear the  hijab , a separate headscarf, under the  shayla . 
Additionally, some women fully veil their face with a burqa, or face mask, or the 
modern-style cloth  niqab , which exposes the eyes. On some occasions, as when one 
is invited to a private home, women may remove the ‘ abaya , and it is returned to 
the guest when she leaves. When visiting Saudi Arabians where men are present, a 
woman may continue to wear the ‘ abaya , unless the hosts indicate otherwise. At very 
large public women’s events or parties, women may also discard the ‘ abaya . If the 
‘ abaya is to be removed, it is wise to dress more conservatively than in the West, for 
instance, in dresses with long sleeves, a higher neckline, and a lower hemline than in 
the West, basically covering all skin, even though Saudi Arabian women may dress 
in extremely tight and fashion-forward clothing under the ‘ abaya . Only in a few 
public locations in Najd is it permissible to drop the headscarf or open or remove 
the ‘ abaya , as on the women’s ﬂ oor of the Kingdom Mall in Riyadh. In Jeddah, the 
attitude toward covering and veiling is somewhat more liberal; however, since the 
pilgrims travel to Jeddah on their way to the Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina, this 
is also a matter of context. 
 DEPORTMENT AND SEGREGATION 
OF THE SEXES 
 Until 2007–2008, the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention 
of Vice , known as the HAIA (Hay’at al-Ma‘ruf wa al-Nahaya ‘an al-Munkar) or 
 mutawa ‘ in , patrolled the streets and public places and were especially harsh to women 
whom they considered improperly clothed. They might verbally berate Saudi Arabi-
ans they considered to be breaking Islamic rules, or even beat them or arrest them, 
but in 2007, they were instructed by the government to cease doing so. 
 According to the law, men are the guardians of women; therefore, women’s guard-
ians (male relatives) are responsible for women’s behavior. Many actions that the 
 mutawa ‘ in seek to prohibit are against the law or have become customary etiquette. 
For instance, couples should not publicly embrace or kiss, and they can be challenged 
as to their relationship; also, no one should be inebriated, and no one should eat, 
drink, or smoke during the daylight hours of Ramadan. The  mutawa‘in  may also 
object to skirts that show even a little ankle, to the uncovering of a wrist or forearm, 
or to men wearing shorts. Women employees are completely segregated from men, 
with the occasional exception of female doctors at their duties. 
 In Riyadh, most restaurants are closed to women, except on Thursday evenings 
as of 2008. Some restaurants were open to women on other evenings, but in previous 
years, they could be subject to raids by the  mutawa‘in . This excludes the women-only 
areas such as the women’s ﬂ oor of the Kingdom Mall. Certain restaurants maintain a 
“family area” meant for women (or men who sit with their family members) or have 
private rooms for groups including females. Readers may be aware that some other 
Islamic countries are more liberal about such restrictions, whereas in other places, for 
instance, in urban Syria and urban and rural Pakistan, it is common for restaurants 
to include a male seating area and a smaller family seating area. 

Business | 265
 Women are not supposed to travel alone but rather in the company of their  mah-
ram , or close male relative or guardian. In order to participate in the pilgrimage, 
women can obtain special letters conferring the  mahram  duty on their tour leader, 
and most concede that there is no problem with women traveling to the pilgrim-
age in such a group if the women are over the age of 45. Foreign businessmen or 
governmental travelers should obtain a  mahram letter from their embassy, which 
essentially means that entity acts as their  mahram ; they should be ready to present it 
if challenged at the airport or elsewhere. 
 Women are not permitted to drive or to walk in the streets without their  mah-
ram . Women who like to walk for exercise have in recent years complained that 
the  mutawa‘in prevent them from doing so, arguing, for instance, in Jeddah, that it 
is unsafe for them to walk. There have been periods when it was announced in the 
media that women would soon be permitted to drive, as in 2005 and 2010, so this 
limitation may someday cease. At present, Saudi Arabian women often employ a 
personal driver, who is typically not an Arab, and they must know their area well in 
order to direct their driver. The rule against driving also applies to foreign women. 
As of 2006, women visitors could hire a taxi from the airport, although offi  cials used 
to insist that women be met by their  mahram  (male relative) or a business stand-in. 
Cars with a driver may be hired by women or men at hotels. 
 Male-female etiquette is extremely complicated, and the government permits or 
encourages women to obtain only certain types of jobs to prevent further social 
mixing. There may be separate elevators for men and women, and special sections 
exist for families and women in restaurants. Women-only banks exist. In addition, 
women’s lines are formed at the airport and other public places, and women’s desks, 
where women can stand in line and receive service, have started to be instituted in 
ministries. Women who may work within those ministries are separated. Stores that 
serve women post signs indicating they are for women and that men are forbidden 
(Yamani 1996; Zuhur, Personal Interviews and Field Notes, 2005–2008). Women 
are permitted in hotels, but hotel recreation areas like pools and golf courses are 
reserved for men. Some branches of government and professions exclude women 
entirely; thus, women may require male intermediaries to interact with male offi  cials 
there. 
 BUSINESS 
 Business is preceded, as is bargaining, with formal greetings, small talk, and possibly 
conversation about other matters. This is important to Saudi Arabians, who gauge 
responses as part of their decision making about the business acquaintance. Rushing 
or impatience is inappropriate. Conﬁ dentiality and discretion are expected. When 
one meets a Saudi Arabian business partner, he may not be very forthcoming about 
all of his business activities or not even specify what he does. Rather than asking 
directly, it is better to look at his business card and then make inquiries from others. 
Likewise, if you are engaged in many diff erent ventures, it is best to give very little 
information about these. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
266 |
 Government offi  cials may do business in the evening at their homes as well as in 
the daytime in their offi  ces. All businesses and offi  ces observe the required prayers, as 
the noon and afternoon prayers fall within business hours. No one should interrupt 
someone who is praying. Even outside of Saudi Arabia, the person praying will not 
respond until he or she completes his prayer. In Saudi Arabia, one will encounter 
people praying in any public place and on airplanes, especially the pilgrims, who are 
joyful and excited about attending the  hajj . Business and offi  cial matters may slow 
in August—when the intense heat inspires many Saudi Arabians who can aff ord it 
to take their vacations—and during Ramadan. After Ramadan at the ‘Id al-Fitr 
and in the  hajj season, during which the ‘Id al-Adha occurs, businesses will be closed 
anywhere from four days to two weeks. During Ramadan, business hours may be 
quite irregular; offi  ces are usually open until about 2:00 p.m., and shops will reopen 
after the evening meal, called the  iftar , which breaks the fast, from about 8:30 p.m. 
to midnight. Important decisions or meetings might be postponed until after the 
holiday at the end of the month. 
 Saudi Arabians may fail to attend a meeting without notice, and one should be 
ﬂ exible about rescheduling. This may occur when someone else has dropped in on 
them and manners required them to receive that person. One should realize when 
dropping in on a business person without an appointment that it is best to try to 
schedule and telephone in advance of a meeting at an offi  ce. It is polite to off er re-
freshments during a meeting and to walk one’s visitor to the door if a meeting is held 
at your offi  ce. During a business meeting, there may be many interruptions, others 
may enter, or telephone calls may be taken. It is best not to expect a serious or private 
matter to be concluded in one meeting. 
 BARGAINING 
 Bargaining is expected, although not in the newer supermarkets or stores in the new 
malls, where set prices are displayed. Bargaining may well be part of the business 
process. Prior to bargaining, or setting terms of a deal, it is important to start with 
greetings. Generally, bargainer and seller are expected to compromise. It is best to 
know something about the relative value of the goods in question and about the dif-
ferent styles of bargaining. Some people may begin with an extremely low off er with 
the intent of settling higher. Others may begin much closer to the price or terms they 
want to settle at. 
 Bargaining is also part of the business process of setting tips or commissions on 
services and can impact other travelers, for instance, pilgrims. In business deals, one 
might bargain on prices and also on terms or the scope of a deal, and one might be 
more ﬂ exible in one area, if not in another. A Saudi Arabian may consider a busi-
nessman who is unwilling to bargain to be someone who is determined to overcharge 
them. It is important to avoid hostility or frustration, possibly by using humor or 
tact in negotiating. When this is not a long-term business association but simply a 
purchase where bargaining is underway, then one might have to be willing, when 
necessary, to simply walk away, as the exercise is supposed to be advantageous to 

Weddings and Funerals | 267
both buyer and seller. However, if you walk away and the seller changes the terms to 
your advantage, it is rude not to reengage with him. At the successful conclusion of 
bargaining, the seller may present the buyer with a smaller item for free. 
 PHOTOGRAPHS 
 One should not take photographs of women or children, or indeed of anyone, with-
out ﬁ rst gesturing intent, and even then one should proceed cautiously. In rural 
areas, especially in the past, photographs were feared and considered un-Islamic. 
Photographing certain facilities, such as military or governmental buildings, may 
be objected to by guards. Certainly, photographs that show any subjects that are 
embarrassing to Saudi Arabians should be avoided, just as the key to etiquette in the 
kingdom is to shy away from publicly embarrassing others. 
 WEDDINGS AND FUNERALS 
 Marriages are usually arranged by the two families, and there is still a high rate 
of cousin (usually ﬁ rst cousin) marriage. Minors may be married, but the marriage 
would not be consummated until the age of majority (puberty); however, recent in-
ternational news attention to the marriages of several very young girls may result in 
a new law forbidding, or more closely regulating, child marriages. Elaborate etiquette 
surrounds the marriage process, beginning with family inquiries made about the bride 
and groom and proceeding to a contract that is negotiated and then registered with a 
judge. The contract speciﬁ es the amount of dower to be paid by the groom to the bride 
and other conditions or stipulations. Some time may pass between this premarital 
contract and the actual signing of the contract by the bride and groom and the wed-
ding parties. Saudi Arabians do not announce engagements or weddings in newspa-
pers, as is done in the West. Wedding parties and dinners are held separately for men 
and women. So many rules of etiquette govern such events that if one is invited, it 
may be a good idea to ask the host or hostess what to do or not do. For instance, an 
entertainer may perform at the women’s  majlis es, for example, female musicians and 
possibly a singer. At certain points in the evening, the guests may dance or participate 
in rhythmic clapping to accompany the music. Saudi Arabians may invite visitors to 
a wedding who are not close friends, and, in that case, a gift is not expected. 
 There are many disincentives to divorce (see chapter 5, subsection on divorce). 
It is often ﬁ nancially and socially disadvantageous to women and frowned on by 
many in society. Divorce is a much easier legal process for a man to initiate than for 
a woman. A woman is expected to move back in with her own relatives following 
a divorce. One may meet women as well as men in Saudi Arabia who are separated 
from each other but still married because of the stigma against divorce. Nevertheless, 
many more couples divorce than in the past. Polygamy is permitted in Saudi Ara-
bia, and many women fear the taking of a second wife more than divorce, although 
the offi  cial position is that the institution preserves rather than weakens marriages. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
268 |
Women whose social standing is impeded by their descent, injury, or age, or who are 
divorced, may seek marriage as a second or additional wife. 
 Burials should be held as soon as possible after a death. After the burial, a mourn-
ing period called the ‘ azza begins, which technically lasts for three days; in fact, the 
mourning period traditionally extended for a longer period and may continue to do 
so. Men and women separately receive guests who express their condolences in a 
 majlis . Women used to receive condolences in the mornings until noon on Sundays, 
Tuesdays, or Thursdays up to the 40th day after a death and sometimes for up to 
four months (Altorki 1986, 108). If a woman has a social relationship with another 
woman whose relative has died, she absolutely must attend to off er condolences. If 
a Western woman attends an ‘ azza , she should wear an ‘ abaya and not wear any 
makeup, especially lipstick. People may give verbal tribute to the deceased, and 
verses from the Qur’an are recited. Generally, the items belonging to the deceased 
are given away, and jewelry is melted down rather than being handed down to de-
scendants. It is considered impolite to discuss inheritance soon after the death of a 
relative, even though, in reality, families do so. (The information in this section is 
partially derived from personal experience and from other friends and residents in 
Saudi Arabia, as well as the listed sources.) 
 REFERENCES 
 Altorki, Soraya.  Women in Saudi Arabia: Ideology and Behavior among the Elite . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment: Visual and Performing Arts of the Middle East , edited by Sherifa 
Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 Cole, Donald P.  Nomads of the Nomads. The Al Murrah Bedouin of the Empty Quarter . Chi-
cago: Aldine, 1975. 
 Cuddihy, Kathy.  Saudi Customs and Etiquette . London: Stacey International, 2002. 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 Long, David E.  Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 
 Snouck Hurgronje, C.   Mekka in the Later Part of the Nineteenth Century, 1885–1889 . Leiden: 
E. J. Brill, 1970. 
Yamani, Mai.  Changed Identities: The Challenge of a New Generation in Saudi Arabia .  London: 
Royal Institute of International Aff airs, 2000. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Some Observations on Women in Saudi Arabia.” In  Feminism and Islam: Legal 
and Literary Perspectives , edited by Mai Yamani. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1996, 263–281. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. Personal interviews and Field Notes. Saudi Arabia. 2005–2008. 
 Literature 
 The literary tradition of Arabia is reﬂ ective of the broader Arabic tradition of letters. 
This is true because the nation of Saudi Arabia did not exist in a separate fashion 

| 269
Literature
before 1932 but also because the Arab troops who conquered and settled so many 
other parts of the Arabo-Muslim world during the Islamic expansion carried deep 
social and political ties with them. The current literary scene is a dizzying wealth of 
styles and messages heavily inﬂ uenced by cultural tropes, social realism, and moral 
messages. Many similarities exist between the work of Saudi Arabian writers and 
that of other Arab writers; nevertheless, some aspects of public writing are unique. 
The parallels pertain to writing subjects (such as tensions between religiocultural 
factors and the spirit of science, rational thought or freedom, and the uncovering of 
social malaise) and to style (such as experiments with stream-of-consciousness ex-
pression or surreal and nonchronological elements). As is explained in the section on 
language, classical Arabic or a modern standard version of it is utilized in literature, 
drama, and even some television drama; however, conversation and dialogue as well 
as some other forms of writing have more recently begun to use colloquial Arabic. 
 The earliest literature of the Arabian Peninsula was oral, and only some of the 
oral poetic tradition of the pre-Islamic era has been preserved. There probably was 
a wider poetic tradition with varying forms and meters, but what scholarship has 
deﬁ nitely uncovered was a sudden emergence of the  qasidah  (an ode, a special poetic 
form) tradition in the ﬁ rst half of the sixth century. Besides this special poetic form, 
the  rajaz meter with short rhyming lines is thought to have come from  saj , rhymed 
prose that was considered to possess magical powers (Gibb 1974, 14), as the poets 
were believed to be inspired by the  jinn (supernatural beings). Poets defended the 
honor of the tribe and perpetuated the tribe’s legacy. It was said of the Arabs in 
the pre-Islamic era that “they used not to wish one another joy but for three things—
the birth of a boy, the coming to light of a poet, and the foaling of a noble mare” 
(Ibn Rashiq, cited in Suyuti’s  Muzhir [Bulaq: 1282h.], as translated by C. J. Lyall 
[1885] cited in Nicholson 1977, 71). The poet’s satire,  hija , was unleashed against 
tribal enemies like a magical curse (Nicholson 1977, 73–74). Poets might represent 
their tribes as emissaries and spokespersons during wartime. Some of the poetic me-
ters used were  kamil ,  basit ,  khaﬁ f ,  wafer , and  tawil —these utilize the long and short 
syllables in Arabic. 
 The  qasidah was a long poem or ode, extending to 60 or 80  abyat  (two half lines 
that rhyme)—always more than 25 and usually not more than 100—written to praise 
the poet, his tribe, or his patron or to take aim at rivals and criticize their values. It 
begins with a section called the  nasib . Here, the poet is leaving his encampment and, 
often, his beloved. The next section describes his steed and then the chosen subject of 
the poem. Hundreds of  qasa’id have been preserved, including the Mu’allaqat (liter-
ally, “hanging”) or Golden Odes of 10 great poets or troubadours, among them those 
attributed to Imru’ al-Qays and ‘Antarah ibn Shaddad   known as the Black Knight 
of the tribe of ‘Abs, born of a slave mother. The  qasid  poets might use any form ex-
cept the elegy, which was established already. Several women poets were well known 
for their elegies, such as al-Khansa of the Sulaim tribe, who mourned her brothers, 
Mu‘awiyya and Sakhr. Aside from the  qasidah and the elegy, many other shorter poems 
and improvised verses were composed (Gibb 1974, 14–22). These poems convey the 
values of chivalry, loyalty to tribe and family, generosity, hospitality, courage, and 
self- sacriﬁ ce for both men and women (Nicholson 1977, 80–90). A famous 20-day po-
etry fair used to take place at Ukaz, and the Prophet Muhammad attended,  listening 

 Chapter 6 Culture
270 |
to the poets and the Bishop of Najran, Qays bin Said (Nicholson 1977, 135–136). 
Among the greatest poets were Ziyad ibn Mu‘awiyya, known as Nabigha, whose 
patron was the king of Hira, and Maymun ibn Qays. Nabigha was also known as 
A‘sha (“the weak-sighted”). A‘sha composed striking panegyrics (poetry in praise of 
rulers); a satirist and wine poet (wine drinking was not prohibited in the pre-Islamic 
era, and a genre of poetry celebrated the inspiration and elevation of mood produced 
by wine), he played his harp and declaimed throughout Arabia. He decided to travel 
to visit the Prophet Muhammad and wanted to become a Muslim. People tried to 
discourage him, for after all the Muslims forbade drinking, but he was willing to 
forswear wine, fornication, and gambling. Abu Sufyan, a great enemy of the Muslims 
prior to his conversion, paid A‘sha 100 camels to stay at home in al-Yamamah: “O 
ye Quraysh,” cried Abu Sufyan, “this is A‘sha and if by God he becomes a follower 
of Muhammad, he will inﬂ ame the Arabs against you by his poetry. Collect, then, a 
hundred camels for him” ( Kitab Aghani , viii, 85–86, I, 10, cited in Nicholson 1977, 
124). Such was the perceived power of the poet at the time of early Islam. 
 THE IMPACT OF THE QUR’AN 
 The Qur’an directly and indirectly inﬂ uenced Arabic literature and language. As so 
many non-Arabs were learning the Qur’an and Arabic, the ﬁ elds of philology and 
lexicography grew to explain the language of the text. The literature of the  ahadith 
(the plural of  hadith ) was produced in order to help Muslims follow and remember 
the example of the Prophet, and collecting and studying the  ahadith became a science 
and specialization of its own. 
 Meanwhile, the existing poetic tradition at the arrival of Islam seemed to die out. 
Great poets were known, such as Labid (Gibb 1974, 41), but they ceased compos-
ing after their conversion to Islam. Perhaps this was because of the popular belief 
in the poets’ connection to inspiration via the  jinn  (or a familiar  shaytan , a devil) or 
their role as propagandists. About 30 years passed, and then the  qasidah revived. 
This time, the poets were of bedouin background but from Mesopotamia, such as 
al-Akhtal, Jarir, and al-Farazdaq (Gibb 1974, 44). 
 GHAZAL POETRY 
 A new form of love poem arose in Mecca, called the  ghazal . The Meccan  ghazal was 
exempliﬁ ed by a member of the Quraysh tribe, ‘Umar ibn Abi Rabi’a (d. 720), who 
wrote: 
 Ah for the throes of heart sorely wounded! 
 Ah for the eyes that have smit me with madness! 
 Gently she moved in the calmness of beauty 
 Moved as the bough to the light breeze of morning 
 Dazzled my eyes as they gazed, till before me 

Folk or Vernacular Poetry and Lyrics | 271
 All as a mist of confusion of ﬁ gures, 
 Never had I sought her and never had she sought me 
 Fated the hour, and the love, and the meeting. (Palgrave 1872, cited in Gibb 
1974, 44) 
 Some criticized the poet for his outspoken passion, and he was exiled more than once. 
 A form of the  ghazal  developed in Medina as well. In it, the lover is a martyr who 
suff ers through his star-crossed love. Jamil of the tribe of ‘Udhra (d. 701) was the 
ﬁ rst to express in writing what came to be known as ‘Udhrite love ( hubb ‘udhri ), an 
unfulﬁ lled passion similar to that of the chivalrous knights of Arthur’s court. It is 
believed that this romantic tradition actually moved from Muslim Andalus (Spain) 
into Europe with the troubadours’ performances. It also moved from Arabia and 
inﬂ uenced poets in Iraq and Syria. 
 FOLK OR VERNACULAR POETRY AND LYRICS 
 Poetry, verse, and contests in colloquial Arabic remained important into the 20th 
century. This genre is discussed to some extent in the section on popular culture, 
but its strong eff ect on discourse as a whole should be mentioned here, as well as the 
fact that it is not merely the poetry or expression of illiterate people, or the “popular 
classes,” as the early chroniclers A. Ibn Khamis (1958, 152–174) and Sh. al-Kamali 
(1963, 283–304) thought. Saad Abdullah Sowayan (1985, 168) has written about 
literate Nabati poets who probably chose vernacular composition so that their au-
diences and the objects of their eulogies (panegyrics) would better understand and 
appreciate their poems. (The word  nabati  originally meant the Nabataean language 
but came to denote nonclassical or colloquial language.) Their work had a broader 
regional impact than might be thought, because although they utilized traditional 
forms, some traveled. Muhammad ibn Li‘bun al-Wayali (1790–1831) had memo-
rized the Qur’an and had beautiful handwriting. He later moved to Zubayr (Iraq) and 
Kuwait due to politics, and his work draws on the bedouin traditions of Najd and the 
Arabian coast (Booth in Badawi, ed., 1992, 466). Muhammad al-‘Abdullah al-Qadi 
(1809–1868) memorized the Qur’an as a child, studied  ﬁ qh , and copied the Sahih 
al-Bukhari (one of the great hadith collections) in his excellent handwriting; and 
Ibrahim Je’tin (d. 1943) was very familiar with classical literature (Sowayan 1985, 
169). Some poetry concerns the action of writing (Sowayan 1985, 171) or is written 
in complex forms requiring literacy, such as  al-muhmal  and  al-alﬁ yya .  Al-muhmal are 
the letters without dots in Arabic (the 15  mu’jam letters have dots); poetry composed 
using only the undotted letters is  muhmal .  Alﬁ yya  is a poem made of 28 strophes, 
each beginning with the next letter of the alphabet. This form occurred in classical 
medieval poetry and the postclassical forms discussed later on (Sowayan 1985, 171). 
Even more complex forms allow numbers to stand for letters (as in  hisab al-jummal ). 
In  al-darsi , paired letters make another kind of code allowing the poet to disguise the 
name of a lady, for example; and in  al-rihani , letters can stand for classes of things 
like fruits (f,  fakha ) or animals (h,  hayawan ), so the author can make hidden allusions 

 Chapter 6 Culture
272 |
to his subject (Sowayan 1985, 171). Numerous other literary devices like the use of 
one particular sound per line (the “s” or the “j”) come from classical verse of the 
earlier periods or those contemporary to the poets. 
 At the same time, oral poetry diff ers from written literature because direct com-
munication with an audience brings it alive and makes it a process. The poet may 
precede his poem with a lengthy explanation about the circumstances of the poem, 
and listeners may participate and ask questions. This discourse is spontaneous. The 
poem is precomposed and declaimed ( hadd or  hadb ), or it is sung ( dewineh ; see sec-
tion on music) either a cappella or accompanied by a  rababa  (or other instrument), 
in which case the poet plays and then stops playing the instrument to sing the next 
verse. The poet may declaim his own or someone else’s poetry (see also Kurpershoek 
1994). Women’s poetry is performed as well, and in some instances everyone in the 
audience knows the words and may loudly, even boisterously, sing the refrain with 
very emotional language (Campbell 1998, 63–64). 
 EARLY-MODERN ARAB LITERATURE 
 Early-modern Arab literature bridged the classical era and the present. Part of its 
inspiration came from the Arab Revolt in the Hijaz, during which some pro-Arab 
and anti-pan-Turkic intellectuals, such as Fu’ad al-Khatib and ‘Umar Shakir, began 
to publish in the  al-Qibla  newspaper founded in 1916. Muhammad Surur al-Sabban, 
one of the literary pioneers, edited, funded, and introduced an important book of the 
Hashemite era,  The Literature of the Hijaz  (1926). These writers were also inﬂ uenced 
by literary critics, such as Muhammad Hassan ‘Awwad (1902–1908), an admirer 
of Muhammad al-‘Aqqad, the Mahjar (Arab immigrants to the New World, such 
as Jibran Khalil Jibran and Mikha’il Na‘ima), and the Nahda, or Arabic revival 
movement of Syria, and a new, freer style of poetry (al-Hazimi et al. 2006, 11). As 
elsewhere in the Arab world, there was also a revival of a more traditional style po-
etry, as in the work of Ahmad Ibrahim al-Ghazzawi (1901–1980), who wrote poetry 
praising King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and his sons, and that of Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn 
‘Uthaymin (1854–1944), whose poetry alludes to the ancient  qasa’id and has been 
compared to that of the Egyptian poet Mahmud Sami al-Barudi (al-Hazimi et al. 
2006, 12). Romanticism was also taken up by Hamza Shihata, Husain Sirhan, Mu-
hammad Hasan Faqi, and others, as it was in Lebanon and Egypt in the same era. 
 MODERN POETRY, NOVELS, AND SHORT STORIES 
 A Sampling of Poets 
 A few lines from ‘Abdullah al-Faysal al Saud’s “Illumination” express this 
romanticism: 
Love, do you likewise feel
 the tremors of our exultant love 

Modern Poetry, Novels, and Short Stories | 273
 Answer me, are you a foreign spirit 
 in the world of people, if you comfort me in my exile? . . . 
 Speak out, do not fear any accuser 
 Our love was never sullied with hypocrisy and lies 
 It is the covenant of two hearts that ﬂ ourish to loyalty 
 Rejecting the treachery of the wolf . . . 
   Fawziyya Abu Khalid  (b. 1955) is known primarily as a poet, but she also pub-
lishes essays. Her earlier work mostly dealt with social issues; she then moved to 
political ones. Criticism was raised against her for writing openly about women’s 
bodies and also for appearing in public forums honoring writers. One of her 
poems concerns her labor giving birth to her daughter, a symbol of the land. An-
other brings in the Palestinian experience: “An Unannounced Trial of an Overt 
Act of Love” (Abu Khalid 1985) is both a powerful love poem and a political 
reﬂ ection. 
 Ghazi al-Ghosaybi (Qusaybi)  (1940–2010) was born in Hofuf; educated in Bah-
rain, Cairo, the United States, and London; and served as minister of industry and 
electricity (1976–1983), where he notably established the Saudi Basic Industries 
Company (SABIC). Then he became minister of health (1983–1985), ambassador to 
Bahrain, and later ambassador to the United Kingdom. He published many collec-
tions of poetry and some 20 books, including anthologies on history and literature. 
His poetry expresses many moods and tones, from the love poem “When I Am with 
You” to the frightening and surreal “Octopus” to the bold “Silence,” in which the 
poet’s social or political mission is alluded to: 
 When the brave poet is afraid to die 
 his best poem is silence 
 (al-Gosaibi 1987, 232) 
 This followed an incident, in which, unable to communicate with King Fahd, he 
decided to write a poem to the king, knowing that he read the newspapers every 
morning. He submitted a poem to the newspaper  al-Jazeera   . The paper published it 
on the front page, and he was promptly sacked. The poem followed along a bedouin 
and also medieval tradition of appealing to the ruler and read: 
 Between you and me, there are 1,000 
 informers cawing like crows, 
 So why do I need to continue talking or 
 singing? 
 My voice will be lost and you will feel 
 its echo. 
 Between you and me there are 1,000 
 informers who are lying. 
 You were cheated and you were pleased 

 Chapter 6 Culture
274 |
 with the cheating, 
 But in the past you were not like this, 
 admiring false things. 
 ( Guardian , August 24, 2010) 
 Al-Ghosaybi called for modernization. Speciﬁ cally, later in his life, he lobbied for 
women’s right to drive and the opening of new ﬁ elds of employment for women and 
was opposed by conservatives. He caused another international scandal in 2002 while 
ambassador to the United Kingdom, when his poem eulogizing a young Palestinian 
suicide bomber outraged the U.S. and Israeli governments. He was subsequently 
recalled from London to Saudi Arabia. According to the  Guardian , his writings 
were not permitted in Saudi Arabia until a month prior to his death in August 2010 
( Guardian , August 24, 2010). 
 Modern Novels 
 Novels and short stories are a new literary form in the Arab world. Novelists and 
short story writers may also compose poetry or essays or contribute to writing in 
the media. One is struck by the incisive social criticism of writers in Saudi Arabia, 
often individuals who hold sensitive university or governmental posts. Beginning in 
the 1950s, libraries were founded in Saudi Arabia, and the idea of preserving local 
culture, including popular literature, spread. In 1958 the Najdi poet ‘Abdullah ibn 
Khamis published  Popular Literature in the Arabian Peninsula , which was in tune 
with the sentiment toward preserving cultural legacies then extant in much of the 
Arab world. Some of these themes were explored by writers using classical rather 
than bedouin language. 
 The ﬁ rst Saudi Arabian novel  The Twins , by ‘Abd al-Qaddous al-Ansary, was 
published in Damascus in 1930 and was followed by Mohammad Nour ‘Abdullah al-
Jawhari’s  The Temperamental Revenge in 1935 and then by Ahmad Rida Houhou’s 
 Mecca’s Maiden (1947) and others who used their novels as a platform for social 
reform (al-Hazimi et al. 2006, 28). At the same time, the genre of short story writing 
was developing, which had the advantage of being publishable in periodicals and 
newspapers. ‘Abd al-Qaddous al-Ansary was the editor of the literary magazine  al-
Manhal . In this capacity, he had a formative eff ect on the writing of his time, as did 
Houhou, of Algerian background, who was probably inﬂ uenced by French writers 
of his era and their themes of positive realism and rationalism. The magazine pub-
lished translations of diff erent works as well as original writing. Muhammad Alem 
al-Afghani, another writer of this period, was literate in English and, given his back-
ground, might perhaps have read Chekhov and Gogol, who were so inﬂ uential in the 
development of the short story in their region. 
 Hamid Damanhouri wrote  The Price of Sacriﬁ ce  about Meccan businessmen 
in 1959, and Ibrahim al-Nasser’s  A Slit in the Night’s Attire was published soon 
 afterward. These two novels are more concerned with the art of writing. Ahmad 

Modern Poetry, Novels, and Short Stories | 275
al-Siba’i’s  Abu Zamil  (1954) was the ﬁ rst book written in an autobiographical form. 
When he republished that work about 20 years later, as  My Days , he was very criti-
cal of some of the traditional aspects of his upbringing and early schooling. Other 
autobiographies or memoirs were published in the 1950s by Muhammad ‘Umar 
Tawﬁ q, Hassan Kutubi, and Hasan Naseef. By the early 1980s, more sophisticated 
autobiographical writing emerged with Hamza Bogary (also referred to as Bogari; 
1932–1984), a student of al-Siba’i, in his  Saqifat al-Safa ( The Sheltered Quarter , 1984 
and 1991), in which he details old customs and belief, the existing pedagogy, and his 
coming of age, and with ‘Aziz Dia’’s  My Life with Hunger, Love and War , which 
recollects his experiences during World War I. In the 1990s and the ﬁ rst decade of 
the 21st century, autobiographical works continued to be written, and some have 
broken other social constraints. 
 Short Stories 
 Fouad Abd al-Hamid Anqawi (b. 1936) earned a degree from Cairo University and 
studied in London. He was the publisher of the ﬁ rst sports newspaper in Saudi Ara-
bia in 1960–1964, and he wrote travel articles and social essays in addition to a 
novel,  There Is No Shadow beneath the Mountain  (1974), and a collection of short 
stories,  Haphazard Days (1982). He presided over the  hajj section for European and 
 American pilgrims. His short story “Ali, the Teacher” shows that men, as well as 
women, are oppressed by ﬁ lial devotion and the customs of arranged marriages 
(Bagader and Heinrichsdorff  1990, 15–20). 
 An entirely diff erent, positive relationship between father and daughter is the 
subject of Ghalib Hamzah Abu al-Faraj’s short story “Violets.” Here, fate rewards 
the daughter’s desire to devote herself to her career with an unfaithful ﬁ ancé; his 
inﬁ delity means she is freed from this commitment. Her father, instead of pressing 
her to marry, understands and sympathizes. Abu al-Faraj was the editor in chief 
of  al-Madinah newspaper and was a government administrator; he wrote the nov-
els  Unforgettable Memories ,  The Red Devils ,  The Green March ,  Beirut Was Burned , 
 Strangers without Home ,  Faces without Makeup , and  Hearts Fed Up with Traveling 
and collections of short stories (Bagader and Heinrichsdorff  1990, 38–43, 77–78). 
Muhammad Ali Maghribi, a veteran writer (b. 1914), tells a morality tale about a 
bad-tempered man whose urine indicates he is pregnant. He takes to his bed in de-
spair. His long- suff ering wife explains to him that she had broken the container with 
his urine in it that he was taking to his doctor for testing. In fear of his vile temper, 
she had replaced it with her own (Bagader and Heinrichsdorff  1990, 12–14, 78). 
 The next generation of short story writers included Ibrahim al-Nasser, Ghalib 
Hamza Abu al-Faraj, Sa‘id al-Bawaridi, Najat Khayyat, Abdullah al-Jifri, Louqman 
Yunis, Abdullah Sa‘id Jam‘an, and others (al-Hazimi et al. 2006, 22). These writ-
ers usually had a main theme in their stories, which were chronological and more 
consciously written as literature. Some are realistic; other story writers like Hamza 
Bogary Siba’i Uthman, and Najat Khayat additionally invoke symbolism (al-Hazimi 
et al. 2006, 23). 

 Chapter 6 Culture
276 |
 Folklore is invoked by Umaima al-Khamees in “Salma the Omani”: “If a beau-
tiful witch from Oman lived in the trunk of a palm tree, the trunk would become 
hollow and ﬂ y off ” (al-Hazimi 2006, 202). Dark tales were told about a monster-like 
creature named Abu Dostain, who carried off  young girls. Salma lives happily with 
her mother and her sister, herding, but is carried off  at night in a combination of these 
magical and terrifying story lines (al-Hazimi 2006, 202–205). 
 The role of the storyteller, a wise/mad fool ﬁ gure, is troubled by the gap between 
the old and the new Saudi Arabia in Muhammad ‘Ali al-Shaykh’s “Tell Us a Story, 
Abu Auf.” The storyteller’s thoughts and their collision with his listeners’ reactions 
form the rhythm of al-Shaykh’s writing style: 
 —Blood has changed into milk, he murmured. People lack the old vitality. The 
pearls are still there, in the bottom of the deep sea . . . but . . . Oh, mad! Mad! 
 —Finish the story of the boy, Abu Auf! (al-Shaykh in Bagader and Heinrichs-
dorff , eds., 1990, 71–75) 
 Al-Shaykh (b. 1946) headed the literary society in Khulays and wrote  Mind Is Not 
Enough in 1982. 
 Najat Khayat writes of a woman plagued by her unhappy marriage who describes 
her husband as a “grimy worm” eating her ﬂ esh. She rises up against him, and, ter-
riﬁ ed he will destroy her, she moves ﬁ rst, waking up in the hospital only after he has 
died. That is the day the sun rose, she writes, the day she was actually born (Khayat 
in al-Hazimi et al. 2006, 207–210). 
 Najwa Hashim (b. 1960) is from Jaizan in Asir. Like many women writers, she 
began writing for newspapers and magazines and published  Travel in the Night of 
Sadness in 1986. Her style is breathy and mainly dialogue. “Fever in a Hot Night” is 
an attack on the institution of arranged marriage and its wild expectations and cruel 
ending (Hashim 1982 in Arebi 1994 , 142–152). 
 Two of the writers producing heartrending stories exposing the vulnerabilities of 
women are Khayriyya al-Saqqaf and Sharifa al-Shamlan. Al-Saqqaf was the ﬁ rst 
women editor at  al-Riyadh newspaper. She was born in Mecca in 1951, but her family 
moved soon afterward to Riyadh, Her writing was published in newspapers when she 
was still a child (Arebi 1994, 139; Hanley 2001, 35). Her story “The Assassination of 
Light at the Rivers Flow” begins like a newscast: “The stage on which action began 
was at 450 kilometers, where the road is exploded by thorns. The period is between 
Wednesday 19/5/1401 and Wednesday 26/5/1401. The event is assassination” (Baga-
der and Heinrichsdorff , eds., 1990, 47). The abrupt beginning shifts to the lyrical 
prose of a girl happy with her routine of study, friends, and family. But her father 
and mother expect her to marry, and her mother slaps her, beats her, and pulls her 
hair out (Bagader and Heinrichsdorff , eds., 1990, 47–51). In “Reﬂ ection” al-Saqqaf 
took up the theme as a more inevitable move of a girl who wants to escape her own 
home, built on the misery of her mother, but is then trapped with another abusive 
man (al-Saqqaf 1982, 69–78). 
 Al-Shamlan was born al-Zubayr in 1946 (some other sources state 1947). Her 
family lived in Iraq in the 1960s, and she studied journalism at the University of 

Theater and Drama | 277
Baghdad. She moved to Dammam near Dhahran and was an administrator of social 
services for women (criminal, disabled, and delinquent). Just as Egyptian novelist 
Nawal al-Sa‘adawi, as a physician and administrator of health services, described the 
core of human oppression that results in women’s oppression, so, too, al-Shamlan 
describes the stories of women she has encountered. There is no resolution in the 
story “A Life” ( Ukaz , April 6, 1987), nor in “Secret and a Death,” the story of a 
young woman, Zahra, who becomes pregnant but never reveals her lover’s iden-
tity and dies of an infection (al-Shamlan 1989, 23–29; Bagader and Heinrichsdorff  
1990, 30–33). “Nawal” relates the jumbled delusions of a newly incarcerated woman. 
Where can her daughter, Nawal, be? Apparently she has killed her (al-Shamlan 1989, 
83–87). 
 Many Saudi Arabian writers’ works and poetry can be found in anthologies, 
magazine or newspaper excerpts, or individual publications; other notable names 
include Faisal Akram, ‘Ali Bafeeqah, Nasir Bouhaimid, Fawzi al-Dahhan, Mu-
hammad Habibi, Hashim al-Jahdalik Khalid Mustafa, Fatima al-Qarni, Husain 
Suhail, ‘Abdullah ‘Aalih al-‘Uthaymeen, Fawziyya al-Bakr, Maryam al-Ghamidi, 
‘Ashiq ‘Issa al-Hadhal, Hasan al-Nimi, Laila al-Juhani, Thurayya Qabel, Khadija 
al-‘Umary, ‘Abdu Khal, Ruqayya al-Shabib, Wafa Attayeb, Fatna Shakr, Juhayer 
al-Musa’id ‘Abdullah abd al-Jabbar, ‘Abd al-Fattah Abu Madyan, Khalid ibn Sul-
tan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, Sultana al-Sidairi (in  nabati ), and others mentioned later in 
this chapter. 
 THEATER AND DRAMA 
 Saudi Arabia actually permitted theater brieﬂ y in the 1960s but then forbade all 
public theater or cinemas. This has severely inhibited the growth of an entertain-
ment industry like that found in Egypt, Lebanon, or Syria. Drama is written, but 
for reading, and performances are limited to college settings. ‘Ali Ahmed Bakthir 
had his ﬁ rst play, which called for the general education of Arab women, produced 
in Egypt. 
 Raja‘ al-‘Alim is a noted playwright and novelist who began publishing in the 
1970s. Her style is reminiscent of Egyptian playwright Yusuf al-Idris’s later period 
when he experimented with surrealism, in the style of Pirandello or Albee. Better 
known outside of Saudi Arabia than at home, her work is symbolic, not easy; her 
characters often lack names, and her underlying message is about liberation. In “The 
Final Death of the Actor” (in ‘Alim 1987b), the owner of a doll factory—or the 
Master of the Dolls—argues with a Scenarist and an Escaped Character about a 
renegade doll, actually a statue of an Arabian heroine, Zarqa of Yamamah (Zarqa 
lived in al-Yamamah before Islam). Zarqa was farsighted and able to see an advanc-
ing group of attackers who held trees in front of themselves as they moved. She 
warned her people that she saw trees advancing. They refused to believe there was 
any danger, and all perished in the attack (Arebi 1994, 316). Zarqa—and all that she 
represents—is threatening to the Master and to a “normal actor” (Samson’s Actor), 
while the Escaped Character is threatening to the Scenarist. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
278 |
 LATER NOVELS 
 Raja‘ al-‘Alim also wrote a novel,  The Silk Road , which moves back and forth through 
history to include her grandfather and details forgotten folk customs of Mecca. The 
surreal journey is controlled by Ibn Khaldun and Mansour the Chessplayer in their 
chess match. Ahmed al-Duwahi’s short novel  al-Raihana is written in a modern style 
without a clear timeline and set in the south of Saudi Arabia. Laila al-Juhaini’s  Wasted 
Paradise is told by Saba, who falls in love with Amir and becomes pregnant. After Amir 
betrays her and leaves her to marry Khalida, she dies from an abortion; Khalida then 
takes up the story, and ﬁ nally the author herself speaks (al-Hazimi et al. 2006, 33–34). 
 One of the greatest modernist Saudi Arabian novelists is ‘Abd al-Rahman Munif 
(1933–2004). Munif was born to a Saudi Arabian father and an Iraqi mother and 
grew up in Amman, Jordan. He was active in the Ba‘th Party, earned a doctorate 
in oil economics, and had a career as an oil economist, moving ﬁ rst to Iraq, then to 
France, and ﬁ nally in 1981 to Syria, where he devoted himself to writing for the rest 
of his life, producing 30 books. While in Iraq, he wrote a quasiﬁ ctional novel, ‘ Alam 
bi-la khara’ it , with the great Palestinian writer Jabra Ibrahim Jabra in 1982. He was 
stripped of his Saudi Arabian passport after he published the ﬁ rst of a quintet of nov-
els called  Cities of Salt ( Mudun al-milh ), which consists of  al-Tih (1984; translated by 
Peter Theroux, 1987),  al-Ukhdul (1985; translated as  The Trench by Peter Theroux, 
1991),  Taqasim al-layl wa-al-nahar (1989; translated as  Variations on Night and Day 
by Peter Theroux, 1993),  al-Munbatt  (1989), and  Badiyat al-zulumat  (1989). Munir 
insisted these were ﬁ ction, but the protagonist of these novels resembles ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
al-Sa‘ud and is the monarch of a desert kingdom where tyranny, oil, political Islam, 
modernization, and Western inﬂ uence wreak havoc. 
 A recent novel is  The Girls of Riyadh  by Raja‘ (spelled Rajaa on the book cover) al-
Sanae (b. 1961), published in 2005 in Arabic, in 2008 in Italian, and then in English. 
The book truly provides a window onto Arabian society, but the author has been 
criticized for being a lightweight in literary style (writing “chick-lit”), residing in the 
West, and producing irreverent social commentary. She explores the circumstances 
of four friends and Saudi Arabian attitudes, including male reluctance to marry a 
divorced woman. Male novelists under 40 years of age as of 2009 included ‘Abdullah 
Thabit (b. 1973) a poet, journalist, and author of  al-Irhabi 20 (Terrorist number 20); 
Mohammad Hassan Alwan (b. 1979), author of  Saqf al-Kifaya  (2002),  Soﬁ a (2004), 
and  Touq al-Tahara  (2007); and Yahya Amqassim, born in 1971 in Wadi al-Husseini 
and the author of  The Crow Leg  (2008) and  Stories from Saudi Arabia  (2004). Alwan, 
Amqassim, and Thabit were chosen as being among the 39 best Arab authors under 
the age of 39 and invited to attend a literary festival at the 2010 Beirut world capital 
festivities ( Beirut 39 , 2010) Other recent novels include Layla Giuhni’s  The Lost Song 
(2007), Siba Al Herz’s (a pseudonym)  The Others (the ﬁ rst novel mentioning lesbians 
written by a Saudi Arabian, 2008), and Ahmed ‘Abodehman’s (b. 1949)  La Ceinture 
(2009), considered the ﬁ rst Saudi Arabian novel in French. Nimah Isma‘il Nawwah, 
a poet, writes in English and has published  Unfurled (2004); she also writes essays 
about Saudi Arabia. Her poem “Gentleness Stirred” depicts a  muta wwa‘ confronting 
a young woman. 

| 279
References
 Also attracting attention outside of Saudi Arabia was Turki al-Hamad, who was 
born in 1953 in Jordan to a family from al-Buraydah . This novelist, journalist, and 
analyst wrote a trilogy about a teenager, Abir ( Atyaf al-Aziqah ,  al-Mahjurah , and 
 Phantoms of Deserted Alleys ), which takes place in the 1960s and 1970s (all were 
banned in Saudi Arabia). He also wrote  Winds of Paradise , which concerns the events 
of 9/11 (Halasa 2005). 
 THEATER IN PRIVATE SPACES 
 Yamamah College in Riyadh mounted a production of  Wasati bila Wasatiyyah 
(“A Moderates without Moderation”) in November 2006. The play concerns Saudi 
Arabia’s hijacking by its extremists, those on the right, and Islamic fanatics but 
admits that those on the left are also full of failings. Outsiders, including  mutawa ‘ in , 
heard the play was against Islam, and on November 27, 2006, they attacked the 
actors, props, and stage lights; someone ﬁ red a weapon, and state security forces 
stormed the theater. The incident was ﬁ lmed on camera phones and then broadcast 
on  al-Jazeera .  Later,  mutawwa ‘ a websites called for the resignation of the president 
of the college, but the governor of Riyadh threw his support to the college, and the 
play’s performances continued to invited audiences only (Slackilometersan 2007; 
Nicolaides 2007). 
 This was by no means the only play produced in a college setting. Maisah al-
Sobaihi wrote, produced, and performed a treatment of women’s situation in today’s 
Saudi Arabia in  Head over Heels . The play was produced in 2006 and twice in 2010. 
It is a social commentary in comedic prose presented in English (Frost 2010). 
 REFERENCES 
 Abodehman, Ahmed.  La Ceinture . Paris: Gallimard, 2000. 
 Abu Khalid, Fawziyya.  Qira’a sirriyya ﬁ  tarikh al-sumt al- ‘ arabi. Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-
Adab, 1985. 
 ‘Alim, Raja‘.  Arba ‘ a/-Sifr (4/0) . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-Nadi al-Thaqaﬁ  al-Adabi, 1987b. 
 ‘Alim, Raja‘.  al-Mawt al-akhir li-l-mumaththal  [The ﬁ nal death of the actor]. Beirut, Lebanon: 
Dar al-Adab, 1987a. 
 ‘Alim, Raja‘.  Thuqub ﬁ  al-Dhahr [Hole in the back]. Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Adab, 1987c. 
 Alsanea, Rajaa.  Girls of Riyadh . Translated by Marilyn Booth. New York: Penguin, 2008. 
 Arberry, A. J.  Aspects of Islamic Civilization: As Depicted in the Texts . Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 1978. 
 Arebi, Saddeka.  Women and Words in Saudi Arabia: The Politics of Literary Discourse . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 
 Bagader, Abu Bakr, and Ava Molnar Heinrichsdorff , trans. and eds.  Assassination of Light: 
Modern Saudi Short Stories . Washington, DC: Three Continents, 1990. 
 Bagader, Abou Baker A., and Deborah S. Akers, trans. and eds.  Histoires D’Arabie Saoudite . 
Beirut, Lebanon: Centre International pour les Services Culturels, 2007. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
280 |
 Baker, Razan. “Tales of Old Jeddah.”  Arab News , January 25, 2007. 
 Beirut 39: New Writing from the Arab World . London: Bloomsbury, 2010. 
 Bogary, Hamza.  The Sheltered Quarter: A Tale of a Boyhood in Mecca . Translated by Olive 
Kenney and Jeremy Reed. Austin: Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of Texas, 
1991. 
 Booth, Marilyn. “Poetry in the Vernacular.” In  Modern Arabic Literature , edited by Muham-
mad Mustafa Badawi. Cambridge History of Arabic Literature. Cambridge, New York, 
and Victoria, Australia: Cambridge University Press, 1992, 463–482. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment: Visual and Performing Arts of the Middle East , edited by Sherifa 
Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 Frost, Bizzie. “Up Close and Personal with Maisah Sobaihi.”  Saudi Gazette , October 11, 
2010. 
 al-Ghadeer, Moneera.  Desert Voices: Bedouin Women’s Poetry in Saudi Arabia . London: Tau-
ris Academic Studies, 2009. 
 Gibb, H.A.R.  Arabic Literature: An Introduction . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1974. 
 al-Gosaibi (alternate transliteration of al-Qusaibi or al-Ghosaybi), Ghazi. “Octopus,” “When 
I Am With You,” and “Silence.” Translated by Sherif Elmusa and Charles Doria. In  Mod-
ern Arabic Poetry , edited by Salma Khadra Jayyusi. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1987. 
 Halasa, Malu. “Triumphant Trilogy.”  Time Magazine , January 17, 2005. 
 Hanley, Delinda C. “Saudi Arabian Women Dispel Myths and Stereotypes.”  Washington 
Report on Middle Eastern Aff airs , May/June 2001, 35. 
 Hashim, Najwa.  Al-Safar ﬁ  Layl al-Ahzan . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Al-Dar al-Sa‘udiyya li-
Nashr wa-Tawzi‘, 1986. 
 al-Hazimi, Mansur Ibrahim, Ezzat Khattab, and Salma al-Jayusi, eds.  Beyond the Dunes: An 
Anthology of Modern Saudi Writers . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 Herz, Siba Al.  The Others . New York: Seven Stories, 2009. (Originally published in 2008.) 
 Ibn Hurayyil, S. H.  Diwan al-Nabat al-hadith . Beirut, Lebanon: Matabi’ al-Wafa, 1374h. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  Min ahadith al-samar . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Matabi’ Sharikat Hanifah lil-
Ofset, 1978. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  al-Adab al-sha’bi ﬁ  jazirat al-’arab . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Matabi’ al-Riyadh, 
1958. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  Rashid al-Khalawi . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Yamamah lil-bahth wa 
al-tarjuma wa al-nashr, 1972.  
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encylopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 663–669. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Oral Tradition of the Gulf Region and the Arabian Penin-
sula.”  Oral Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 175–187. 
 al-Jayyusi, Salma Khadra.  The Literature of Modern Arabia: An Anthology . London: Kegan 
Paul, 1988. 
 al-Kamali, Sh.  al-Shi’r ‘inda al-badu . Baghdad: Matba’at al-Irshad, 1964. 

| 281
Visual Art and Film
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Arabia of the Bedouins . London: Al Saqi, 2001. 
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Oral Poetry and Narratives from Central Arabia . Vol. 1. Leiden, the 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1994. 
 Munif, Abderrahman.  Variations on Night and Day . Translated by Peter Theroux. New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1993. 
 Nawwab, Nimah Ismail.  Unfurled .  Vista, CA: Selwa, 2004. 
 Nicholson, R. A.  A Literary History of the Arabs . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1977. (Originally published in 1907.) 
 Nicolaides, Harry. “Saudi Students Seize the Day.” n.d. Archived at Canada-ESL.com, http://
www.canada-esl.com/articles1/seizeday.html. 
 Palgrave, W. G. “The Poet ‘Omar’.” In  Essays on Eastern Questions . London, 1872. 
 al-Qusaibi, Ghazi.  Chosen Poems . 1980. 
 al-Qusaibi, Ghazi.  Fever . 1980. 
 al-Qusaibi, Ghazi.  You Are My Riyadh . 1976. 
 Saqqaf, Khayriyya.  Li-Tobhira nahwa al-ab ‘ ad . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Ulum, 1982. 
 Serjeant, Robert B.  Saudi Arabian Poetry and Prose of Hadramawt . London: Taylor’s Foreign 
Press, 1951. 
 Shaker, Fatna.  Nabt al-Ardh [The earth’s planet]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Tihamah, 1981. 
 al-Shamlan, Sharifa.  Muntahal Hudu’ . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Nadi al-Qissa al-Sa‘udi. al-
Jam‘iyya al-‘arabiyya lil-thaqafa wa-l-funun, 1989. 
 Slackilometersan, Michael. “The Not So Eagerly Modern Saudi.”  New York Times , May 6, 
2007. 
 Sowayan, Sa’d Abdullah. “Tonight My Gun Is Loaded: Poetic Dueling in Arabia.”  Oral 
Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 151–173. 
 Sowayan, Sa’d Abdullah.  Nabati Poetry: The Oral Poetry of Arabia . Berkeley and Los Ange-
les: University of California Press, 1985. 
 al-Thabit, Abdullah.  al-Irhabi 20 . Damascus, Syria: Dar al-Mada, 2006; In translation, Paris: 
Actes Sud Sindbad, 2010. 
 Visual Art and Film 
 Visual art has always been a part of the Islamic tradition; however, the use of human 
ﬁ gures or representations in mosques or sacred spaces was not allowed. This was 
meant to distinguish Islam from the worship practices of the polytheists and also 
from the use of icons and representations of Jesus in the Christian tradition. Actu-
ally, there were representations of the Prophet Muhammad and his companions, 
particularly in book illustrations. By the medieval period the Prophet was sometimes 
represented with his face veiled. Other representations of human, animal, or natu-
ral scenes were not problematic in nonreligious settings, but Muslims did want to 
avoid the practices of Christian art with several exceptions—the arts of the princes, 
illustrations in books and manuals, and images in all sorts of media in the 12th and 

 Chapter 6 Culture
282 |
13th centuries and in folk art (Grabar 1992, 126–127). Several unique forms of art 
emerged as well: calligraphy, arabesque (repetitive design), and the “art of the object” 
(Grabar 1992, 130–131), beautifully crafted special functional items. 
 Neither Islamic art nor Islamic visual tradition has been static. In the seventh and 
eighth centuries, a process of synthesis began between the culture of Medina and 
Mecca and the artistic legacy of the peoples and lands conquered by the Muslim 
armies. This synthesis was carried farther both to the east and west through further 
expansion, into Spain and past Iran. In about the 10th century, the development of 
smaller states made for greater diff erences between areas, and the inﬂ uence of the 
Ottoman Empire on many Arab lands (but not Saudi Arabia) further distinguished 
artistic traditions (Grabar 1992, 108–109). 
 In Saudi Arabia, artistic design is seen in a variety of crafts, ceramics, building 
decor, murals, jewelry, clothing, decorated weapons, doors, pottery, rugs, and many 
other items. A few individuals have tried to record, preserve, and catalog what was 
made in the past (Topham 1981; Colyer Ross 1978, 1981). Some projects aimed at 
economic development keep traditional design motifs alive, as in the glazed pottery 
and costumes produced at the al-Nahda Philanthropic Foundation under the spon-
sorship of Princesses Sarah and Moudy al-Sa‘ud in the late 1990s, and other projects 
since then. 
 Studio art ﬁ rst arrived in the 1950s as schools were established. The Department 
of Education in Saudi Arabia introduced drawing, painting, and art lessons. Some 
promising art students were sent to other Arab countries or the West for their art 
education. In 1967 an arts society was founded in Saudi Arabia, which helped to ar-
range exhibitions and support artists (Ali in Nashashibi et al. 1994, 114). The Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) and Gulf Art Friends have also supported exhibitions. 
As in other Arab countries, modern-style artists experimented with realism, cubism, 
impressionism, surrealism, abstract art, neo-Islamic art styles and, more recently, 
installations or conceptual art. At the same time, the expatriate community in Saudi 
Arabia included some artists and those with an interest in the visual arts, and they 
often mounted exhibitions. 
 The painter Saﬁ yeh Said Binzagr, born in 1940, began her studies in England, 
returned to Saudi Arabia in 1964, and then embarked on art studies in Egypt. She 
ﬁ rst exhibited in Saudi Arabia with Mounirah Mosley. She describes her art style, 
rendered in diff erent media, as primitive, and indeed it is somewhat like the primi-
tive/naïf styles of artists in Egypt who drew on historical themes of the same era. She 
became one of the leaders in the early arts movement of Saudi Arabia. Among her 
well-known paintings is  Zabun , which depicts a woman in the Hijazi dress style called 
 zabun . Another is entitled  Zaff at al-Shibshib , which shows the neighborhood people 
bringing the bride’s belongings to her new household. Binzagr has established an art 
studio and gallery called the Dar‘ah in Jeddah, which also holds monthly lectures 
(Nawwab 2001, 20–27). 
 Mounirah Mosley, born in Mecca in 1952, is a painter, graphic designer, and art 
teacher who also writes about art in several Saudi Arabian newspapers. Her work 
has been exhibited in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Iraq, Spain, London, and the United 
States. 

Young Artists | 283
 Mohammed Farea, born in 1968 in Saudi Arabia, has professional art training 
and an attractive style, showing brilliant colors and abstract shapes with some cal-
ligraphic use, as well as mysterious ﬁ gures. He belongs to two artists’ societies, and 
the patronage of the royal family is important to him, as it is to other artists. 
 Male artists have been painting contemporary murals and wall art for some time 
in Saudi Arabia. The female artist Shalimar Sharbatly broke their monopoly in Jed-
dah with a painting on the Corniche and another in front of the Guest Palace, home 
to foreign visitors. Sharbatly trained in Egypt and had her ﬁ rst show there at age 
18 in 1988, and she wishes there were a ministry of arts and culture in Saudi Arabia 
(Fakkar 2008). 
 Jeddah hosts an annual art festival; in 2010, the event hosted 300 artists. In 
Paris, the Saudi Contemporary Art Exhibition at Musée du Montparnasse, ending 
in July 2010, exposed French audiences to contemporary Saudi Arabian painting. 
Since 1982, a special art contest has been mounted for children ages 4 to 14 in Saudi 
Arabia called The Children’s Kingdom, in which they depict their own country and 
culture. The contest is judged by a panel of artists and teachers, and the exhibi-
tion was cataloged by Saudi Aramco, because it shows a wealth of images, like the 
open-air markets, lifestyles, and occupations now fading into the past, like the wa-
tercarrier with his goatskin, traditional dances and weddings, and religious rituals 
(Nawwab 1995, 18–27). It is signiﬁ cant that art education is off ered in the schools, 
because it counters a conservative position that representational art is forbidden in 
Islam, particularly images of people. The national competition also shows young 
people that art is respected and has a connection with heritage and history. Besides 
the religious prejudice, some artists must deal with traditional prejudices about 
artisans’ work. 
 PHOTOGRAPHY 
 Photography is a growing ﬁ eld in Saudi Arabia. Displaying photographs or portraits 
was considered scandalous in most circles in the early 1940s and earlier; in fact, 
people said the angels would not visit a home so decorated. Yet, today, one of its 
internationally recognized practitioners is Princess Reem al-Faysal, a granddaughter 
of King Faysal who has captured some memorable images of the  hajj  (Melis 2004, 
48–50). The  hajj is a favorite photographic and artistic subject for Muslims. Saudi 
Arabia and its citizens have been a favorite subject of foreign photographers, too, 
ever since the days of early travelers like Gertrude Bell, an archaeologist, intrepid 
adventurer, and eventually oriental secretary to the British High Commission in Iraq 
(see Bell’s photographs in Bell 2000). 
 YOUNG ARTISTS 
 In September and October 2010, the Saudi Arabian Pavilion at the 2010 Shanghai 
World Expo featured a contemporary art exhibition curated by Lulwah al-Homoud 
and J. W. Stella entitled Nabatt (A Sense of Being) which included 130 works of art 

 Chapter 6 Culture
284 |
by more than 23 young artists from Saudi Arabia. Music, poetry, and calligraphy 
were included as well. The presenters were Bandar al-Rumayh, Jowhara al-Saud 
(photography), Ayman Yossri Daydban, Reem al-Faysal (photography), Zaman 
Jassim (painting, sculpture), Fahad al-Hijlan (painting), Lulwah al-Homoud (media 
installation), Mohammad Farea (painting), Nohal al-Sharif (sculpture), Mustafa 
al-‘Arab, (calligraphy), Di‘a ‘Aziz Di‘a (sculpture), Maha Malluh (photography), 
Nasser al-Turki (painting), Mohammed al-Gamdi (installation), Mohammad 
Alajlan (painting), Fahad al- Gelhami (photography/video), Saddiek Mohammad 
Wasil (sculpture), Farouk Kondakji (painting), Bakr Shaykhun (installation), ‘Abdul 
‘Aziz ‘Ashour (mixed media), and Sahdi and Raja ‘Alem (installation). Nabatt also 
traveled to the MENASART Fair in Beirut in 2011, where ﬁ lms, including Saudi 
Arabian ones were also shown at Video Box. 
 Many other young artists are experimenting with diff erent media. Several are fea-
tured in a collection on graphic design in the region (Wittner, Thoma, and Bourquin 
2008); one of the graphic elements in modern Arab art is calligraphy. A traveling 
exhibit called Edge of Arabia includes several artists of interest. Manal al-Ghobayan 
of Dhahran displays a black-and-white photograph of a woman in a hard hat and 
engineer’s uniform with her face covered by a tribal burqa, decorated with coins. An-
other shows a woman’s hand, decorated with henna, gripping a steering wheel—the 
upper part of her face looks at the viewer, forming a circle with a Y shape inside of 
it (Edge of Arabia, Berlin 2010). 
 ‘Abdulnasser Gharem, from Khamis Mushait near Abha, was a major in the army 
and also a conceptual artist. He photographed a “performance”/event he staged in 
Abha, “Flora and Fauna,” wrapping a special type of tree imported from Australia 
and planted throughout Abha,  Cornocarpus erectus , and himself in plastic, surviving 
from the oxygen produced by the tree. The tree is a symbol of development schemes 
gone environmentally awry because this type of tree’s roots extend horizontally for 
up to 100 meters (328.08 feet) running into and killing the root-balls of other trees 
(Hemming, 2008-2009 and Hemming in Edge of Arabia, 2009). 
 FILM 
 Theaters featuring drama or cinema have been banned in public forums in Saudi 
Arabia for decades, but ﬁ lms are watched on television thanks to satellite or on 
DVDs and videos. The ﬁ rst reason given for the ban on ﬁ lms is that representation 
is frowned on; however, if that were the case, then the ban on television overturned 
by King Faysal would have continued. An ancillary objection is the ultraconservative 
(and traditionalist) idea that women who show themselves on the screen (or onstage) 
in front of men, or allow their pictures to appear in the newspapers, are  mutabarrajat 
(those who display their physical charms) and incite sinful behavior or, if in Saudi 
Arabia, disgrace their families. The same objection has been raised against some of 
the women writers mentioned in the Literature section, who have been photographed 
in the local newspapers. Cinemas do exist in other Gulf countries. In 2009, when the 
Rotana group screened a comedy,  Menahi , in Jeddah and Ta’if, religious authorities 
pronounced that ﬁ lms were against Islam, because they distract people from their 

Film | 285
work; the head of the religious police, Shaykh Ibrahim al-Ghayth, declared ﬁ lms to 
be evil. However, he then stated that if they depicted what was lawful and did not 
violate  shari‘ah , they could be allowed. Perhaps Saudi Arabia will allow the develop-
ment of an Islamically compliant cinema as in Iran. 
 Despite the ban, quite a few shorter documentaries and one big-budget ﬁ lm have 
been produced, directed, and acted in by Saudi Arabians in their country in recent 
years, and they have directed and produced ﬁ lms abroad as well. The Saudi Arabian–
ﬁ lmed productions include  Dhilal al-Samt (2004),  Kayf al-Hal (2006),  Nisa’ bila Dhil 
(Women without shadows; 2006);  I Don’ Wanna  (2008),  Shadow (2008),  Three Men 
and a Woman  (2008),  According to Local Time (2008),  Sunrise/Sunset (2008),  Last 
Day (2008),  Project  (2008), and  Ayesh  (2010). Directors not mentioned in the follow-
ing include ‘Abdullah al-Muhaisin, Muhammad al-Khalif, Muhammad al-Dahri, 
Hussam Alhulwah, ‘Abdulmuhsin al-Dhabaan, and others. 
 Kayf al-Hal , a big-budget ﬁ lm, was produced by Ayman Halawani, was directed 
by Izidore Musallam, and starred Hind Muhammad. The screenplay is about a 
Saudi Arabian family engaged in the struggle of modern life versus the traditions 
of the past, and how these impact the character Dunya (Hind Muhammad). The 
ﬁ lm was actually ﬁ lmed in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates and shown on pay 
per view through an arrangement with Showtime Arabia. It screened at the Cannes 
Film Festival, where the director, who is the general manager of ﬁ lm production 
for the Rotana Group (see the Music section in this chapter), said he hopes to 
change attitudes toward ﬁ lmmaking in Saudi Arabia (Dowd,  BBC News , May 26, 
2006). 
Saudi Arabian man watches, 
Menahi, the ﬁ lm at a 
screening in Riyadh, June 6, 
2009. Women were not 
permitted to attend but the 
screening at a government-
run cultural center was 
considered a daring step. 
(AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 6 Culture
286 |
 Cinema 500 Kilometers (2006) was written, directed, produced, and ﬁ lmed by 
Abullah al-Eyaf (b. 1976) and starred Tariq al-Husaini. Al-Husaini’s character loves 
movies but, living in Saudi Arabia, has never seen a movie showing. He drives 500 
kilometers to Bahrain to see a movie in an actual cinema theater for the ﬁ rst time. The 
ﬁ lm was shown at the Emirates Film Competition in Abu Dhabi in 2006. Following 
this project, al-Eyaf completed three short ﬁ lms:  Etaar, Matar ,  about a young man 
about to become blind and a hearing-disabled child, and  ‘Ayish  (2010), which won 
the Gulf Film Festival award for best short documentary.  Women without Shadows 
(2006) was directed by Haifa Mansour (b. 1974), who previously directed three short 
ﬁ lms ( Who? ,  Bitter Journey , and  The Only Way Out ).  Women without Shadows deals 
with the issues of the required covering of the ‘ abaya  and has been shown in at least 
17 international ﬁ lm festivals, winning the best documentary award at the Muscat 
Film Festival. 
 A number of ﬁ lms address the plight of children and the disabled in society. En-
tries in the Islamic Film Festival in December 2009 were  Just Words , directed by 
Samir Arif;  The Child Task , directed by Mamdouh Salem; and  Acquitted Dreams , 
directed by Bashir al-Muhaishil.  Just Words concerns a Saudi Arabian child who on 
returning from residence in the United States has diffi  culties assimilating to life in his 
own country.  The Child Task is about a child whose parents have left him.  Acquitted 
Dreams is the story of an orphaned child and his dreams of becoming a photographer 
( A1Saudi. Arabia.com ). 
 Tawﬁ q al-Zaydi directed  al-Samt , which concerns deafness;  Aseel , directed by 
Faisal Khalid al-Harbi, is about a man with a blind son. These ﬁ lms, and  Matar 
(which was already mentioned),  Ahsin , and  Nanmool Adventures , were all entries in 
the Asian Film Festival in Sri Lanka.  Ahsin was directed by Faisal al-‘Utaybi and 
was set in the Fayfa Mountains in the south of Saudi Arabia, and  Nanmool Adven-
tures was a cartoon directed by Muhammad al-Obaid. The Beirut International Film 
Festival 2010 included  Al-Gandarji , directed by Ahd Kamel, and  ‘Ayish of Abdullah 
al-Eyaf , which was already mentioned. 
 Filming is permitted for certain educational purposes and for promotion of in-
ternal tourism. Camera phones, which were initially banned in Saudi Arabia, have 
created thousands of amateur ﬁ lmed sequences, some of which have been posted 
on the Internet. However, studios and technical crews are lacking. Certain foreign 
production crews have been permitted to shoot in Saudi Arabia, as in  Malcolm X 
(1962) or  Lawrence of Arabia (1962), or have depicted issues moving into Saudi Ara-
bia, such as  The Slave Trade Today ( Le Schiave Esistona Accora ) (1964) or  Le Grand 
Voyage (2004). Other recent ﬁ lms focusing on terrorism were shot entirely outside 
of Saudi Arabia at locations thought to resemble Saudi Arabia; these included  The 
Kingdom , directed by Peter Berg and shot in Phoenix and Mesa, Arizona, and in Abu 
Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates. Berg spent two weeks in Saudi Arabia prior to 
the ﬁ lm. Nevertheless, some details and aspects of the ﬁ lm suff er from clichés and 
assumptions to be found in media and “expert” treatments of the terrorist move-
ment in the kingdom, although Faris al-Ghazi, the character of a Saudi Arabian 
state policeman who helps the American investigators, is depicted as a hero (a rarity 
in Western ﬁ lms). 

| 287
References
 REFERENCES 
 Ali, Wijdan. “Modern Painting in the Mashriq.” In  Colors of Enchantment: Theater, Dance, 
Music and Visual Art of the Middle East , edited by Sherifa Zuhur. Cairo: American Uni-
versity in Cairo, 2001, 363–385. 
 Ali, Wijdan.  Modern Islamic Art: Development and Continuity . Gainesville: University Press 
of Florida, 1997. 
 Ali, Wijdan. “Modern Arab Art: An Overview.” In  Forces of Change: Artists of the Arab 
World . Exhibition director and contributing co-author Salwa Mikdadi Nashashibi, Laura 
Nader, Etel  Adnan, Shehira Doss Davezac, Todd B. Porterﬁ eld, and Wijdan Ali. Lafay-
ette, CA: International Council for Women in the Arts; Washington, DC: National Mu-
seum of Women in the Arts, 1994, 73–119. 
 The American Film Institute Catalog of Feature Films 1961–1970 . Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press, 1976. 
 Bell, Gertrude.  The Arabian Diaries, 1913–1914 . Edited by Rosemary O’Brien. Syracuse, NY: 
Syracuse University Press, 2000. 
 Binzagr, Safeya.  Saudi Arabia, An Artist’s View of the Past . Lausanne, France: Three Conti-
nents, 1979. 
 Colyer Ross , Heather.  The Art of Arabian Costume: A Saudi Arabian Proﬁ le . Fribourg, Swit-
zerland: Arabesque Commercial, 1981. 
 Colyer Ross, Heather.  Bedouin Jewellery in Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey International, 1978. 
 Dowd, Vincent. “First Saudi Feature Film Aims High.”  BBC News , May 26, 2006. http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/5019116.stm 
 Edge of Arabia: Contemporary Art from Saudi Arabia . Exhibition curated by Stephen A. 
Stapleton, Lulwah Al-Homoud, and Ahmed Mater Al-Ziad Aseer at the 6th Berlin Bi-
ennale. Text and interviews by Henry Hemming and Venetia Porter. From 2008–2011. 
(Berlin, Germany, July 2010; London, 2010.) Exhibition guides available at http://www.
edgeofarabia.com 
 Elgood, Robert.  The Arts and Armour of Arabia . London: Aldershot and Brookﬁ eld, 1994. 
 Fakkar, Galal. “An Instinctive Arab Painter.”  Arab News , August 26, 2008. 
 Grabar, Oleg. “Art and Architecture.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of 
Rennaisance , edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 
107–131. 
 Harman, Danna. “Middle Eastern Female Filmmakers Give Glimpse of Once-Veiled Worlds.” 
 Christian Science Monitor/Alternet , March 10, 2008. 
 Hayes, John R.  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renaissance . New York: New York 
University Press, 1992. 
 Helb, Aarnout, ed. et al. A.  Ahmed Mater . Catalogue of Artspace Exhibition. Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates, 2009. 
 Hemming, Henry. “Art of Survival: An Interview.” Off screen Education Program, 2008–2009, 
and in  Edge of Arabia . Also at http://henryhemming.com/?book=edge-of-arabia 
 Le Gouic, Jean-Claude.  Mahdi Al Jeraib . Paris: Fondation Al Monsouria, 2001. 
 Melis, Wim, curator.  Nazar: Photographs of the Arab World . Amsterdam: Stichting Aurora 
Borealis, 2004. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
288 |
 Nashashibi, Salwa Mikdadi. “Gender and Politics in Contemporary Art: Arab Women 
Empower the Image.” In  Images of Enchantment: Visual and Performing Arts of the 
Middle East , edited by Sherifa Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 1998, 
165–182. 
 Nawwab, Ni’mat. “Painting Cultural History.”  Aramco World , January/February 2001, 
20–27. 
 Nawwab, Ni’mat. “The Children’s Kingdom.”  Aramco World , November/December 1995, 
18–27. 
 Al-Osaimi, Najah. “Haifa Film Creates a Stir.”  Arab News , April 21, 2005. 
 Porter, Venetia, Linda Komaroff , Tim Mackintosh Smith, and Ahmed Al-Omran.  Ahmed 
Mater . Foreword by Catherine David. London: Booth-Clibborn Editions (BCE), 2010. 
 Porter, Venetia, ed.; Henry Hemming, ed. and texts.  Edge of Arabia: Contemporary Art from 
Saudi Arabia . London: Booth-Clibborn Editions (BCE), 2011. 
 Topham, John.  Traditional Crafts of Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey International, 1981. 
 Wittner, Benn, Sascha Thoma, and Nicolas Bourquin.  Arabesques: Graphic Design from the 
Arab World and Persia . Berlin: Die Gestalten, 2008. 
 Music and Dance 
 Music is an important aspect of cultural life in Saudi Arabia. Attention is given here 
to music and dance, due to the many genres of collectively performed folkloric forms 
that unite music, poetry, and dance in the Arabian tradition, and to vocal aspects 
of religious music and recitation. Somewhat more information exists on traditional, 
or folk, music of the area as opposed to “art” or classical Arabic music, or contem-
porary commercial popular music in the kingdom, in part due to ethnomusicology’s 
focus on rural traditions. Nevertheless, other types of music are popular, including 
Western pop, jazz, rock, and other genres and classical music. However, these other 
genres of music are clearly secular and unconnected with the cultural legacy ( turath ). 
Religious conservatives oppose the playing of music in public (with the exclusion 
of religious genres), and music might not be considered a desirable profession for a 
youngster in a conservative family. Likewise, professional, meaning paid, dance is 
not likely to be pursued by young Saudi Arabian women, although, in recent years, 
diff erent genres of dance as exercise are presented in sports and exercise clubs exclu-
sively for women. 
 It is diffi  cult to disaggregate Saudi Arabia’s indigenous musical tradition from 
that in other parts of the peninsula on a purely national basis; certain genres extend 
beyond borders, and musicians and their unique styles may have traveled to an area. 
The term  khaliji (Gulf ) in reference to music or dance refers to the United Arab 
Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Oman as well as Saudi Arabia. At the same time, 
each town or village had its own special musical heritage that is related to its poetic 
and dance output. A ﬁ nal proviso is that many publications allude to the religious 
distaste for music, particularly instrumental music, mentioning occasional attacks 
on musicians who nonetheless continue to perform (Urkevich 2001, 325). This can 

| 289
Music and Dance
lead to a misunderstanding that bolsters the salaﬁ st rejection of entertainment, popu-
lar rituals, and, with them, music and dance. Ordinary people tend to consider the 
music they hear and perform to be sung poetry, which is accepted, rather than simply 
(musical) “songs” (Campbell in Zuhur, ed., 1998, 60) as performed by popular Arab 
singing stars of other countries—even though nearly all vocal music is sung poetry. 
Paradoxically, music, particularly as part of ceremonial gatherings, is acceptable 
and enjoyed within private settings and also given certain restrictions. Music is an 
important part of public occasions, as at the end of the Gulf War, to celebrate the 
homecoming of a king, and it appears on radio and television. State support is im-
portant as well, including sponsorship from Saudi Arabia’s Society for Culture and 
the Arts, whose mission is to preserve folkloric heritage. On an annual basis, the 
Janadiriyyah festival of cultural heritage held near Riyadh features musical, dance, 
and poetry performances. Parts of the festival grounds are set up to represent diff er-
ent regions of Saudi Arabia with particular handicrafts sold there and performances 
given in these special settings. In addition, entertainers perform for invited guests 
in a main performance pavilion. Some never before exposed to their own country’s 
cultural traditions can experience the songs of Abha shepherds, dancers from the 
Eastern coast, or the warriors’  ‘ardha performance (see later on). 
 Archaeological ﬁ ndings at Najran display images of four lyres, an important early 
instrument, which may indicate they were played as an ensemble. Frame drums and 
at least two other drums were played as well, and Arabia seems to have been inﬂ u-
enced by the music of its southern shores, Ethiopia, and eastern Africa, perhaps as 
much as by the musical traditions coming from farther north (Poché 2002). In the 
Jahiliyya (the time before Islam), the Arabs referred to music and the singing of po-
etry with a single term,  ghina’ ; drawings show dancers, and texts include references 
to  zaﬁ na (from the Mehri language of southern Yemen), Ethiopians who danced. 
The term for slave women who sang,  qiyan , was in use by the seventh century as well 
(Poché 2002, 361–362). These entertainers sang for travelers and patrons and played 
stringed instruments. In addition, texts report communal singing at festivals and 
special occasions, which the Prophet approved of, according to several Prophetic 
traditions (Campbell 2002, 696; Campbell in Zuhur, ed., 1998, 69). 
 The Dutch scholar Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje, who wrote about Mecca in the 
19th century (Snouck Hurgronje 1931), described the music of wedding ceremonies 
and a special song for the bride’s headdress,  ghuna al-kharit . He also described the 
popularity of the  qanun , a multistringed zither, and the  qanbus , a southern Arabian 
(and Yemeni) small pear-shaped lute (Lambert 2002, 654). Thanks to him, some 150 
cylinders were recorded in Jeddah by the Dutch legation early in the 20th century, 
including women’s folk music. Commercial recording began in the Gulf area in the 
late 1920s and 1930s. Commercial recordings from other Arab countries were circu-
lated to the peninsula, despite the Ikhwan’s distaste for music and musical rituals. Ibn 
Sa‘ud, the founder of the modern kingdom, reputedly enjoyed musical gatherings. 
 This opposition does not carry over to religious musical forms, which are dif-
ferentiated from secular music or not even considered “music” at all. Many sources 
claim that what is disdained is instrumental music, as vocalists, percussionists, and 
clappers are often not considered to be playing instruments. In fact, many traditions 
of instrumental music go far back in history and may be attached to social groups 

 Chapter 6 Culture
290 |
of lower status in some areas but not in all, and this prejudice did not seem to attach 
to the  rababa (a bowed upright ﬁ ddle) in the bedouin tradition (Campbell in Zuhur, 
ed., 1998, 60). 
 Women’s music, which is enjoyed at schools, universities, and private parties, is 
to some degree a separate genre, permissible so long as it takes place in segregated 
venues. Recordings of women’s performances are commercially available (Campbell 
1998, 66–67). Saudi Arabian women may perform abroad and for each other, but 
not in public in front of men in the kingdom; however, women of other Gulf nations 
may appear in public ensembles. Women’s days at the Janadiriyyah festival, an an-
nual cultural event organized by the Saudi Arabian National Guard, are attended by 
women only and feature performance styles from all over Arabia, as well as special 
poetry and dance spectacles (Zuhur, Field Notes, 2005).  
 MUSIC: GENERAL FEATURES 
 Music is performed on large frame drums ( tar , singular;  tiran , plural); frame drums 
with cymbals; double-skinned larger drums ( tabl ); a vase- or goblet-shaped drum 
( darbukka ); the  rababa , a bowed instrument with a rectangular sound box that is 
played upright; the ‘ ud , a short-necked lute; the  tanbura , or lyre (also called the  sim-
simiyya ), usually with ﬁ ve strings; and the  mizmar , a reeded aerophone in which the 
two reeds are blown together; and also by clapping, or  tasﬁ q . Other instruments may 
be played in larger ensembles such as the  nay (bamboo ﬂ ute), the  qanun (a plucked 
zither), violins, and sometimes violas or cellos, and the electronic keyboard. Diff erent 
areas may feature other instruments such as the  tanaka  (a date or olive tin, perforated 
NATIONAL ANTHEM OF SAUDI ARABIA
The national anthem of Saudi Arabia was adopted in 1950. The lyrics were 
written by Ibrahim Khaﬁ ji and the music by ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Khatib in 1947. 
Earlier lyrics were written by Muhammad Tal‘at.
TABLE S6.2
Transliteration
English Translation
Sa¯r‘ı¯ la l-majd wa l-‘alya¯’,
Majjedı¯ al-kha¯liq as-sama¯’!
Wa arfa‘ı¯ al-khaffa¯q akhdar
Yah.mil an-nu¯r al-musat.t.ar
Raddedi: Allahu akbar,
Ya¯ mawatanı¯!
Mawtanı¯, ‘ishta fakhr al-muslimı¯n
‘A¯sh al-malik li- l-‘alam wa l-watan! 
Hasten to glory and supremacy,
Glorify the Creator of the heavens!
And raise the green ﬂ ag
Carrying the emblem of Light,
Repeating: Allah is the greatest,
O my country!
My country, Live as the glory of Muslims!
Long live the King for the ﬂ ag and the 
country! 

Music: General Features | 291
with holes and hit with the hand), played in Qahtan in the south, or the  surnay (an 
instrument similar to the oboe), played in al-Hasa and used in the  liwa dance. 
 Saudi Arabian music in its “art” ( fann) and “traditional” (sha‘bi forms, like other 
varieties of Arabic music, is melodically organized around  maqamat , which are more 
like modes than scales (because the note pattern diff ers on the descent; also, the 
tonalities may vary even more narrowly than a quarter-tone, and they impart a par-
ticular mood), and a poet/singer played an integral role in music (Racy in Hayes, 
ed., 1992, 160–161; also see Racy 1998. Each of these  maqamat has a name and a 
typical melodic pattern, which emphasizes particular dominant notes and features 
microtonality—in other words, tones narrower than the half pitch between the black 
and the white notes of the Western piano. These  maqamat  are further subdivided into 
smaller subsets (often sets of ﬁ ve notes) in traditional forms. Improvisation on these 
 maqamat and the use of call-and-response structures are common musical features. 
Polyphony (the technical term for harmony) is uncommon, with the exception of 
certain forms of choral singing, as in the pearl divers’ music from the Arabian Gulf. 
Another feature of Arabian music is its strong use of rhythm and multiple rhythms. 
A typical multiple or polyrhythmic segment could be performed by the  duff   or  daff  
(a frame drum) and a goblet-shaped drum, and also by clappers performing  tasﬁ q 
(clapping hands). 
 Majlis al-Tarab 
 In cities and towns, music and dance are performed in a  diwan , or a  majlis al-tarab , 
a large salon in a family home. This area is separate from the living quarters and can 
accommodate a large number of visitors. Whereas in the other Gulf countries, musi-
cal evenings or celebrations with music would, in the past, have been performed for 
mixed audiences, in Saudi Arabia (and today in certain Gulf state settings) the  majlis 
al-tarab would include either male or female guests. 
 Wedding Celebrations 
 Wedding celebrations are lengthy and do not conclude on a single day. The engage-
ment may ﬁ rst be celebrated. The actual wedding involves parties for the groom 
and at least one for the bride, which may be the  laylat al-hinna , an event where 
her family and friends beautify her with henna decorations on her hands and feet. 
A musical ensemble consisting of a  mutriba , a female singer, and percussionists 
(women) is hired for the event. Music may also take place at the  laylat al-zaff a (or 
 zfaff   ). The  zaff a was traditionally a procession, and the key event on this evening 
is the joining of the bride and groom. Each of these events could be performed in 
a  majlis al-tarab  in a family residence.  ‘Ud  (oud; that is, the scented wood, not the 
musical instrument) will be burned, the best possible, to perfume the entire evening 
(Hansen 2000), and women will wear their ﬁ nest clothes, which will be permeated 
by the smell of the  ‘ud . 

 Chapter 6 Culture
292 |
 These events may be recorded and videotaped, and the recordings might be dis-
tributed for sale. Numerous examples of such performances can be found on the 
Internet, and as some of these video clips were recorded years ago, one may view 
styles of dance and music no longer performed today. 
 POPULAR MUSIC INDUSTRY 
 Radio and television were tremendously inﬂ uential in popularizing the careers of 
modern Saudi Arabian performers and disseminating the performances of other 
Arab, and also Western, musicians and vocalists. As well, Saudi Arabian patronage 
of live musical entertainment in other parts of the Arab world, and the importing of 
entertainers as well as musicians to the Gulf region, has made for a kind of musical 
cosmopolitanism in the Gulf that was not originally present. Just as Saudi Arabian 
musicians and singers are inﬂ uenced by regional styles, performers from Lebanon 
to Egypt to Tunisia have incorporated songs into their performances and recordings 
based on Saudi Arabian and Gulf rhythms and melodic patterns, which are generi-
cally termed  khaliji . 
 The Saudi Arabian company Rotana Group, founded in 1987, currently exerts 
an extraordinary inﬂ uence on Arab music of the Levant, Egypt, Iraq, and the Gulf, 
and on performers from all over the Arab world. The conglomerate, known sim-
ply as Rotana, includes ﬁ lm production, a record label, a magazine, and numerous 
television and music channels and is owned primarily by Prince al-Walid ibn Talal, 
with News Corporation as a 9 percent partner. At least 100 Arab artists are signed 
to Rotana. 
 TRADITIONAL MUSICAL FORMS 
 Such performances involve singing, accompanied by the  rababa  in the bedouin tra-
dition, and sometimes also percussion. Such performance can also be performed 
by two or more singers. Along the eastern coast and into Kuwait or down into the 
Gulf, in the 1970s, traveling gypsy ensembles used oil canisters as  rababa , along with 
a woman singer and dancer (Røvsing Olsen and Wegner 2001, 796), much as the 
bedouin on the Red Sea coast (as in the Sinai) use oil canisters to make a facsimile 
of a  tanbura (lyre) (Zuhur, Field Notes, 1998–1999). The aesthetics of singing vary 
somewhat by area and genre, but, generally, a nasal quality was admired in the pre-
sentation of older forms such as singing of  qasa’id  (strophic poetry). Also, a sweet 
singing tone is admired in  khaliji styles, somewhat more so than in other parts of the 
Arab musical tradition. 
 Dewinih  
 Dewinih  is one of the bedouin genres; the name refers to a  diwan , or poetry collec-
tion, sung a cappella or with the performer providing his own accompaniment on 

Traditional Musical Forms | 293
the  rababa . The poetry of the  dewinih is of the type called  nabati . The melody is often 
limited to ﬁ ve notes of a  maqam (Lambert 2002, 652), which is the traditional build-
ing block of the  maqam as well as the basis of bedouin melodies. Variants include 
the  mashub , the  barbi , and the camel herder’s or camel rider’s (Jargy 2002, 665) song, 
the  hjeini . 
 Other soloists, or soloists accompanied by ensembles, play the  ‘ud , the short-
necked lute performed all over the Arab world. Many forms of collective perfor-
mance involve dance and music and feature poetic lyrics. Some are described in the 
following. 
 ‘Ardha  
 ‘ Ardha has become a national dance and song of Najd; it is also performed in other 
regions of the kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain. It derives from a 
war singing tradition intended to scare the enemy and prepare for combat (Urkevich   
2001, 326). The  hidwa (lyrics) are antiphonal and syllabic and glorify the tribe, its 
honor, its leader, and the ruler (Lambert 2002, 654). It was once performed by men 
and women together and is now performed by men who carry swords. In Najd, the 
 ‘ardha is performed to a six-beat rhythm ( DUM, DUM, tek, DUM, tek, tek ) played 
on the  tabl (double-skinned drum) and  daff  or  tar (single-skinned held frame drum). 
It is actually a suite of pieces. In Najd, two lines of men dance, wave swords, and 
also serve as the chorus. The rulers of Saudi Arabia have always danced the  ‘ardha 
publicly, and it may be performed simultaneously with a military spectacle. The 
 ‘ardha is called  ‘ayala in the United Arab Emirates. There and in Bahrain, it is often 
performed with a double chorus on special occasions and two lines of dancers (Røvs-
ing Olsen and Wegner 2001, 795; Awhan 1988). In southwestern Arabia, the dancers 
may perform with riﬂ es to a faster 4/4 rhythm (Campbell in Zuhur, ed., 1998, 59). In 
Oman it is called  wahhabiyya (Lambert 2002, 654). 
 Galtih (or  Riddiyih ) 
 This is a poetic dueling tradition—a war of words, a part of the  nabati  verse tradi-
tion. Each poet-singer delivers lines, which are supposed to be original and may be 
spontaneously composed, and then the ensemble repeats the text.  Tasﬁ q , rhythmic 
hand-clapping, accompanies the performance. 
 al-Dawsari  
 Al-Dawsari    is a dance and singing style of the Banu Dawasir tribe, who are found to 
the southwest of Riyadh, and there are many subforms given the same name (Camp-
bell 1998, 58). The rhythm known as  dawsari is played as follows: tek a, DUM, ess, 
tek a, DUM ess (tek = light beat on the side of the drum, the upbeat; DUM = a beat 
on the deeper center of the drum, and, here, it is the downbeat; ess = a rest). 

 Chapter 6 Culture
294 |
 al-Samri  
 The  samri , or  samiri , are a song cycle performed at night (hence the name, which 
means “of night”) to texts of the  nabati genre about love or beauty (Urkevich 2001, 
326; Lambert 2002, 653). As well as being part of the nomadic tradition, they are 
performed by now-sedentary bedouin near urban areas (Jargy 2002, 665). They are 
performed at weddings, festivals, and Thursday night gatherings (Thursday evening 
is the equivalent of the American Saturday night, since businesses may be closed on 
the following day, Friday). The  samri have variants called the  shiri ,  khammari , and 
‘ ashuri  (‘Abd al-Hakim 1980, 74). According to Urkevich (2001, 326), the  samri were 
played to keep awake a person bitten by a snake until a healer arrived to treat him 
or her; the  samri ’s nocturnal performance is also explained by other tales from folk 
tradition (Tayash 1988). 
 As with many of the performed musical and dance traditions, the  samri is orga-
nized in two lines of people who sing as a double chorus. Individuals playing the  tar 
and  tabl (a larger double-skinned drum) and  tasﬁ q  (clappers) accompany a main 
singer and the two choruses. One line may sing, and then the other responds. The 
 tar and  tabl players are often professionals who display the name of their group on 
their instruments (Lambert 2002, 653). 
 As the poet-singer gives the verse, he and the drummers stay in their lines, but 
lines of dancers move their backs in a special rolling, or undulating, motion. Two or 
three veiled women may dance between the lines of men. The dancers may playfully 
snatch articles of clothing from the men, which are given back to them later (Adra 
2002, 709). 
 Aghani al-Ghaws and  Fijiri  
 An important genre of  khaliji music came from the divers and seamen of the pearling 
industry, an important trade that died out after the early 1930s. The ships’ captains 
retained a  niham ( nahham ), a lead singer for the  al-ghaws al-kabir , the six-month div-
ing season between April and September. The  nahham  led the crew and divers ( ghaw-
was was the name for a diver) aboard the dhow in singing songs that marked diff erent 
stages of their work, and they also performed other special songs (song of the whale) 
and songs of entertainment when they returned after a voyage, when they convened 
at a  dar (the word for a home but also a dwelling with a large hall and a lodge for a 
crew) and sang and danced in diff erent styles. The specialized genres were known as 
 aghani al-ghaws  (songs of the diving) or  nahma  (voice of the whale), and the songs of 
entertainment, which include the  al-haddadi  form, are also known generically as  ﬁ jiri 
(meaning “of dawn”). The special features of this music included songs performed 
to a deep drone maintained by the singers/divers/crew, called the  hamhama , which 
may be meant to imitate the sound of the whale and  also a  nahda , a lament, and a 
 janda , an introductory improvisation (Lambert 2002, 651). Accompanying the song 
are drums,  tar , cymbals ( twaysat ), coff ee mortars (struck with the grinding stick 
to produce a rhythm), and  tasﬁ q (clapping). There were also traditional women’s 

Traditional Musical Forms | 295
songs performed when the pearl divers returned home, and these were called  guff al 
(Campbell 2002, 698). 
 Before the pearling dhows launched, a dance called  al-sinkini was performed to 
sad and lamenting poetry. The forms of  ﬁ jiri involved dancing in group forms with 
dancers striking the ﬂ oor with their hands, and a soloist might improvise. Just be-
fore the boat’s return to shore, the ‘ ardha al-bahriyya  (the ‘ ardha  of the sea) was 
performed onshore by lines of men, drummers, and sword carriers (Adra 2002, 708). 
 Liwa  
 The  liwa , or  leiwah , is said to come from Kenya or Tanzania and is performed in 
areas with large populations originally from Africa, in the Eastern Province, in Bah-
rain, and in Basra. It may include the  shawm  (alternate names are surnay,  zurnay , 
or  zurna ; this is a double-reeded woodwind instrument bored like an oboe), singers, 
and percussion instruments (Røvsing Olsen and Wegner 2001, 796; Urkevich 2001, 
327). The dance performed by men and women during the  liwa is a slow walk around 
a circle with a step forward, then a step back, and then sometimes a complete turn. 
The texts of the songs are sad and concern separation from loved ones, and some 
lines have Swahili words (Adra 2002, 710). 
 Sawt  
 The  sawt  is the most important form of music developing in traditional urban settings 
and is often identiﬁ ed as “art” ( fann ) music. It is played in the Eastern Province and 
in Kuwait and Bahrain, and it includes other instruments in addition to the  ‘ud and 
percussion, such as the  nay (a ﬂ ute) and  qanun . Although it is like classical Arabic 
music, played in  maqam Bayati, Rast, Sikka, and Hijaz, the accompanying rhythms 
make  sawt unique. (The  maqamat  are musical modes constructed around an ascend-
ing and descending scale, with prominent tonalities; each is thought to aff ect the 
mood of the listener in a special way. Bayati, for example, would typically move from 
the dominant tone of  re , or D, in its ﬁ rst tetrachord, which contains an E half-ﬂ at, 
to a Nahawand second tetrachord with a dominant tone of  sol , or G, and a B ﬂ at. 
One can modulate from this maqam to an Ajam trichord on the third or the sixth 
note. Or one may modulate to the Bayati Shuri  maqsam , which has an A ﬂ at. Bayati 
is associated with the desert tradition.) The genre is said to have come from Yemen 
(‘Abduh Ghanim 1986) and was recorded as early as 1927 in Baghdad and 1929 in 
Cairo by Abd al-Latif al-Kuwaiti (Lambert 2002, 649–650). It used to be performed 
in houses that belonged communally to groups of musicians or at performances in 
private homes. The  sawt featured a singer who accompanied himself on the  ‘ud , four 
performers on the  marawis (small double-skinned drums),  tasﬁ q (hand-clapping), 
and possibly other instruments. It includes classical Arabic poetry and also Yemeni 
colloquial poetry. The  sawt cycle unfolds with an instrumental introduction (the 
 istihlal ), then a short sung poem ( istima ), followed by the  sawt section sung to one of 

 Chapter 6 Culture
296 |
the two rhythms, and a ﬁ nal short poem ( tawashih ) in a precomposed melody usually 
in  maqam Rast (Lambert 2002, 652; also see Røvsing Olsen and Wegner 2001, 795). 
The dance that accompanies the  sawt is called the  zafan ; in it, dancers may suddenly 
leap or kneel (Adra 2002). 
 LARGE-ENSEMBLE MUSIC 
 The majority of early recordings of  khaliji music were of the  sawt form. Beginning in 
the 1950s and 1960s, male singers began to perform with very large orchestras along 
the lines of the famous Egyptian vocal artist Umm Kulthum. These orchestras con-
tained modern instruments such as violins, violas or cellos, and the keyboard, along 
with ‘ ud ists, and were not limited to the local traditional instruments and percus-
sion. Among the ﬁ rst Saudi Arabian singers to present this new style, typical of the 
 ughniya  (song) form, were Talal al-Maddah (1939–2000) and Muhammad ‘Abduh 
Othman al-Asiri (1949–). Al-Maddah ﬁ rst came to the public’s attention with his 
song “Wardak, Ya Zira’ al-Ward” in the 1950s, while ‘Abduh ﬁ rst sang on the radio 
in 1960. Several of their songs—Maddah’s “Maqadir” and ‘Abduh’s “Ab‘ad” and 
“Ya Sariya”—became hits throughout the Arab world. 
 When Egypt fell from Arab favor after signing the Camp David peace treaty, tour-
ism from the Arab Gulf fell off  there for some years, and the proﬁ table club scene in 
Cairo gradually went into a decline coinciding with a religious revival. At the same 
time, Beirut was no longer an attractive magnet for Arab tourists due to the civil war. 
The Gulf tourist audiences dispersed to other areas, and a musical recording industry 
based in Dubai and the United Arab Emirates began to ﬂ ourish. This, in tandem with 
performing opportunities in the Gulf, attracted non- khaliji singing stars who added 
Gulf-inspired songs to their own repertoire; for instance, Warda al-Jaza’iriyya, the 
Egyptian star of Algerian origin; the late singer Zikra, originally from the Maghrib 
as well; and Kadhim al-Sahir, the Iraqi vocalist. 
 Some of the best-known Saudi Arabian singers include Talal Maddah, who died 
onstage in 2000 while performing at the annual Abha music festival, and Muham-
mad ‘Abduh, who has recorded more than 100 albums or CDs. He no longer regu-
larly presents concerts but performed in the Arab Music Festival in Cairo in 2005. 
Others are ‘Abbadi Johar (b. 1953), Saleh Khayri, and ‘Abd al-Majid Abdullah (b. 
1963). Leading composers include Tariq ‘Abd al-Hakim (b. ca. 1921), Ghazi ‘Ali, 
Muhammad al-Senan, and Muhammad Shaﬁ q Chughtai. Tariq Abd al-Hakim (al-
ternately written as al-Hakeem) was the ﬁ rst to introduce military music to Saudi 
Arabia; he has contributed greatly to the academic study of traditional Saudi Ara-
bian music and maintained the Castle of Cultural Arts at his home in Jeddah from 
1990–2005 ( Arab News , November 25, 2005). Muhammad al-Senan was a violinist 
and then an  ‘ud ist of the al-Khobar Orchestra, known as the Silver Band, under 
the Iraqi musician Tawﬁ q Jadd in 1962. He was active in Dammam and Qatif and 
was imprisoned for political activism; then, after returning from a 10-year hiatus in 
Kuwait, he began composing, winning competitions. Leading singers perform his 
music. 

Styles of Hijaz and Asir | 297
 Rabih Saqr is in the next generation of singers and is known for a more modern, 
or “pop” sound. He was introduced, as were many of the other male and female 
singers, by al-Maddah in 1992. Other singers include Talal Salama (b. 1966) and 
also Hisham ‘Abderrahman (b. 1980), the winner of the Star Academy 2 Awards, a 
televised contest of Arabic music similar to  American Idol . Unfortunately, the Saudi 
Arabian  ‘ulama condemned the Star Academy, calling it a crime against Islam, and 
urged ‘Abderrahman to repent. Perhaps the best-known Saudi Arabian female singer 
is ‘Itab. Ibtisam Lutﬁ  is another well-known female singer. Tuha, who composed 
many songs sung by other singers such as Talal Maddah, sings in the wedding-party 
circuits and plays the ‘ ud . Sara ‘Othman is another singer of this genre. Waed (her 
real name is Hanan Bakri Younes) is a younger female singer; her mother is Iraqi, 
and her father was one of the founders of Saudi Arabian radio broadcasting at the 
National Broadcasting Service, which has played an important role in introducing 
local artists to their Saudi Arabian audience. 
 STYLES OF HIJAZ AND ASIR 
 Urban Music 
 The urban music of the Hijaz was recorded by the Dutch orientalist Snouck Hur-
gronje. Later recordings were made by Muhammad al-Sindi, who sang, played the 
 ‘ud , and was accompanied by a  mirwas and a deeper drum. The  qanbus , or southern 
Arabian lute, was replaced by the  ‘ud over the course of the 20th century. Typically, 
the music includes an improvised, nonmetered segment called  mawwal  or  majass , 
played in the middle of a piece that otherwise features rhythm (Ba Ghaff ar 1994, 52). 
The  maqamat played are close to Rast and Hijaz; what is special about the style is 
the syncopation of the percussion (Lambert 2002, 655). 
 Majrur  
 The  majrur is performed in Ta’if and in Asir. The musical text may be an epic lament 
or a love poem. All of those participating play a treble  tar  except for the lead drum-
mer, who is positioned between two lines of players and plays a low-pitched  tabir as 
well as a  tar . The dancers sing while moving to the center. Participants can leave their 
place in the performance and then start leading the group in a new rhythm, which 
might include  majrash  and  shabshar  beats (Urkevich 2001, 326). Campbell describes 
the  majrur of Ta’if as involving dancers who move with twirling motions in  thobs 
made with circular skirts (Campbell in Zuhur, ed., 1998, 58). 
 Mizmar  
 The  mizmar is a very popular dance of the Hijaz performed in Jeddah, Mecca, and 
Medina by men. The men hold long wooden canes and pretend to ﬁ ght each other 

 Chapter 6 Culture
298 |
as in the Egyptian Sa‘idi cane dance ( al-‛asayya ). The name of the dance refers to 
the  mizmar , a double-reeded pipe that is also played in Sa‘id and is important to 
this dance. The melodies are called  zawamil , and they are accompanied by about six 
frame drums called  tiran ( tar is the singular). 
 Sahba  
 Sahba were performed by the ﬁ shermen of the Hijaz when they returned home after 
the voyaging season. These evidence both Egyptian and Yemeni styles. The  sahba 
from the area of Medina is a diff erent form, similar to the  muwashshah , the famous 
strophic songs of Andalusia and Syria. 
 Yanbuwiyya  
 The  yanbuwiyya is a special musical form coming from Yanbu on the Red Sea. It 
features the instrument called the  simsimiyya (and sometimes known as the  tanbura ), 
a six-stringed lyre that is played on both coasts of the Red Sea (Campbell 1998, 58). 
The songs were sung by sailors as they carried out set tasks. Another form is known 
as  al-khobaytiyya , which involves very complex movements by individual dancers, 
who also sing. 
 Zar  
 A  zar  is a ceremony of exorcism and also a song type performed for those occasions. 
People are believed to be possessed by spirits, and certain singers and instrumental-
ists, often including a soloist on the  tanbura , or  simsimiyya  (lyre), specialize in this 
genre (Shiloah 2001, 830; also see Tayash 1988). Christian Poché (2002, 319) has 
suggested that the  zar shows the connection between the lyre and the  jinn , who may 
possess individuals (the lyre was also known in historical texts as the  ma’azif , and 
its root,  ‘azf , means the voice of the jinn). The  zar  tradition is found in areas along 
the Red Sea, including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Sudan, and farther into eastern Africa, 
and also in the Arabian Gulf area. The  zar may be danced in Saudi Arabia to  samiri 
poetry. Dancers wear goat’s hooves on their belts, and when they stamp their feet, 
these rattle (Adra 2002, 209). 
 DANCE 
 Dance is generically called  raqs , or it might be titled according to the type of poetry 
that is being performed. Dancers may perform together in a line formation but some-
times also in a circle, a horseshoe, or a square shape. Dancers may also perform in a 
solo fashion or as a couple improvising as they move. Although some dances feature 
steps with hops and leg motion, as a general norm the dancing styles do not involve 
lifting of the legs, as Western ballet does. The dances of the sailors or pearl divers 

Religious Music | 299
from the Gulf or the Red Sea may involve kneeling positions and movements that 
simulate tasks aboard a boat. Dances may be segregated by gender, particularly in 
Saudi Arabia, and in urban settings, recordings exist of mixed-gender performances. 
In addition, there were some settings where female professional dancers performed 
for men or women . A special movement in women’s dance on the Arabian Peninsula 
is called  nuwwash , or  na’ash , and involves swinging of the hair and head. The over-
sized, brightly colored  thob    of the Eastern Province may also be swung and moved as 
part of the dance. Another general characteristic is artful playing with the movement, 
or variations of the movement but within a restrained repertoire of overall move-
ments. Dance may be an important means of asserting tribal identity, as Najwa Adra 
has indicated for Yemen (Adra 1982; Adra in Zuhur, ed., 2001). 
 There are numerous dance traditions that are particular to celebrations or to par-
ticular regions. For instance, dancing may be performed by the mother of the bride 
or of the groom, who dances around incense, spices, and eggs with a tray on her head 
bearing lit candles. The candles are supposed to remain lit throughout the dance 
(Adra 2002, 709). At the Janadiriyyah Heritage Festival, I observed a dance from the 
Hijaz that is similar to the one performed at the  sabu ‘ a , the seventh-day celebration 
following the birth of a child. In Asir, women perform a special line dance called 
 al-khatwah in which they link their arms and dip to the music while moving in tiny 
steps (Campbell 1999); also, in women’s warlike dance of Mahayil women stamp, 
wearing anklet bracelets, and hold small daggers. The clothing worn in this dance 
resembled the white cotton highland styles of Ethiopia (Campbell 1999). 
 A dance called the  farisa in the coastal towns of the Gulf region is somewhat like 
the dance known as the  khil (horse-imitating), or hobbyhorse dance of Egypt. A 
dancer wears a cardboard horse form and dances in the middle of a circle of women 
who play tambourines. Another dancer may lead the horse in its motions (Adra 
2002, 209). 
 Belly dancing is not indigenous to the peninsula, but given its popularity through-
out the Middle East, it may be performed informally in private gender-segregated 
settings or by professional dancers imported for such occasions. 
 RELIGIOUS MUSIC 
 Whereas sacred music has played a very strong role in the Western musical tradition, 
in the Muslim world, religious music and chanting are considered to be completely 
separate from music ( musiqa ) or secular music. This holds for religious songs that 
are clearly based on musical forms, not just for  tajwid , or Qur’anic, recitation. Nev-
ertheless, these forms are discussed here as religious music, because readers desiring 
further information can search under this rubric. 
 Adhan  
 The call to prayer ( adhan ) performed by the  mu’adhdhin is delivered ﬁ ve times a day 
according to a schedule that may be printed in the newspapers, published online, 
or given on television. Muslims then perform  salat , the prayer cycle. At Medina, 

 Chapter 6 Culture
300 |
where Muslim practices were developed, the decision to deliver the call to prayer 
with the human voice diff erentiated Muslim prayers from Jewish, Christian, or 
polytheistic traditions. The ﬁ rst  muadhdhin   , Bilal, was chosen for his ﬁ ne voice. 
The position of the  mu’adhdhin was respected, large mosques employed multiple 
callers, and the callers had their own guild under the Ottoman Empire (Neubauer 
and Doubleday 2001, 601). The  adhan is chanted from the minaret and then inside 
the mosque just before prayer. It is as follows: “ Allahu Akbar  (Allah is the Great-
est) [repeated 4 times or 2 times]  Ashhadu anna la ilaha ilallah . (I testify there is 
no god but Allah) [2 times]  Ashhadu anna Muhammada rasulullah (I testify that 
Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah) [2 times]  Hayya ‘ ala salat  (Hasten to the 
prayer) [2 times]  Hayya ‘ala falah (Hasten to success) [2 times]  As-salatu khayru 
min an-nawm (Prayer is better than sleep) [2 times but only at dawn prayer]  Allahu 
akbar  (Allah is the Greatest) [2 times]  La illaha illallah (There is no god but Allah) 
[1 time].” 
 The text of the  adhan  is set; however, the ﬁ rst phrase  Allahu Akbar is chanted four 
times, rather than two times, by those of the Maliki legal school (one of the four 
Sunni  madhahib , or legal traditions; it exists in Saudi Arabia, although the Hanbali 
school predominates). The ﬁ nal phrase  La illaha ilallah  is chanted once by Sunni 
Muslims and twice by Shi‘a Muslims. Muslims repeat the  adhan  to themselves as it 
is intoned. 
 The tonal rendition of the  adhan diff ers depending on the  mu’adhdhin . Some ren-
der the call close to  maqam Rast or  maqam Hijaz ,   and certain words are sung with 
melismas. A diff erent, very plain style may be performed on only two notes, and 
some call this  adhan shar ‘ i . 
 Tajwid and  Qira’a  
 Qira’a is the recitation of the Qur’an by a  qar’i .  Tajwid is the art or science of recit-
ing the Qur’an and is not considered music as such. It is consistently diff erentiated 
from secular music (Faruqi 1985), although under the high caliphal tradition, elabo-
rate performances of  tajwid were apparently staged (Neubauer and Doubleday 2001, 
601).  Tajwid is also used interchangeably with one of the two forms of recitation, 
 mujawwad . However, the recitation follows along the  maqamat (modal) system, and 
a great reciter requires all the vocal techniques of a great singer and is well aware 
of the  maqamat and the vocal agility required. The reciter is in some ways like the 
cantor in the Jewish tradition. Like a singer, the reciter must know where to breathe 
in the text, what weight to give diff erent consonants, what length (of time) is to be 
given to syllables, and where ornamentation may be performed. Classes are off ered 
in  tajwid , and contests take place in various parts of the Islamic world. Some consider 
the following to be great reciters: Ayman Swayd of Jeddah; Hamad al-Bukhari of 
Medina; Muhammad Sa‘id al-Iskandariyya of Alexandria, Egypt; ‘Adil Abu Shi‘r of 
Damascus, Syria; ‘Adil Al-Sunayd of Riyadh; and Shaykha Rebab Shaqaqi of Jed-
dah. A popular recorded version of the entire Qur’an is by Mishary Rashid Alafasy 
of Saudi Arabia, who achieves an eff ortless, stunning reading. 

Songs of Pilgrimage | 301
 Inshad and  Mada’ih  
 Inshad (or  anasheed , the plural of  nashid ) are religious songs and verse, and  mada’ih 
are verses of praise, typically praising God or the Prophet Muhammad.  Inshad may 
also glorify other venerated Muslim men and women in the Suﬁ  tradition, who re-
portedly composed and inspired  inshad . This tradition was notably attacked by the 
followers of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab in Saudi Arabia. Ironically, perhaps, 
as the  hajj gathers Muslims from throughout the world, the  inshad tradition has been 
perpetuated in the peninsula. The lead vocalist of the  inshad is called the  munshid . 
 Inshad of the  Mawalid  
 The  inshad celebrating the  mawalid (festivals of the holy men and women of Islam) 
are extremely varied. In one example from Jeddah, the  munshid  leads the audience/
chorus in simple, mostly unison versions, on the  mawlid  (alternatively  mulid ; mean-
ing the birthday) of the Prophet Muhammad and heavily ornaments the sections he 
intones alone (Mawlid Jidda, ca. 2006). A continuing Suﬁ  presence in Saudi Arabia, 
despite the Wahhabi reform movement, has been documented—the performance of 
this very  mawlid led in 1941 to the expulsion of the  shaykh of the Dandarawi Suﬁ  
(Sedgwick 1997, 349). 
 SONGS OF PILGRIMAGE 
 The traditions of songs of the pilgrimage are ancient, comprising those played at 
pilgrims’ departure, while on the  hajj , and upon pilgrims’ return. Since the Islamic 
awakening of the 1970s, many performers of popular music have added religious 
songs to their repertoire and made programs and ﬁ lms about the  hajj ; some have 
turned exclusively to religious music. However, the songs of pilgrimage, referred to 
as  tahlil , reﬂ ect their own national genres. Saudi Arabia has its own songs of pilgrim-
age, too, as many in the kingdom participate in the annual  hajj . Historically, military 
bands, which included a  tabl al-hajj (drum), might play for departing pilgrims or 
accompany pilgrims on the  hajj (Neubauer and Doubleday 2001, 602). 
 Certain rites involve religious chanting, as in the  takbir , which is recited at a special 
morning prayer during the ‘Id al-Adha, the feast of the sacriﬁ ce on the 10th of the 
month, Dhu al-Hija, during the  hajj , which may be simply: 
TABLE 6.4
Allāhu akbar, Allāhu akbar, Allāhu akbar
lā ilāha illā Allāh
Allāhu akbar, Allāhu akbar
wa li-illāh il-h.amd

 Chapter 6 Culture
302 |
 Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest. There is no God 
but Allah. Allah is the Greatest. Allah is the Greatest. And all praises are due to Him. 
 REFERENCES 
 ‘Abd al-Hakim. Tariq.  Ashhar al-fulklurat al-sha’abiya [The most famous forms of folkore]. 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: al-Jam’iyya al-‘Arabiyya al-Sa‘udiyyah lil-Thaqafa wa-l-Funun, 
1980. 
 ‘Abd al-Hakim, Tariq.  Masahhir al-musiqiyin al-’arab [Famous Arab musicians]. n.d. [ca. 
1966]. 
 ‘Abduh Ghanim, Nizar. “Al-Judhur al-Yamaniyya li-fann al-sawt al-khalij” [The Yemeni 
roots of the Sawt in the Gulf ].  al-Ma’thurat al-Sha‘biyya 4 (1986), 9–28. 
 Adra, Najwa. “Dance in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World Music , 
edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 
2002, vol. 6, 703–712. 
 Adra, Najwa. “Dance: A Visual Marker of Qabili Identity in Highland Yemen.” In  Colors of 
Enchantment: Theater, Music, Dance, and Visual Arts of the Middle East , edited by Sherifa 
Zuhur. Cairo and New York: American University in Cairo Press, 2001, 175–210. 
 Adra, Najwa. “Qabyala: The Tribal Concept in the Central Highlands of the Yemen Arab 
Republic.” PhD diss., Temple University, 1982. 
 Akeel, Maha. “Old Songs in Old Nights.”  Arab News , December 25, 2004. http://www.arab-
news.com/?page=21&section=0&article=56530&d=25&m=12&y=2004 
 Awhan, Faruq. “ Raqsat al-’ ‘ ayyala ﬁ -l- ‘Imara al-‘Arabiyya al-Mutahidda” [The ‘Ayyala 
dance of the United Arab Emirates].  al-Ma’thurat al-Sha ‘ biyyah 9 (1988). 
 Ba Ghaff ar, Hind.  Al-aghani al-sha ‘ biyya ﬁ -l-Mamlakah al- ‘ Arabiyyah al-Sa ‘ udiyyah [Folk 
songs in the Saudi Arabian Kingdom]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Qadsiyya li-l-tawzi‘ 
wa-l-nashr, 1994. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Saudi Folk Music: Alive and Well.”  Saudi Aramco World Magazine , 
March/April 2007. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Music in Performance: A Saudi Women’s Wedding Party.” In  Gar-
land Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight 
Reynolds. Vol. 6,  The Middle East. New York: Garland Press, 2002, 696–698. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Days of Song and Dance.”  Aramco World 50, no. 1 (1999), 78–87. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment , edited by Sherifa Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo 
Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Recent Recordings of Traditional Music from the Arabian Gulf and 
Saudi Arabia.”  Middle East Studies Association Bulletin 30, no. 1 (July 1996), 37–40. 
 Farmer, Henry George.  A History of Arabian Music to the XIIth Century . London: Luzac 
and Co., 1929. 
 Faruqi, Lamya (Lois) Ibsen. “Music, Musicians and Muslim Law.”  Asian Music  7, no. 1 
(1985), 5–36. 
 Grund, F. “Danses d’ailleures: La mâle danse, ceremonies masculines en Arabie Saoudite.” 
 Danser , no. 269 (September 1998), 26–28. 

| 303
References
 Hansen, Eric. “The Hidden History of a Scented Wood.”  Saudi Aramco World,  51, no. 6 
(November/December 2000), 2–13. 
 Hanzal, Falih.  Mu‘jam al-qawaﬁ  wa-l-alhan ﬁ -l-khalij al- ‘ arabi  [Dictionary of rhymes and mel-
odies in the Arabian Gulf ]. Al-Sharja: Ittihad Kuttab wa-Udaba al-‘Imarat al-‘Arabiyyah 
al-Mutahhida 1987.  
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 663–669. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Oral Tradition of the Gulf Region and the Arabian Penin-
sula.”  Oral Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 175–187. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Comments on the Concept and Characteristics of the Folk Music in the Gulf 
and Arabian Peninsula.”  Ma’thurat al-Sha‘biyyah , January 1, 1986. 
 Lambert, Jean. “The Arabian Peninsula: An Overview.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 649–661. 
 Nelson, Kristina. “The Qur’an Recited.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by 
Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2002, 
vol. 6, 157–163. 
 Nelson, Kristina.  The Art of Reciting the Qur’an . Austin: University of Texas Press, 1985. 
 Neubauer, Eckard. “Arabic Writings on Music: Eighth to Nineteenth Centuries.” In  Garland 
Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight 
Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 363–386. 
 Neubauer, Eckhard, and Veronica Doubleday. “Islamic Religious Music.” In  The New Grove 
Dictionary of Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: Mac-
millan, 2001, 599–610. 
 Poché, Christian. “Music in Ancient Arabia from Archaeological and Written Sources.” In 
 Garland Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and 
Dwight Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 357–362. 
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “The Life History of the Lyre (in the Path of the Lyre). The Tanburah of the 
Gulf Region.”  Musike: International Journal of Ethnomusicological Studies  2, no. 2 (2006). 
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “Music of the Arabian Desert in the Accounts of Early Western Travelers.” 
Translated by the author as “Musiqa al-Badiyah ﬁ  Sijillat al-Rahhalah al- Gharbiyyin.” 
In  al-Ma’thurat al-Sha‘biyyah . Doha, Qatar: The GCC Arab Gulf States Folklore Center, 
1998. 
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “Music.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renaissance , edited 
by John R. Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992. 
 Røvsing Olsen, Poul. “La musique africaine dans le Golfe persique.”  JIFMC 19 (1967), 28–36. 
 Røvsing Olsen, Poul, and Ulrich Wegner. “Arabian Gulf.” In  The New Grove Dictionary of 
Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: Macmillan, 2001, 
vol. 1, 795–797. 
 al-Sa‘id, Labib.  al-Maqari wa-l-qurra’ . Cairo: Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, 1976. 
 al-Samiri, ‘Abd al-Jabbar. “Masadar wa maraji ﬁ  fulklur al-khalij al-‘arabi wa al-jazira: al-
raqs al-sha‘bi” [Sources and References in the Folklore of the Arabian Gulf and the Pen-
insula: Folk dance].  al-Turath al-sha ‘ bi 9, no. 7, 268–270. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
304 |
 al-Sa‘ud, Norah bint Muhammad, al-Jawhara Muhammad al-‘Anqari, and Madeha Mu-
hammad al-‘Atroush, eds.  Abha, Bilad Asir: Southwestern Region of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: By the editors, 1989. 
 Sedgwick, Mark. “Saudi Suﬁ s: Compromise in the Hijaz 1925–1940.”  Die Welt des Islams 37, 
no. 3 (1997), 349–368. 
 Sells, Michael. “Sound, Spirit and Gender in Surat al-Qadr.”  Journal of the American Oriental-
ist Society 11, no. 2 (1991), 239–259. 
 Shiloah, Amnon, II. “Folk Music” (section of the article on “Arab Music”). In  The New 
Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: 
Macmillan, 2001, vol. 1, 824–883. 
 Snouck Hurgronje, Christaan.  Mekka in the Latter Part of the Nineteenth Century, 1885–1889 . 
Translated by James Henry Monahan. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1931. 
 Tayash, Fahad. “Sameri Tradition and Zar Dance in Saudi Arabia.”  al-Ma’thurat al-Sha ‘ biyya 
9 (1988), 23–36. 
 Urkevich, Lisa A. “Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of.” In  The New Grove Dictionary of Music and 
Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: Macmillan, 2001, vol. 22, 
324–328. 
Zuhur, Sherifa.  Personal interviews and ﬁ eld notes, Egypt and Sinai Peninsula 1998-1999, and 
Riyadh, Jeddah, Diriyyah, Khobar, London and Washington, 2005-2008.  
 Selected Recordings 
 A Musical Anthology of the Arabian Peninsula . Recorded by Simon Jargy and Poul Røvsing 
Olsen (also cited as: and ‘Ali Zakariyya al-‘Ansari). 4 vols. 1, Sung Poetry of the Bedouins. 
2, Music of the Pearl Divers. 3,  Sawt : Music from the City. 4, Women’s Songs. Geneva: 
Archives Internationales de Musique Populaire de la Musée d’Éthnographie, 1994 (Field 
recordings made in the Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula from the early 1970s). Dist. Gary 
Thal Music Inc.,: 1994, VDE-Gallo CD 758–59–60–61. 
 Arabie saoudite: Musique de ‘Unayzah ,  Ancienne Cité du Najd . Pierre Bois, dir. Paris: Maison 
des Cultures du Monde. Inédit. CD W 260087. 1999. 
 Ettab-Talal Madah . Performed by ‘Itab and Talal Madah, Funun al-Jazeera, FJCD 1109. 
 “Mawlid Jiddah Sharif.” Video example of  mada’ih of the  mawlid al-nabi . n.d. [ca. 2006]. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5n_dikNnsS8 
 Musique des bédouins . Bhattacharya, Deben, dir. Paris: Bam. Folkore et Musiques de l’univers. 
LD 5783, LP, disk. n.d. [ca. 1970s]. 
 al-Qur’an al-Karim . Mishary bin Rashid Alafasy ( qari’ ). 26 CDs in set. UFI Inc. 2003/1424h.. 
 Rayigh . Performed by A. Abd al-Majid. Rotana. 397 TC ROT, 1997. 
 Rhythms from an Oasis [instrumental music]. Comp. Dhafer Kohaji and ‘Aref al-‘Amer. Saudi 
Aramco, 2003 CD. 
 Samra: Songs from Saudi Arabia . Produced by Kay Hardy Campbell. Audiocassette, 1985. 
 Samra II: More Songs from Saudi Arabia . Produced by Kay Hardy Campbell. Audiocassette, 
1986. 
 Sha’biyyat . Vol. 15–16. Performed by Muhammad ‘Abdu, Sawt al-Jazira MACD 528 and 
MADC 529. 

| 305
Food
 Sha’biyyat/Muhammad ‘Abduh: Folk Songs . Performed by M. ‘Abduh. Sawt El Jezira (same 
as Sawt al-Jazira). MACD 516 and MACD 517, 1991. 
 Tanburah; Music of the Gulf . Coll. A. J. Racy (accompanies volume). Arab Gulf States Folk-
lore Center, 1988. 
 Al-Tawhîd . Comp. by Siraj Omar, lyrics by Prince Khalid al-Faisal. A modern musical epic 
with vocals by Talâl Maddâh, Muhammad ‘Abduh, ‘Abd-al Majîd ‘Abd Allah, ‘Abd Allah 
Rashâd, and Râshid al-Mâjid. W 260001, Maison des Cultures du Monde, 1994. 
 The Very Best of Ettab . Performed by ‘Itab. Relax-In REL CD 313, 1989. 
 Food 
 Food customs and the culinary tradition in Saudi Arabia tend, as in the rest of the 
Arab world, to feature traditional foods, whether these are speciﬁ cally local dishes 
or part of the regional repertoire. These traditional dishes should be prepared with 
the freshest ingredients possible, although frozen, canned, and pre-prepared foods 
are now available and used. When preparing traditional dishes, individual cooks may 
vary them by adding an extra teaspoon or pinch of this or that. Food consumption 
has changed due to technology, modernization, and shifts in lifestyles, so what is tra-
ditional now diff ers from the past. No great appreciation for radical experimentation 
exists as in American food, outside of large hotels and business settings, or in dem-
onstration cooking. However, as in  nouvelle cuisine , lighter versions of traditional 
dishes are now sometimes available, and measurements are now given in cooking 
instruction, shows, and books. Cooking shows on satellite or cable television have 
become popular, and these sometimes glamorize food, instructing on both prepara-
tion and presentation. 
 It is sometimes diffi  cult to distinguish which foods were originally Saudi Arabian 
and which came from the Levant or Iraq, Syria, or Egypt, because certain foods 
are linked in a common tradition going back to the Abbasid era, while others have 
moved into the Arabian Peninsula due to the movement of labor, pilgrims, and schol-
ars. Saudi Arabians consider the breakfast foods of  ful mudammes (fava beans) and 
 shakshooka (eggs cooked with minced meat) to be their national dishes, even though 
these are regarded as national dishes in other countries (the ﬁ rst dish in Egypt and 
the second in Tunisia).  Karkadeh , a tea of hibiscus hips that can be consumed hot or 
cold, is found in Mecca and Medina and throughout Egypt. Saudi Arabians prepare 
 sanbusak , a sort of half moon–shaped ravioli stuff ed with a leek ﬁ lling, which can be 
served with a yogurt sauce; the same dish, of Ottoman origin, is off ered in Syria. One 
can ﬁ nd  kabsa , a Saudi Arabian specialty, prepared in takeout kitchens in Damascus, 
Syria, thanks to the large number of Saudi Arabian tourists. 
 Culinary historians have studied manuscripts of Abbasid-era cooking. The recipes 
show a great similarity to modern dishes in the Arab world (Arberry 1939; Roden 
1974, 7–17). The cuisine of the Ottoman Empire traveled throughout its holdings, 
which did not include Saudi Arabia except for a relatively short period that ended 
the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state (see Chapter 2, History). Yet these foods entered Saudi Arabia 

 Chapter 6 Culture
306 |
as other Arabs settled there following the pilgrimage or as they have worked in the 
kingdom since the 1930s. The cuisine of the Arabian/Persian Gulf is also a mixture of 
inﬂ uences. Throughout the kingdom, South Asian food is also available. Similarities 
in the traditional Arab regional foods are based on (a) the use of small appetizers and 
salads called  mezzah that preface main dishes; (b) the use of many fresh vegetables, 
garlic, and spices; (c) the balancing of vegetables and protein foods like chicken, 
lamb, or goat with either rice or cooked wheat, as in other highland areas of the 
Arab world, and/or bread; (d) sweets based on the Ottoman culinary tradition or 
servings of fresh fruit; (e) serving of vegetables stuff ed with a rice or rice-and-meat 
ﬁ lling: peppers, grape leaves, tomatoes, or cabbage; (f ) grilling, frying, and baking 
of meats; (g) use of olive oil or  samnah , a clariﬁ ed butter; (h) a special tradition of 
preparing and serving coff ee (and tea) to demonstrate hospitality; (i) the use of syrup-
based cold drinks and herbal teas for medicinal purposes; and ( j) the observance of 
Muslim dietary rules. 
 The word  halal , “allowed or lawful,” comes from the Qur’an and is a category 
of substances including food that contrast with those that are  haram , unlawful and 
forbidden. The Qur’an designates plants and animals that are lawful for Muslims to 
eat (Qur’an, 80:25–32, 2:168; 2:172, and 16:14), which include goats, sheep, cattle, 
and camels and also ﬁ sh and other wild animals so long as they meet the criteria in 
the law (5:94–96). However, swine, animals that are already dead, and those prepared 
for sacriﬁ ce to deities other than Allah are forbidden (Qur’an 5:3, 6:45; Campo 1995, 
375). Muslims must not eat pork or bacon. Other animals are ritually slaughtered 
and referred to as  halal meat and are certiﬁ ed as such in Saudi Arabia. The slaughter-
ing consists of saying “bismallah” and cutting the animal’s throat, although camels 
were supposed to be killed by a knife or sword to the upper chest. Then the carcasses 
are hung to drain the blood. The method thus resembles the ritual slaughter practiced 
by the Jews under their  kashrut , or kosher, dietary laws. 
 The ancient Arabs drank wine made from dates ( khamr ), which was forsworn 
by the Emigrants (those who left Mecca for Medina with the Prophet in the  hijra h) 
and the Ansar (those already resident in Medina) and was condemned in the Qur’an 
(5:90–91). The Hanbali legal school considers  khamr to pertain to wine made of 
grapes as well as dates and other intoxicating beverages, and it was outlawed along 
with all intoxicants in 1929 for Muslims in Saudi Arabia. 
 Both bedouin and sedentary lifestyles produced diff erent types of foods and inﬂ u-
enced trade. The bedouin had grazing animals and therefore access to milk, cheese, 
and yogurt and, on special occasions, meat. Other traditional foods of the bedouin 
included dates, lentils, pumpkins, leeks, zucchini (courgettes), eggplant, and oc-
casionally goat, lamb, or camel. Frequently, they grew their own vegetables if they 
were settled or settled for part of the year, or they traded with sedentary or partially 
sedentary groups to obtain their other food needs. The Najd and Hasa regions 
produce wheat, which is very much a part of the cuisine in that area. Government-
sponsored programs to subsidize farmers, particularly those growing wheat, were 
opposed on economic grounds by some Western observers, who thought the mas-
sive amounts of water needed were too costly. On the other hand, those countries 

| 307
that have instituted grain imports have become highly dependent on a diff erent 
type of government subsidization intended to keep down the costs of the ﬁ nished 
product. 
 The rules of hospitality also impact food and its preparation, serving, and recep-
tion. The host is expected to prepare more food than is necessary and to use excellent 
ingredients as a sign of generosity; to serve a guest ﬁ rst and to treat a guest from far 
away prior to one who is a regular visitor; and to be cheerful and not argue. He or she 
will expect reciprocity from a close friend or relative, although not necessarily from 
a stranger (also see the section on etiquette). The phrase  Bismallah (“in the name of 
Allah”) is pronounced before eating, and eating with one’s ﬁ ngers is considered polite 
and has its own set of rules as detailed as European table manners. 
 Coff ee ﬁ rst gained popularity in Arabia and Yemen (Roden 1974, 445). It was 
discovered in Ethiopia, perhaps by Yemenis, or perhaps its fruits (coff ee cherries) 
were known to slaves who came from Sudan to Yemen and Arabia through the port 
of Mocha (al-Mukha). Some sources claim it may have been cultivated as early as 
the 13th century. It was certainly being consumed (as was tobacco) in the early 16th 
century (Bouzigard 2010) and cultivated, mainly in the Ottoman Empire, and made 
its way to Safavid Iran (Matthee 2005, 144–145) and Europe. 
 Preparing and off ering coff ee for guests has been a requirement of Arab hospital-
ity ever since. Coff ee preparation was usually the host’s task, and it is said of a gener-
ous man that “he makes coff ee from noon until night” (Mahy 1975). The coff eepots 
of the bedouin ( dellal ) were carried in a  fatya (coff ee-gear basket) so that they were 
always at hand, despite the constant packing and unpacking of the nomads described 
by the traveler Charles Doughty in the 1870s. His host, Zeyd, sometimes pretended 
to be busy with another matter when men approached his open tent: “He tells them, 
wellah, his aff airs do call him forth, adieu, he must away to the mejlis, go they and 
seek coff ee elsewhere. But were there any sheykh with them, a coff ee lord, Zeyd could 
not honestly choose but abide and serve them with coff ee; . . . except he gently protest, 
‘billah, he would not drink’ ” (Doughty 1968, 57–58). 
 What is known as Turkish coff ee in much of the Middle East is prepared according 
to the guest’s or customer’s taste for additional sugar, and in Lebanon, rose water 
is usually added. Arabian coff ee is served without sugar and with cardamom. In the 
past, a host would roast the beans and pound them in a  mahbaj (coff ee grinder) and 
add this  bunn (ﬁ nely powdered coff ee) to the pot and then cook it in front of the 
guests. Cardamom pods could be added, and then it was served, as today, in very 
small cups without a handle. In the past, people ground their own spices as well as 
coff ee. Today, coff ee can be bought ground, and cardamom is obtained from spice 
vendors or available in powdered form in containers in supermarkets. The addition 
of cardamom and straining of the coff ee grounds make the coff ee “whiter.” Coff ee 
is presented at all formal occasions and meetings and at less formal ones in homes. 
Middle-class and wealthy Saudi Arabians may frequent coff ee restaurants in the 
modern city malls, which serve lattes, cappuccinos, Nescafé, and more rarely Ger-
man- or American-style brewed coff ee, as well as Arabic coff ee. These are important 
spaces for social exchange as well. 
Food

 Chapter 6 Culture
308 |
 Whereas the Bedouin had plentiful milk, they could hunger for other food, as they 
could not aff ord to kill their animals except for special occasions such as a circumci-
sion, a wedding, or the religious feast days. Today, the change in consumption pat-
terns has aff ected certain health conditions; obesity and heart disease are on the rise, 
as in the West. Another important change is the availability of all types of food in 
diff erent parts of the country and the presence of excellent restaurants; it is no longer 
true that Saudi Arabian food is available only in homes. Some restaurants specialize 
solely in Saudi Arabian food, but many also off er grilled and Lebanese or continental 
dishes, and a sizable business in catering or takeout has developed as well. 
 A specialty of Najd and the Hasa oasis is the use of wheat in the cuisine (in ad-
dition to bread) as in the recipe for  mufallaq later on. This is Saudi Arabia’s answer 
to the  fariqa of Syria or Egypt and to North Africa’s couscous. Wheat agriculture 
also makes possible many varieties of bread: the ﬂ at loaves of  khubz ‘arabi (Arabic 
bread),  tamis (a bigger loaf with more crust, in the east), and  shurayk (a soft and 
golden loaf ).  Khubz ruqaq , which is a mixture of ﬂ our, water, salt, and date syrup 
baked on a griddle, is made in Najd throughout the year and in other areas during 
Ramadan. When little pieces of this bread are ﬁ lled with egg, they are a child’s treat 
called  hinnuwah (Mahy 1975). 
 To the east, rice is the preferred grain, and it is served with ﬁ sh or shrimp around 
the Persian Gulf, sometimes ﬂ avored with tamarind. The rice might be seasoned 
with tomato or  muhammara , and the ﬁ sh is seasoned with a spice mix called  baharat . 
 In the past, a heavier meal at lunchtime was preferred, but a full dinner may also be 
eaten, quite a bit later in the evening than is common in the West. During Ramadan, 
people consume a meal sometime before dawn and then fast all day, breaking their 
fast with an  iftar . The food of the  iftar  should not be too heavy on the stomach; ﬁ rst, 
dates and water may be eaten and then a nourishing soup and other dishes. Desserts 
make up for the daytime decrease in caloric intake during Ramadan. 
 In Najd, the traditional preference for dessert is fresh fruit such as grapes, pome-
granate, or melon. A candy was made of the  utrunj (sometimes called uglyfruit, it is 
a type of citrus). The rind of the  utrunj was marinated in its own juice, water, and 
QAHWAH ‘ARABIYYAH (ARABIC COFFEE)
3 c water
3 tbsp powdered cardamom
2 tbsp Arabic coffee
¼ tsp saffron (optional)
Boil the water in a pot. Add the coffee to the water, and bring to a boil 
over low heat. Remove from the heat for ﬁ ve minutes to allow the coffee to 
settle. Put the cardamom in the pot (some strain the coffee at this point), and 
add the saffron. Bring back to boil once and serve. Serves 8 to 10 persons in 
tiny cups (or 6 in larger glasses).

| 309
QOUZY OR KHARUF MAHSHI (WHOLE STUFFED KID OR LAMB)
A feast dish of whole roasted kid (qouzy) or milk-fed lamb (kharuf ) was served 
on behalf of honored guests or for the feast days. The kid or lamb is stuffed, 
then roasted outdoors over charcoal, or it can be cooked in an oven.
1 baby lamb (headless and prepared for stufﬁ ng), 15 to 18 lb
2 tbsp ground coriander
1 tsp ground ginger
1 tbsp turmeric
2 tbsp lemon juice (optional) 
10 garlic cloves
1 tbsp black lime powder
Salt and pepper
Stuffing
6 c long-grained rice (or 5 c rice and 1 c chickpeas)
1 tbsp turmeric
10 cardamom pods, crushed
2 c onion, ﬁ nely chopped
2 tbsp oil
1 c rose water
2 tbsp lemon juice
1 c chopped walnuts
½ c chopped pistachio nuts
½ c almonds (pine nuts can be substituted for the walnuts)
Mix of ½ c tamarind juice, ½ c rose water, ½ c water, and 2 tbsp baharat (mixed 
spices)
10 cloves garlic, chopped
Hard-boiled eggs (optional), one for each guest
Butter or samnah for basting
Salt and pepper
Wash the lamb inside and out, and pat dry. Mix the spices with garlic, 
lime powder, and salt and pepper, and rub onto the lamb all over outside and 
inside. (You may also mix the spices with 2 tbsp. lemon juice and then rub the 
lamb with that mixture, although some prefer to season solely with dry ingre-
dients.) Prepare the stufﬁ ng by boiling the rice (and chickpeas) in water with 
turmeric, cardamom pods, and salt until partially cooked, about 10 minutes. 
Discard the cardamom pods and the liquid. Fry the onions in oil, and add 
rose water, lemon juice, nuts, and the tamarind mixture, and cook for about 
10 minutes. Add shelled hard-boiled eggs if you wish (if not, you can garnish 
Food

 Chapter 6 Culture
310 |
the serving plate with sliced hard-boiled eggs) and the additional 10 cloves 
of chopped garlic, stuff the lamb, and sew the cavity closed. Roast for 4 to 
6 hours on an open ﬁ re (depends on the size of the lamb), basting it with its 
own juice and butter or samnah if desired. If roasting in the oven, preheat to 
450°F, then reduce to 350°F. Cover the lamb with foil, and uncover during the 
last half hour of cooking, basting regularly with butter or samnah. This should 
take about 2 to 2½ hours or longer for a larger lamb. Remove the thread, and 
empty the stufﬁ ng. Serve on a large platter surrounded with the stufﬁ ng. May 
be garnished with parsley and sliced hard-boiled eggs (if you did not add these 
to the stufﬁ ng), or smaller dishes of tomatoes, cooked pumpkin, sliced melon, 
and apricots can be served along with the main dish (Roden 1974, 210–211; 
Abdennour 2005, 108–109; Mahy 1975).
BAHARAT
3
1  c black pepper
¼ c ground coriander
Scant ¼ c cinnamon
¼ c ground cloves
¼ c ground cumin
2 tsp ground cardamom
¼ c ground nutmeg
½ c ground paprika
3
1  c curry powder
Scant ¼ c ground dried (black) limes (this is a popular spice of the Gulf and can be 
bought in larger-size jars)
Mix together and store in a glass jar. Some also add allspice or ginger.
HAWAIJ
2 tbsp black peppercorns
1 tbsp caraway seed
½ tsp cardamom seeds
1 tsp saffron threads
1 tsp turmeric
Another spice mix is Hawaij:

| 311
KABSA (PREPARED WITH CHICKEN)
1 lb U.S. or basmati rice
2 medium onions, sliced
1 c corn oil (canola oil may be used)
1 frying chicken, cut in pieces
1 can tomato purée (approximately equal to a 6 oz. can)
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
5 cloves garlic, mashed to a pulp in a mortar
3 c hot water
6 cloves (arumfal)
6 cardamom pods
4 sticks of cinnamon
Salt and pepper
2 medium carrots, grated
Grated rind of one orange
4 tbsp raisins
4 tbsp almonds, soaked and split
Wash the rice, and cover with water for at least 15 minutes before cooking. 
Sauté the onion in oil until it is browned. Add the pieces of chicken, tomato 
puree, chopped tomatoes, and garlic. Stir for about ﬁ ve minutes over low 
heat. Add hot water, the spices, salt and pepper, grated carrots, and orange 
rind. Cook 20 to 26 minutes or until the chicken is done. Remove the chicken, 
and put in the oven to keep warm. Add the rice to the sauce, and cook for 
15 minutes. Arrange the chicken atop the rice on a platter or large plate, and 
decorate with raisins and almonds.
MUFALLAQ
3 c jarish (crushed wheat, a favorite of Najd and the Hasa oasis and a substitute for 
rice)
4½ c water
Heat peppercorns, caraway seeds, and cardamom seeds in a pan for a 
few minutes. Pound in a mortar or grind. Add saffron and grind. Pour into a 
bowl, stir in turmeric, and keep in an airtight container.
Other favorite dishes include the following:
Food

 Chapter 6 Culture
312 |
JARISH BI-LABAN (CRACKED WHEAT WITH YOGURT)
With the exception of the yogurt, this dish is almost the same as harisah, a 
dish of the eastern coast of Saudi Arabia, which was similarly pounded and 
then cooked all day.
4 c yogurt
½ lb margarine
2 tbsp ground cumin
4 red chili peppers
4 c cracked wheat
3 tbsp butter, melted
Salt to taste
Mix yogurt and salt in a pan. Stir over low heat. Combine the margarine, 
cumin, and chili peppers in a mortar, and grind with the pestle. When the 
yogurt is almost boiling, add the cumin mixture and mix well. Wash and drain 
the cracked wheat, and add to the yogurt. Cover and simmer over low heat 
for three hours. Take off heat and beat with a wooden spoon. Then blend in 
a food processor (prior to the advent of the food processor, this would have 
been beaten for at least half an hour). Pour wheat and yogurt mixture into a 
deep serving dish. Make a depression in the center, pour in the melted butter, 
and serve.
1 lb lamb cut into large chunks (lamb neck is acceptable too)
1 small can tomato paste
2 onions, chopped
Small amount (2 tbsp) of olive or canola oil. If on low-fat diet, you can spray the pan 
with olive-oil spray. For a traditional taste use samnah.
Salt and pepper to taste
Wash the wheat, then soak in water for two hours. Brown the meat in oil, 
add tomato paste, salt and pepper to taste, and 1 cup water. Cook over 
medium heat until the meat is tender, then spoon the meat out onto a plate 
and cover. Drain the water off the wheat, then fry the wheat over low heat in 
oil (or samnah, which many now avoid to keep down cholesterol levels) until 
it browns. Add the meat mixture and 3½ c water to the wheat. Cover and 
cook until the wheat is dry and ﬂ uffy. Fry the onion and place at the center of 
the wheat. Continue to steam the mixture for another 15 minutes on very low 
heat. Stir the onion into the wheat, and serve on a platter, topping with the 
meat pieces.

| 313
‘AISH BIL-LAHM OR ‘AISH ABU LAHM
In the Hijaz this dish is made with shamar, habbah sawda (black caraway 
seeds), fennel, and ground lamb.
Dough
1 tbsp yeast
4 c ﬂ our
3 eggs
3 tbsp vegetable oil
Salt
½ tsp powdered bread spices (black pepper and cumin); or use 1 tsp habbah sawda 
(black caraway seeds) and 1 tsp fennel seeds
Stuffing
4
3  lb ground beef (or ground lamb)
2 onions, ﬁ nely chopped
2 tsp salt
½ bunch leeks (kurrash)
3 tbsp corn oil
6 tbsp tahina (sesame paste with oil)
½ tbsp vinegar
4 cloves garlic, pressed or mashed
2 black peppercorns
1 tbsp poppy seeds (or black caraway seeds)
Dissolve yeast in half a cup of warm water, and set aside to soften. Put ﬂ our 
in a large bowl, make a well in center, and add eggs, oil, yeast, salt, and 
bread spices. Mix well, adding water a little at a time until you have a ﬁ rm 
dough. Grease a large baking sheet with oil. Put dough on tray and cover with 
a damp cloth. Place dough in a warm place for at least two hours.
Put ground beef, onion, and salt in a saucepan with the corn oil. Place over 
medium heat, stirring until meat is cooked. Set aside to cool. Finely chop leeks, 
and wash several times in a strainer. Spread leeks on a paper towel to absorb 
excess water. Add leeks to ground meat. Mix tahina with a small amount of 
vinegar, a little water, garlic, and black pepper. Once this is smooth, add to 
leek and meat mixture and mix. Once the dough has risen, roll out. Cut into 
circular shapes, and spread the meat mixture over the dough, leaving the edge 
uncovered. A different way of making this dish is to roll the dough out and 
cover a deep pie dish (more typical of the Hijaz) and spread with the meat-leek 
mixture. Sprinkle with poppy seeds or with black caraway seeds and fennel 
seeds. Bake at 350°F for half an hour or until bread is baked.
Food

 Chapter 6 Culture
314 |
BASAL MAHSHI (STUFFED ONIONS)
Stuffed green peppers, tomatoes, eggplant, grapevine leaves, cabbage, and 
zucchini are prepared in every other Arab country as well as Saudi Arabia 
because they apparently come from a shared Abbasid tradition. However, 
stuffed onions are a type of mahshi (stuffed dish) that is unusual elsewhere.
4
3  c tamarind paste or frozen tamarind
1 lb large onions
3 tbsp butter or oil
1 tbsp vinegar
About 4 c hot water
Filling
½ c rice
½ lb lean lamb
½ c onion, grated
1 tomato, chopped
4 cloves garlic, pressed or crushed
Salt and black pepper
2 tbsp chopped parsley
½ t ground cinnamon
Soak the tamarind paste, or defrost frozen tamarind. Peel onions and boil 
for 15 minutes or until cooked, then drain. Wash the rice, drain it, and mix well 
with the ground lamb, grated onion, tomato, garlic, salt and pepper, parsley, 
cinnamon, and 1 tbsp oil or butter. Separate the layers of the onions, and 
gently remove the central layers. Set these aside. Place the stufﬁ ng between the 
layers of the onions, roll up, and seal by placing them very closely together in 
a pan. Put the onion hearts on top of the stuffed onions. Strain the tamarind, 
and add 1 tbsp of vinegar, 2 remaining tbsp of oil, and just enough water to 
cover the onions with this liquid mixture. Cook over medium heat until done. 
Eat hot or warm.
SHARAB AL-NA‘NA‘ (HOT MINT DRINK)
½ c fresh mint, washed well, or 3 tbsp dried mint
Sugar to taste
Not all Saudi Arabians drink coff ee. Tea, soft drinks, fruit juices, and sharbat, or fruit 
syrups mixed with water, are popular. Tea made of mint or other herbs is also enjoyed.

| 315
sugar to make the candy (Mahy 1975). However, today, European-style cakes or 
Arabian pastries may be off ered. During Ramadan, sweets were traditionally pre-
pared throughout the country.  Muhallabiyya (similar to the Egyptian version) is a 
rice and milk pudding that can be ﬂ avored with orange-blossom or rose water or 
with mango.  Sagudanah  is a sago pudding, or tapioca. Both may be decorated with 
almonds and pistachios. At Ramadan in the Hijaz, other poplar sweets are  qatayif (a 
type of pancake stuff ed with nuts or cheese, fried, and soaked with syrup),  basbusa 
(a semolina sweet also drenched in syrup),  luqmat al-qadi (“morsels of the judge”: 
dough fried in oil and covered in syrup; Mahy 1975), or  kunafah  (a shredded pastry 
with a layer of cheese or clotted cream and nuts, as in all of the preceding items, that is 
cooked and then covered with syrup).  Kunafah is shared with the Levant, and  qatayif 
and  basbusa are also claimed by Egypt. On the occasion of the ‘Id al-Fitr, which con-
cludes Ramadan,  ma’mul  (a rich cookie) stuff ed with dates are eaten. Other desserts 
include  ghoraybeh , a kind of shortbread,  baqlawa , and custard. Dates are especially 
prized and come in delicious varieties not available elsewhere. Another delicacy is 
 tumr bi-l-simsim (dates with sesame seeds). 
 A traditional date dish for breakfast in Najd in the wintertime,  hunayni , was pre-
pared from soft dates, semolina ﬂ our or bread, butter, and cardamom. 
1 pinch ground saffron
3 c boiling water
Wash the mint carefully and then put in a small teapot or a long-handled 
metal pot. Next, add sugar, saffron, and boiling water. Bring nearly to a boil, 
remove from heat, and then serve. Serves 3. 
TUMR BI-L-SIMSIM
½ lb blanched almonds (you may also use presliced almonds)
¼ c corn oil (some prefer canola oil)
1 c sesame seeds
2 lb soft dates
1 tbsp ground cardamom
If you cannot obtain blanched or sliced almonds, dip almonds in boiling 
water, remove the skins, and split in two. Fry almonds in the oil until golden. 
Drain on paper towels. Brown the sesame seeds without oil until they are 
golden. Spread the browned sesame seeds onto a tray. Remove all seeds 
from the dates. Mix with cardamom to form a soft dough. Break off a piece 
the size of a date, and stuff with a piece of almond. Roll in the sesame seeds, 
and arrange on a plate. Serves 8 to 10.
Food

 Chapter 6 Culture
316 |
 Food and cooking have become even more popular due to the professionalization 
of cooking through the hotel and restaurant industries and as a result of cooking 
shows and contests on television. In 2009, the four-day Salon Culinaire festival, also 
known as Food Expo and featuring cooking exhibitions and contests was inaugurated 
during the Food, Hotel and Propac Show. It met again in 2010 and was sponsored by 
the Saudi Arabian Chefs’ Association, a member of the World Association of Chefs’ 
Societies, and also by the al-Harithy Company for Exhibitions at the Jeddah Center 
for Forums and Events. The chefs competed in 21 categories, mainly continental but 
also Middle Eastern food and  tapas . The Saudi Arabian Chefs’ Association counted 
150 members in 2010 and reported that its Saudi Arabian membership was growing 
(Ramkumar 2010). It was founded and is headed by Chef Yasser Jad, who began his 
career as a food-quality controller with Saudi Arabian Airlines and advanced to head 
the company’s food production. The group also founded the Saudi Arabian national 
cooking team ( What’s Up KSA , what’supksa.net, posted September 2010). Televised 
cooking shows have been popular for quite some years in the kingdom and include 
programs on Arabic, Pakistani, Indian, and other channels. 
 REFERENCES 
 Abdennour, Samia.  Egyptian Cooking and Other Middle Eastern Recipes . Cairo: American 
University in Cairo Press, 2005. 
 Adib, Naziha, Ferdous Al-Mukhtar, Ban Ismail, and Jala Makhzumi.  Arabian Cuisine: From 
the Gulf to the Mediterranean . LAAM Ltd., 1993. (Originally published in Arabic in 1965.) 
 Alford, Jeff rey, and Naomi Duguid.  Flatbreads and Flavors: A Baker’s Atlas . New York: 
William Morrow, 1995. 
 AramcoExpats. “Arab Favorites.”  Aramcon Recipes . http://www.armacoexpts.com 
 Arberry, A. J. “A Baghdad Cookery-Book.”  Islamic Culture , no. 13 (1939). 
 Bouzigard, Aimee. “Archaeological Evidence for the Consumption of Tobacco and Coff ee 
in Ottoman Arabia.” Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, East Carolina Uni-
versity, 2010. 
 Campo, Juan Eduardo. “Dietary Rules.” In  Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World , edited 
by John Esposito. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995, vol. 1, 375–377. 
 Doughty, Charlies M.  Travels in Arabia Deserta . Abridged by Edward Garnett. Gloucester, 
MA: Peter Smith, 1968. (Originally published in 1888). 
 al-Hamad, Sarah.  Cardamom and Lime: Recipes from the Arabian Gulf . London: New Hol-
land, 2008. 
 Long, David.  Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 
 Mahy, Lyn. “Saudi Aramco World Flavored with Tradition: Food from Saudi Arabia.”  Ar-
amco World , November/December 1975, 32–40. 
 Matthee, Rudolph P.  The Pursuit of Pleasure: Drugs and Stimulants in Iranian History 1500–
1900 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005. 
 Nawwab, Nimah Ismail. “Ramadan Recipes: Family Favorites.”  Saudi Aramco Week , Octo-
ber 28, 2004. Archived at http://www.aramcoexpats.com 

| 317
Sports and Leisure
 Ramkumar, K. S. “Top Chef, Art de Table Contests Major Draw at Food Expo.”  ArabNews.
com , September 18, 2010. 
 Riolo, Amy.  Arabian Delights: Recipes and Princely Entertaining Ideas from the Arabian Pen-
insula . Herndon, VA: Capitol Books, 2008. 
 Roden, Claudia.  A Book of Middle Eastern Food . New York: Vintage Books, 1974. 
 Tastes of Jubail. http://www.aaljumah.com. (and other websites) 
 Weiss-Armush, Anne Marie.  The Arabian Delights Cookbook: Mediterranean Cuisines from 
Mecca to Marrakesh . Los Angeles and Chicago: Lowell House, 1994. 
 Weiss-Armush, Anne Marie.  Arabian Cuisine . Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Nafaes, 1993. 
 Yamani, Mai. “You Are What You Cook: Cuisine and Class in Mecca.” In  A Taste of Thyme: 
Culinary Cultures in the Middle East , edited by Sami Zubaida and Richard Tapper. Lon-
don: Tauris Parke, 2000. 
 Sports and Leisure 
 SPORTS 
 Modern and traditional forms of sport, hobbies, and leisure pastimes coexist in Saudi 
Arabia. The traditional contests of camel racing, horse racing, and poetry added to 
the prestige of the tribe. Today’s promotion of athletics and sports is a matter of 
national pride and social development. Government planning for sports education 
and facilities began in the late 1960s and expanded during the 1970s. The govern-
ment budgeted for and built facilities throughout the country, including large sports 
arenas and stadiums, and implemented training in schools. However, the idea of 
individual ﬁ tness or exercise for all is still not entirely accepted. 
 Sports are not forbidden in Islam. Nevertheless, some conservatives oppose the 
enthusiasm that youth have for sports. A high school educational religious text con-
demned sports as a poor use of time, because they “cause youth to miss prayers 
and ignore household obligations” (Doumato 2008, 162). However, in this aspect of 
social development, governmental support is obvious and legitimates these activities 
despite the views of some religious scholars. 
 Women had been excluded from sports at an offi  cial level entirely up until 2010, 
even though segregated sports activities do take place. Private schools have off ered 
physical education, and national schools followed suit despite the concerns about 
public spectator sports. Beginning in the  Third Development Plan  (1980–1983), the 
need for facilities for sports in girls’ schools was speciﬁ cally addressed (Bird 1995, 
289; Third Development Plan, Ministry of Planning 1985, 375). Women are excluded 
from attending many sports events. All offi  cial athletes of the Olympic team and 
national leagues are men, as are the trainers and referees. And even though women 
are not allowed to drive, they cannot exercise by walking in the streets, as this is also 
frowned on. Most sports and exercise activities take place in private clubs. Certain 
workplaces have their own health clubs or exercise facilities. Women are excluded 
from some of these but may participate in others, as in hospitals, which are offi  cially 

 Chapter 6 Culture
318 |
licensed to operate health clubs. Health clubs and exercise facilities at hotels are 
restricted to men. Without licenses, many clubs have off ered exercise classes, physi-
cal training, and even yoga classes, because no government agency was willing to 
issue licenses to women’s facilities elsewhere. Several women’s health facilities were 
closed in Jeddah and Dammam in 2009 because of the licensing and registration issue 
(Alsharif 2009). 
 Soccer (Football) 
 Soccer, known as football in Saudi Arabia, is probably the most popular sport, as is 
also true in the other Gulf states and the Arab world. The Saudi Arabian Football 
Federation was founded in 1956 and was headed by Prince Sultan bin Fahd ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz. The Saudi Arabian national team is known as the Green Falcons, 
and they have often qualiﬁ ed to play in the Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association (FIFA) World Cup since they ﬁ rst entered in 1994 (however, they did 
not qualify in 2010). 
 A 12-team national league, the Saudi Professional League, plays regularly. The 
al-Hilal Saudi Club is probably the most popular soccer team; it is based in Ri-
yadh and plays at the huge 67,000-seat King Fahd Stadium. Al-Hilal belongs to the 
Asian Football Confederation’s Asian Champions as well as the Saudi Professional 
League. Other Riyadh-based teams are the al-Nasr and al-Shabab football clubs. Al-
Ittihad Jeddah ranked ahead of al-Hilal (2.1 to 1.5) in the FIFA rankings in 2010. The 
al-Ahli Sports club is also based in Jeddah. Al-Ittihad plays at the Prince Abdullah 
al-Faisal Stadium (27,000 seats), and al-Ahli plays in the Prince Sultan bin Fahd Sta-
dium (24,000 seats). There are football clubs in Abha, Mecca, Dammam, and Tabuk. 
 In 2008 the Under 17 Gulf Cup of Nations was held in Saudi Arabia, and teenag-
ers from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Bahrain took part. 
Also in 2008, the Under 23 Gulf Cup of Nations was hosted by Saudi Arabia. The 
Asian Football Confederation (AFC) U-19 Championship was held in Saudi Arabia 
in 2008. This was the 35th event of this tournament, an activity of the Asian Football 
Confederation. The A group, which included Saudi Arabia, played seven games, and 
all four groups played between October 12 and November 14 at the Prince Muham-
mad ibn Sa‘ud Stadium in Dammam; the ﬁ nal game was played at Prince al-Jilawi in 
Khobar. Both stadiums are in the Eastern Province. The three matches involving the 
Saudi Arabian team (against Japan, Yemen, and Iran) were all very well attended, 
with attendance varying from 6,000 to 8,000. 
 Basketball 
 The Saudi Arabian Basketball Federation is a member of the Fédération Interna-
tionale de Basketball (FIBA) and is located in Riyadh. It had 72 registered teams as 
of 2010, all of which are male. These include the al-Hilal basketball team in Riyadh 
and the al-Ittihad team in Jeddah. 
 Women are playing basketball and soccer but have no offi  cially sponsored teams or 
clubs. Danaya al-Maeena is the cofounder of the women’s Jeddah United  Basketball 

| 319
Sports and Leisure
Team. Her sister Lina was the trainer of the team in 2008 and pointed out that nearly 
all other Muslim countries are now training women athletes and sending them to the 
Olympics (Thorold 2008). In basketball, as with all sports, women play fully veiled, 
in long sleeves and pants, as in other Gulf countries. 
 Golf 
 Golf has become popular in Saudi Arabia in recent years. Golf clubs with member-
ships have been established, and visitors can pay on a daily or short-term basis to 
enter. Among these are the Arizona Golf Resort in Riyadh and the International 
Hotel in Riyadh, which has a nine-hole course that is lit at night. Unfortunately, 
women are not permitted to play golf there or even walk on the course. Golf training 
is also off ered in Saudi Arabia. 
 Martial Arts 
 Wrestling, various forms of karate (including  shotokan and  kyokushin ), tae kwon 
do, aikido, and judo are taught and practiced in Saudi Arabia. The ‘ ardha , or sword 
dance of Najd, and stick-ﬁ ghting dances of the Hijaz (see the Music and Dance sec-
tion in this chapter) allude to the ﬁ ghting traditions of the premodern period as well. 
 Olympic Participation 
 Saudi Arabia joined the International Olympic Committee in 1964. Saudi Arabia’s 
Olympic athletes compete in many sports, ﬁ rst winning medals in track and ﬁ eld and 
equestrian sports jumping events. In 2000, Hadi Souan al-Somayli won the silver 
medal at the Olympic Games in the 400-meter hurdles, coming extremely close to 
winning the gold; his foot crossed the ﬁ nish line ﬁ rst, but the American competi-
tor’s chest was forward, crossing the ﬁ nish line before al-Somayli’s upper body. Al-
Somayli continued competing and then directed the sprint team at the Beijing games. 
Other track-and-ﬁ eld athletes from Saudi Arabia have excelled. In the Youth Olym-
pics of 2010, held in Singapore, a Saudi Arabian female equestrian, Dalma Malhas, 
received a bronze medal for show jumping, and her participation was praised by the 
chairman of the International Olympic Committee, Jacques Rogge. He saw this as 
a breakthrough, even though she was excluded from the offi  cial delegation of Saudi 
Arabian Olympic athletes and had to pay for her own entry to the event (Zoepf 2010). 
 Islamic Solidarity Games 
 The Islamic Solidarity Games, an international competition, were held in Mecca 
in 2005. Fifty-ﬁ ve nations participated with a presence of 6,000 athletes, all male. 
These featured the categories of aquatics, athletics, basketball, equestrian, fencing, 
soccer (football), handball, karate, table tennis, tae kwon do, tennis, volleyball, and 

 Chapter 6 Culture
320 |
weightlifting. The Islamic Solidarity Games were scheduled to be held in Iran in 2010. 
Saudi Arabia withdrew due to an argument about the proper name for the Arabian 
Gulf, which Iran insists is the Persian Gulf, and the games were cancelled. 
 Cricket and Baseball 
 Cricket is popular in Saudi Arabia, particularly in those countries that were cultur-
ally inﬂ uenced by the United Kingdom. The Riyadh Cricket Association and the 
Jeddah Cricket Association list many teams and their schedules. At a national level, 
the Saudi Cricket Center is located in Jeddah. 
 Baseball is also played as a youth sport. A number of Little League teams are in 
operation and include the members of the Jeddah Youth Baseball League. 
 Rugby 
 Rugby is played in Saudi Arabia, and the teams are made up of Saudi Arabian 
nationals along with expatriates from many countries. The Riyadh Rugby Football 
Club and the Jeddah Rugby Football Club play regularly. 
 Horse Racing and Equestrian Sports 
 The Arabian horse is famous throughout the equestrian world, and clubs and asso-
ciations exist in the region and in the West linking racing and breeding industries in 
the northern and southern hemispheres. Amazing relationships between people and 
these horses link them, Arabia, and the bedouin to aﬁ cianados like Carl Reinhard 
Raswan, who devoted himself to sharing his knowledge of Arabians (Raswan 1955, 
1990). Many Saudi Arabians are involved in equestrian and horse racing, breeding, 
and competitions throughout the world, not only inside the kingdom. King ‘Abdul-
lah is himself a sponsor of equestrian sports as president of the Arriyadh Equestrian 
Club, founder of the Saudi Arabian Equestrian Federation, and patron of the King 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz Arabian Horse Center, at Dirab, which along with the al-Janadiriyyah 
farm are world-renowned horse-breeding farms. The main national horse racing 
event is the King’s Cup Race and the Crown Prince’s Race held in March or Febru-
ary at the King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Racetrack at Janadiriyyah. The same tracks off er races 
from September to April. 
 The Arabian Horses Festival takes place over 10 days in Riyadh in the winter. 
Among the events is a long-distance or endurance race of 75 kilometers (46.6 miles). 
This type of race gained acceptance as an Olympic sport with the sponsorship of 
racers and riders here and in other Arab countries. The festival also includes show 
jumping and a horse beauty contest. The long-distance race, sometimes called the 
race of a million steps, is held at Thumama Park. It is divided into three sections of 
25 kilometers (15.5 miles), with a rest of 30 minutes and opportunity for veterinary 
inspection in between each part. 

| 321
Sports and Leisure
 The Equestrian Federation is located in Riyadh, and clubs are found around the 
country. In the 1980s show jumping was introduced to the kingdom. Arabian horses 
were not as well suited to this sport as to racing, so other thoroughbreds began to 
be imported for jumping. Members of the Olympic show-jumping team, the broth-
ers Khalid and Fayad al-Eid trained in Germany, England, and the United States. 
Khalid placed 30th in the 1996 Olympics. As part of the Saudi Arabian Olympic 
jumping team, he trained with Nelson Pessoa, a Brazilian equestrian show jumper 
based in Belgium. Khalid al-Eid won the bronze medal in 2000 (Harrigan and Maz-
zawi 2001) and is still competing. In the Alltech World Equestrian Games of 2010, 
al-Eid at age 41 moved from ﬁ fth place to ﬁ rst in a nearly ﬂ awless performance on his 
stallion, Presley Boy, on the third day of the competition. Other important members 
of the show-jumping team and previous qualiﬁ ers for the World Cup are ‘Abdullah 
Shurbatly, Khalid Ba-Hamdan, and Prince ‘Abdullah ibn Miteb. 
 In 2008, Arwa Mutabagani, a woman and the mother of the show jumper Malhas, 
who won a bronze medal, was appointed a top sports administrator at the Equestrian 
Federation. She has set up an equestrian center in Jeddah that trains women. In 2008, 
50 women participated in equestrian events there. However, they could not compete 
in the national and international shows, and this type of competition is necessary to 
produce winners (Thorold 2008). 
Khaled al-Eid, Saudi Arabian equestrian champion on Presley Boy, World Equestrian 
Games, Lexington, Kentucky, 2010. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 6 Culture
322 |
 On July 31, 2010, ‘Ali Ahmed of the Institute of Gulf Aff airs, a critic of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, began a “No Women No Play” campaign to get the 
International Olympic Committee to ban Saudi Arabia from participation if it did 
not allow women on its team. His reasoning was that this violated the International 
Olympic Committee’s own policies and was much like South Africa’s exclusion of 
black athletes under apartheid (Zoepf 2010). The International Olympic Commit-
tee did not, however, exclude Saudi Arabia. (Only Qatar and Brunei also exclude 
female athletes from their teams.) Malhas, age 18, participated independently in 
the Youth Olympics in Singapore in August 2010. Her winning of a bronze medal 
sparked many recriminations from conservatives in Saudi Arabia. They are the 
reason that women are not provided sports in schools and are not encouraged to 
exercise or engage in sports, or must do so at unmarked facilities. A cleric, Shaykh 
Sa‘ud al-Funiasan, said that women in equestrian events are “deﬁ ant public viola-
tors” of Islamic law and should not be part of national or international equestrian 
competitions, because this violates the rules of modesty and causes them to mingle 
with men. 
 Camel Racing 
 The Arabian camel is a single-humped dromedary found in a variety of colors and 
sizes. It has traditionally been ridden and raced in Saudi Arabia. Throughout the 
winter season, camel races are held on Mondays at the King Fahd International 
Stadium. In February or March, the Janadiriyyah Cultural Festival is opened with 
the King’s Camel Race. This takes place at Janadiriyyah, not far from Riyadh. Every 
day of the Janadiriyyah Festival, camel races are held, with about 2,000 camels par-
ticipating and 20,000 to 30,000 spectators. No gambling is allowed at such games 
(or anywhere in Saudi Arabia) due to religious prohibitions. Some reports claim that 
very young children are used as camel jockeys, and although it is illegal to employ 
them, some races are held outside regular hours, so the practice might be continuing. 
 Camels are no longer necessary for travel or production, but they are prized as a 
symbol of times past and are today a multimillion dollar industry in Saudi Arabia. 
Camel beauty pageants are held throughout the country, and the contestants are 
judged for their physical qualities, which include large eyes with double rows of 
curly eyelashes, long necks, and their dressage. Camel markets are held, the largest of 
which is in Riyadh; these include camels raised for riding, for milk, or for slaughter 
as food (Zoepf 2008). In the late winter, owners may go on special outings to spend 
time with their favorite camels. 
 Auto Racing 
 Auto racing is held at the Jeddah Raceway, which opened in 2006 and operates a 
school to train race drivers. Unfortunately, auto racing is somewhat of an undeclared 
sport on the highways and even in cities, and it is exceedingly dangerous. 

| 323
Sports and Leisure
 Tourism, Camping, Hiking, and Outdoor Recreation 
 Saudi Arabia maintains many parks and wildlife and game reserves and has plans 
for expanding them. Tourism within Saudi Arabia is a fairly new endeavor, as most 
travel to the kingdom is undertaken for the  hajj and secondarily for business; touristic 
travel has required a sponsor and speciﬁ c permission. Saudi Arabians travel within 
their country primarily for business, the  hajj or ‘ umrah , and visits to family members. 
Internal tourism as a feature of education is another aspect of the country’s develop-
ment that is being expanded. Saudi Arabian students visit the national museum in 
Riyadh and Diriyyah, the site of the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi state and other locations. 
 The Saudi Commission for Tourism and Antiquities was created in 2000. As of 
2010, it was presided over by Prince Sultan ibn Salman (a former Royal Saudi Air 
Force lieutenant colonel and the ﬁ rst Arab and Muslim to participate in a space 
mission, mentioned later on again for his interest in traditional-style architecture). 
Prince Sultan wants to develop internal and external tourism to natural sites and his-
toric monuments and to expand tourism as a means of employing more Saudi Ara-
bian nationals. The Prince Sultan College for Tourist and Hotel Management was 
opened in 2001 in Sultan City, which is on the road from the Abha regional airport. 
 Among many nature-touristic sites the government established was the al-Hada 
resort in Ta’if. This has a 4,200-meter- (about 2.6-mile-) long cable car route that con-
nects al-Hada with the al-Kar touristic village, which is at a lower elevation. Hotels, 
parks, and playgrounds were built to encourage family tourism. 
 While this type of development is in tune with modern Saudi Arabians, families 
and groups also camp in a style closer to the bedouin, now making use of jeeps and 
sports vehicles. And some families, settled for generations, nevertheless enjoy set-
ting up tent areas on a temporary basis in the right weather and location. Picnics are 
popular throughout the country; families used to bring radios, then televisions, and 
now newer electronic viewing devices. 
 Private international tourism was inaugurated in 2000, and some obstacles to its 
success reside with national policies and the degree of understanding of tourists and 
operators. Tourism may allow outsiders to better understand history, gender, and 
nationality in Saudi Arabia, or it may succeed in further strengthening stereotypes 
(Okruhlik in Rasheed and Vitalis, eds., 2004, 201–208). 
 Saudi Arabia off ers many other possibilities for hiking, climbing, trekking, spe-
lunking, dune skiing, and diving. The coral reefs off  the Red Sea coast off er divers 
sights of wonderful ﬁ sh and fauna. Divers should be licensed and experienced. Snor-
keling, boating, and other water sports are also available. Dune skiing is an unusual 
sport particular to the Arabian Peninsula. In the Rub‘ al-Khali, the sand dunes can 
be hundreds of meters high, so a skier can glide downward swiftly. 
 Avid mountain climbers or hikers can enjoy climbing in the Abha region. John 
Pint, who has written about many natural wonders in Saudi Arabia, also describes 
the climbing available at the black and white volcanoes of Harrat Khaybar lava ﬁ eld, 
which lies 190 kilometers (118 miles) north of Jeddah. Not only is there excellent 
climbing, but the conjunction of the Qidr volcano, which puts out black lava, and the 
two white volcanoes, Jabal Bayda and Jabal Abyad, is visually stunning. Jabal Bayda 

 Chapter 6 Culture
324 |
is an easier climb than Jabal Abyad. Climbing the Qidr volcano involves moving up 
the roofs of relatively recent lava tubes. 
 Pint also writes about access to the desert caves at the Summan Plateau, not far 
from Riyadh or Dhahran (Pint n.d.). Pint recommends hiking with groups like the 
Hash House Harriers, an expatriate group that organizes hikes, runs, and outdoor 
events, and the Natural History Society. 
 Another reason to hike and walk is to see the many natural phenomena of Saudi 
Arabia. Expeditions are made to Tuwair in the spring to witness the simultaneous 
ﬂ owering of the iris, which occurs at 1:00 p.m. on a sunny day and a bit later if it is 
cloudy. Another strange phenomenon is the “desert rose,” which can be found in the 
 sabkha s, or salt ﬂ ats. When water moves into these areas in the Eastern Desert and 
evaporates, gypsum crystals are formed and shaped by the sand into a rosette shape, 
usually buried under the surface. 
 Other enjoyable travel destinations are historic sites, which are located through-
out the kingdom, such as Mada’in al-Saleh  , the ancient city near Medina; the settle-
ment of Diriyyah; and various locations in and near Ta’if, which can be cooler and 
more pleasant. Ta’if possesses three wildlife refuge sites where endangered species 
have been reestablished. Musma Park will be developed to the east of Ha’il as an 
ecotourism destination, with a tourist city or village, which means there will be ac-
commodations for families and services. 
 Hunting and Falconry 
 Hunting is a popular pursuit in the kingdom as well as in other GCC countries. Sev-
eral species were hunted to extinction, such as the Arabian wild ass and the Arabian 
wild ostrich. The Arabian oryx nearly died out, but some were captured and kept 
in zoos and then reintroduced in wildlife parks under a protected status. Antelope 
and gazelles were hunted but are also now on the endangered watch list. Birds and 
lizards are hunted. Hunting used to be carried out on horseback, but now it is done 
by four-wheel-drive truck. The prized dog of the bedouin, the  saluki , could be at the 
center of the hunt, chasing after antelope for its owner. 
 Falconry is a special form of hunting. The use of falcons and hawks dates far back 
in history, and training of birds of prey for hunting is mentioned in the Qur’an. The 
 saqr (falcon chirrup) is the most popular bird used and is bred in breeding farms and 
entered in falcon beauty contests. A prize falcon can cost as much as $100,000. To 
train the bird, the trainer, or falconer, swings a lure around his head and the bird 
follows it. Once the falcon lands on the lure, it is given a reward of a piece of meat. 
Jesses are attached to the falcon’s leg, and a hood covers its eyes when it is not train-
ing so it remains calm. The falconer wears a glove so the bird’s sharp talons do not 
hurt him. Prince Fahd bin Sultan, the governor of Tabuk as of 2007, is known as a 
great falconer and employed very experienced falcon masters such as Hadi al-Aimi. 
Members of the royal family have long been associated with the sport; one of King 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s epithets was al-Saqr al-Jazira (the Falcon of the Peninsula;  New York 
Times , June 12, 2007). He was so named for his falconry but also because of his 

Leisure and Entertainment | 325
 conquest of the area. Some princes of the royal family used to transport their falcons 
with their personal goods when traveling abroad for study. As with specialty camel 
and pedigree horse raising, falcons are bred for the sport. 
 LEISURE AND ENTERTAINMENT 
 The most pervasive leisure activity in the kingdom is social interaction, mainly par-
ticipation in family, peer, and business-related visiting networks. People entertain 
frequently and reciprocate. Social isolation is generally disliked and unusual. Both 
men and women participate in visiting networks that mark all important events in 
families’ lives from births to deaths. Visiting is therefore the most traditional of ac-
tivities, and yet it has been changed by the swift growth of cities, traffi  c, and the move-
ment of families, in some but not all cases, away from extended-family households. 
 Most of this social interaction takes place in the separate worlds of men or women. 
Prominent men and princes held and still hold visiting hours, which may take place 
as a  majlis (literally, a “sitting”). These are often a mixed encounter of social interac-
tion and business, or petitioners may leave a formal written request after presenting 
it brieﬂ y. Men usually coordinate with their wives unless they have a large waitstaff , 
so that food and beverages are prepared and so that their wives can attend to their 
visits with other women on diff erent days. 
 Weddings and celebrations can be enormously elaborate events; schools also put 
on ceremonies that include entertainment. The annual Janadiriyyah Festival includes 
many diff erent types of events and opening ceremonies. A large, special reception is 
held for invited women guests on the women’s days of the festival and is hosted by 
members of the royal family. At this women-only event, poetry recitations, songs, 
and dances, including the dances of the eastern provinces in the colorful  thawb nashal 
(an outer bright-colored, gold- and sequin-embroidered garment), are performed, 
often by very young women or schoolgirls. Theatrical entertainment has occasion-
ally been presented in school settings, but religious conservatives have protested 
this, so there are no national or public theaters as there are in Egypt or Lebanon and 
no movie theaters. However, there was a theater and small ﬁ lm scene in the 1960s. 
Sometimes, those who can drive go to Bahrain to view ﬁ lms It is possible, given state-
ments in 2009 and 2010, that cinema showings, and possibly even regular theaters, 
might be reintroduced. 
 Card games are played, as are chess, backgammon, and video games, now on 
handheld devices. Gambling, and games of chance, however, are not permitted in 
Islam. 
 Poetry and calligraphy festivals are held. Poetry remains a popular interest in a 
way it no longer is in Western societies, but it too has undergone change. In the past, 
men would gather socially in the evenings, particularly in the summer, and open a 
cycle of poetry recitation and commentary on poetry by asking if the attendees knew 
of a certain poem composed by so-and-so and then reciting it. Such events provided 
a chain of transmitters and perpetuated knowledge about poetry. Beginning in the 
mid-1980s, the University of Riyadh began sponsoring a three-day poetry festival 

 Chapter 6 Culture
326 |
that was recorded on videotape. Radio and television programs also feature poetry 
shows, which are very popular with audiences, who might write in or call in concern-
ing a particular poem and its wording (Sowayan 1985, 126–129; also see Literature 
section in this chapter). 
 Numerous gatherings and special events are sponsored by cities or business 
groups, ranging from inaugurations of facilities to special-events concessions with 
business or industry themes (see section on food in this chapter). 
 Restrictions 
 No cinemas or discotheques, dancing clubs, casinos, or, obviously, bars or nightclubs 
exist in Saudi Arabia. People also meet for social or business purposes in restaurants 
or large hotels. Women are not able to visit restaurants at all times in Riyadh, but 
these rules are more relaxed in the large international hotels. Dancing and music are 
performed at special occasions, parties, and weddings (see Music and Dance section 
in this chapter) but not in mixed-sex settings. Aerobic dance and some other forms 
of dance are off ered as exercise in women’s spas and clubs. Women’s gyms have 
also been set up in this way but have faced licensing problems due to opposition by 
conservatives. 
 Shopping 
 Shopping has become an important pastime. Families shop together, and women 
or men (separately) may meet for shopping. Family areas are located in the malls, 
which may also have family-style eating concessions. Just a few are the Kingdom 
Center, Le Mall, the Faisaliyya, and Riyadh Sahara Mall in Riyadh; the al-Azziziah 
Hyper Panda, the al-Hasan, and the al-Rashid Mega Mall in Medina; and the Mall 
of Arabia Sultan Mall, Jareer Mall, al-Hijaz, and Le Mall in Jeddah. Women meet 
at the women’s ﬂ oor of the Kingdom Center in Riyadh for social purposes or busi-
ness or may also shop or window-shop. High fashion is at least as popular in Saudi 
Arabia as in Europe, since many women wear Western fashions under their outer 
garb of the black ‘ abaya . Designer labels from Europe are available and desired, but 
there are also up-and-coming Saudi Arabian designers such as Wijdan al-Sharyouﬁ ; 
the transplanted Summer Olayan, operating in Los Angeles; and Siraj Sanad. 
 Media Entertainment 
 Without movie theaters or cinemas, the watching of television, videos and DVDs, 
satellite television, and new media technologies is ever growing in Saudi Arabia. Cer-
tain television series acquire almost a cult following; among these were several Turk-
ish series dubbed in Arabic, including  Nur and  Aški Memu’a (the Turkish title, or 
‘ Ashqi mamnu‘a in Arabic), which were equally popular elsewhere in the Arab world. 
Certain satellite channels are blocked on regular services but may be available at 

| 327
References
other locations in the kingdom, such as international hotels. News is consumed and 
eagerly discussed in Saudi Arabia. News services in the kingdom are censored, and a 
complex system is in place to ﬁ lter out content or inﬂ uences that are not approved. 
 Telephone- and computer-based contacts occupy leisure time for many, especially 
young people. For a time, cell phones with cameras were forbidden, but they have 
proliferated anyway. Blackberry services began and then were cancelled in August 
2010, probably because these are more diffi  cult to monitor; cell phone texting re-
mains popular. Internet use has grown rapidly in Saudi Arabia and has been a source 
of certain security concerns inasmuch as political opponents, religious militants, and 
severe critics of the kingdom also post there. Numerous Islamic Internet sites are ac-
cessed; some are commissioned by government centers, while others are independent. 
The Internet is thus educational and a site of conservative knowledge, and not only a 
liberal connection (Bunt 2009). E-mail is similarly convenient, connective, and often 
monitored. Blogging has gained in popularity and is subject to some restrictions; it 
has been used to protest many conditions in Saudi Arabia or has simply been used 
for social purposes (Cooke and Lawrence 2005). Facebook operates in a similar way 
and is an interesting site for debates about social or political change, allowing the 
Saudi Arabian feminists, like Wajiha al-Huweidar, Manal Sharif and others to speak 
(Khannous 2010; see Chapter 7, Contemporary Issues) and still others to respond. 
 REFERENCES 
 “Alltech FEI WEG Jumping: Saudi Arabia’s Al Eid Heads Individual Rankings while Ger-
many Heads Team Leaderboard.”  Equestrian Times , October 6, 2010. 
 Alsharif, Asma. “Saudi Arabia Clamps Down on Unlicensed Female Gyms.”  Reuters , April 
30, 2009. 
 Bird, Jerine. “Revolution for Children in Saudi Arabia.” In  Children in the Muslim Mid-
dle East , edited by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995, 
290–294. 
 al-Bogari, Naima. “Motivation for Domestic Tourism: A Case Study of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.” In  Consumer Psychology of Tourism, Hospitality and Leisure , edited by Arch G. 
Woodside. Oxfordshire, UK: CABI, 2004. 
 Brock, Paul. “Al-Hurr: Noble One.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 1973, 2–5. 
 Bunt, Gary . iMuslims: Rewiring the House of Islam . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2009. 
 Cooke, Miriam, and Bruce Lawrence, eds.  Muslim Networks from Hajj to Hip Hop (Islamic 
Civilization and Muslim Networks) . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005. 
 Doumato, Eleanor A. “Saudi Arabia: From Wahhabi Roots to Contemporary Revisionism.” 
In  Islam and Textbooks in the Middle East , edited by Eleanor A. Doumato and Gregory 
Starrett. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 2008, 153–176. (Also published as 
 Teaching Islam: Textbooks and Religion in the Middle East . [Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 
2007].) 
 Eickelman, Dave, and Jon Anderson.  New Media in the Muslim World: The Emerging Public 
Sphere . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999; 2nd ed., 2003. 

 Chapter 6 Culture
328 |
 Franklin, Jo., dir.  A Gift from the Desert: The Arabian Horse [documentary ﬁ lm]. SeaCastle, 
2010. 
 Harrigan, Peter, and Rosalind Mazzawi. “Saudi Arabia’s First Olympic Medals.”  Saudi-Ar-
amco World , January/February 2001. 
 Khannous, Touria. “In Search of an Arab-Muslim Feminism on the Internet.” Paper pre-
sented at the Conference on Interculturality and Gender, University of Fes (Fez) Morocco, 
May 29–30, 2010. 
 Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Third Development Plan, 1980–1985 . Ri-
yadh: Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 1985. 
 Okruhlik, Gwen. “Struggles over History and Identity: Opening the Gates of the Kingdom 
to Tourism.” In  Counternarratives: History, Contemporary Society, and Politics in Saudi 
Arabia and Yemen , edited by Madawi al-Rasheed and Robert Vitalis. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2004, 201–228. 
 Pint, John. “Outdoor Activities in Saudi Arabia.” Outdoor Activities in Saudi Arabia: Hiking, 
Climbing, Dune Skiing and Open-Air Recreation in the Desert. n.d. http://www.suite101.
com/content/outdoor-recreational-activies-in-saudi-arabia-a58568#ixzz11hDnUkaB 
 Raswan, Carl (Reinhard).  The Arab and His Horse . Oakland, CA: By the author, 1955. (Ger-
man version: Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1990.) 
 Raswan, Carl (Reinhard).  In the Land of the Black Tents . 2nd ed. (German). Hildesheim: G. 
Olms, 1990. 
 “Saudi Arabia.” Fédération Internationale de Football Association. http://www.FIFA.com 
 Sowayan, Saad Abdullah.  Nabati Poetry: The Oral Poetry of Arabia . Berkeley and Los An-
geles: University of California Press, 1985. 
 Thorold, Crespin. “Saudi Women Vie for Olympic Rights. BBC, June 13, 2008. 
 Wynne, Lisa. “The Romance of Tahliyya Street: Youth Culture, Commodities and the Use 
of Public Space in Jiddah.”  Middle East Report , no. 204 (July–September 1997), 30–31. 
 Zoepf, Katherine. “For Saudi Women Biggest Challenge Is Getting to Play.”  New York 
Times , November 17, 2010. 
 Zoepf, Katherine. “Camel Beauty Pageants Become Popular Pastime.”  Seattle Times , March 
17, 2008. 
 Popular Culture 
 Popular culture in Saudi Arabia is usually associated with traditional culture, or folk 
custom, rather than youth trends. Unlike Egypt, where a juxtaposition of the culture 
of the common people ( al-sha’b ) versus the elite groups ( al-khassa ) was once clear 
(Sonbol 2000), Saudi Arabia does not present clear-cut distinctions. Members of 
the  ‘umara , the royal family, or elites may patronize or preserve popular culture and 
symbols of the Arabian past yet pursue modern interests and consumption patterns. 
Certain aspects of popular culture are preserved only as  turath  (legacy) at festivals, 
exhibits, and museums and in publications. It is strongly associated with the nomadic 
bedouin heritage or speciﬁ c geographic areas as well. 

| 329
Amthal
 AMTHAL 
 A  mathal  (singular form) is a brief proverb or statement reﬂ ecting popular belief and 
custom or attributed to religious tradition. Saudi Arabians use  amthal in conversation, 
explanation, and analysis of social situations. Some date back far into the past. As with 
literature, it is diffi  cult to conﬁ ne the form to the Arabian Peninsula. Early collections 
were the  Majma ‘ a al-Amthal (Cairo, 1310), containing 4,766 proverbs compiled by 
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Maidani. He referred to 50 sources in it that had contained 
proverbs (Rayyes 1969). Abu al-Qasim al-Zamakhshari compiled some 3,461 prov-
erbs in  al-Mustaqsa ﬁ  Amthal al- ‘ Arab (The sought-after Arabic proverbs) in 1107. 
 Proverbs may liken humans to animals. This tradition appears in classical Arabic 
literature, in a famous fable collection,  Kalila wa Dimna . Some of the proverbs are: 
“If a camel once gets his nose into a tent, his body will soon follow.” “A kind word 
can attract even the snake from his nest.” “Do not seek bones from the ﬂ esh of a 
starved camel” (said of trying to force a person to comply who cannot). “Throw a 
lucky man in the sea, he will come up with a ﬁ sh in his mouth.” Or based on verses 
of the renowned medieval poet Abu Tayyib Mutanabbi: “If you see the lion’s jaws 
open, do not think he is smiling” (things are not always as they seem). Or, “In seeking 
honey, expect the sting of bees” (any quest for an object of value will involve some 
tribulations). Others refer to the values of the tribe: “Assist thy brother, whether he is 
wrong or right.” “God ordains the going out on raids and the returning from raids” 
(an expression used to explain a change of mind; (Sowayan 1985  b, 132). 
 Many are attributed to the Prophet Muhammad or to principles of religious belief. 
Two early collectors of such proverbs were Ibn Khallad al-Ramhurmuzi and Abu 
Hilal al-Askari, who published  Amthal al-Nabi (Brockelman 1913–1938). “Fear not 
the man who fears God.” “Riches are not from abundance of worldly goods, but 
from a contented mind.” “Let go of the things of which you are in doubt for the things 
in which there is no doubt” (Rayyes 1969). 
 Others derive from the Qur’an: “Whatever good you possess is all from God. 
Whatever evil, all is from yourself.” “Allah will not change the condition of men, 
until they change what is in themselves.” “Work for your future as if you are going 
to live forever, for your afterlife as if you are going to die tomorrow.” “Allah is with 
those who patiently preserve.” Others come from  ahadith : “Feed the hungry, visit the 
sick and free the captive” (al-Bukhari). “The dearest to me are those who are best in 
character” (al-Bukhari). 
 Arabian proverbs may be very close to Western ones: “Love is blind,” “Speak 
of an angel and you hear his wings” (like “the walls have ears” or “speak of the 
devil”) (al-Maidani 57). “A liar must have a good memory” (al-Maidani 49). “To 
fall between two stools” (al-Maidani 64, similar to “between Scylla and Charybides” 
or to fall “from the frying pan into the ﬁ re”). “Save your white coin for your black 
day” (save for a rainy day). “Repeated visits cause boredom” (familiarity breeds 
contempt) (Rayyes 1969). 
 Others are more unique: “A book is a garden carried in the pocket,” “one hand 
alone cannot clap” (unity is necessary, or it takes two); “the ﬁ ngers of your hand are 
not the same” (human beings, even members of a group, are unique); and “a tree 

 Chapter 6 Culture
330 |
without fruit attracts no birds” (to explain attacks or negative reactions to one’s 
eff ort). A regionwide proverb is “the ship led by two captains will sink” (too many 
cooks spoil the soup); revised and somewhat mocking of Saudi Arabia, it is: “I am a 
prince and you are a prince, who will lead the donkeys?” (all chiefs and no Indians). 
 JOKES,  NAWADIR , AND SHORT TALES 
 Jokes may completely overtake conversational exchanges at gatherings. Typically 
one or two display their memories and talents for comedic timing by relating joke 
after hilarious joke. Sometimes they are complicated stories that take ﬁ ve minutes 
or so to relate and can have a reprise form.  Nawadir are anecdotes or short stories. 
In modern times, these might be circulated by e-mail. Older children’s stories and 
lullabies forms of popular culture in danger of being forgotten; Lamia Baeshen, who 
is trying to preserve these genres, published a book of tales from the Hijaz in that 
dialect in 1997 and a CD including the lullaby “Doha ya Doha” (Baeshen 1997, 201). 
 SUPERSTITIONS 
 Many superstitions are reﬂ ected in folktales. The  jinn (literally, “hidden beings”) 
are a broad category of supernatural beings, both harmful and helpful. To become 
 majnun (crazy or mad) means to become possessed by jinn. One powerful variety of 
jinn lives on the open water. An  ifrit ( afrit ;  afarit is the plural) is an evil spirit, some-
times blamed for evil events. A capsized ship is said to be overturned by  afarit . Also, 
a misbehaving child or a bride who chafes at new restrictions and cries ( hiyya ‘ad 
al-awwil tit’afarit ) are said to be “like afrit” (Holes 2001, 345) A  ghul is an even more 
terrifying shape-shifter who lives in the desert, digs up the dead, may prey on chil-
dren and travelers, and is apparently the origin of the English word  ghoul . All make 
appearances in traditional stories. In the story of Sitt Lahab, she is visited by a  ghul . 
The  ghul  demands to know what the beautiful girl saw at her teacher’s house. She 
reports she saw him reading the Qur’an. The ghoul threatens her with killing her fam-
ily’s animals and her parents and destroying their home, if she will not say more. She 
won’t, and he does away with all dear to her. She ﬂ ees and is discovered and married 
by a prince. The ghoul ﬁ nds her and threatens to kill the children she conceives, three 
times, and takes each child, but she refuses to falsely report. Finally, a vision of her 
old teacher visits her and restores her children, her parents, and all their goods to her; 
then, ﬁ nally, the ghoul disappears (Bushnaq 1986, 132–137). People feared certain 
places due to rumors of evil beings. Reading of shells was a form of fortune-telling 
to learn about the future, bad or good; and fortune-telling was practiced in various 
parts of the country even though certain Wahhabist offi  cials considered it sorcery. 
 GAMES 
 Card games, video games, and handheld electronic games abound, but any that in-
volve gambling are forbidden. A once-popular game for little girls was  al-saqlah . The 

Tribal Law and Mediation | 331
girls sit on the ground where they have made a slight hole ﬁ lled with some pebbles or 
shells. One throws a key stone, larger and diff erent from the others, up into the air 
toward the hole and scoops the pebbles or shells—as many as she can—out while the 
key stone is in the air and then catches it before it hits the ground. She keeps trying 
to remove them, so long as she catches the key stone, but if she drops it, she has to 
return the last pebble/shell or set of pebbles/shells to the hole, and then it is the next 
girl’s turn. The winner is the one who collects the largest number of pebbles/shells. 
 “The hunter” is played, usually by 5 to 10 boys together, and sometimes by girls, 
while some remember playing in a mixed group. The hunter counts from 1 to 10, 
closing his or her eyes while all the other children run and hide. If the hunter ﬁ nds 
anyone, he has to tag them. If he can’t ﬁ nd them all, he has to tell them to start over. 
Otherwise, the ﬁ rst one who is caught becomes the next hunter. This is very similar 
to  al-ghomaid , which is played in diff erent parts of the Arabian Peninsula. 
 When a Meccan child carries out his ﬁ rst  hajj , a party called JoJo is held. Everyone 
starts singing “Jojo, they have made the pilgrimage ( jojo hajjo)!” The mother of the 
 hajji child sprinkles candy and money (previously, one-riyal coins) on her child, and 
all the other children rush to collect as much of the candy and money as they can 
( Saudi Jawa as interviewed on American Bedu , March 4, 2010). 
 TRIBAL LAW AND MEDIATION 
 ‘ Urf , or tribal law, governed the behavior of the tribes. It stands in contrast to the 
state-appointed offi  cials, judges, and urban-centered ‘ ulama . It is a basic building 
block of popular culture, because its purpose was to limit violence and restore jus-
tice. ‘ Urf inﬂ uenced  shari‘ah in three ways: ﬁ rst, the classiﬁ cation of crimes and their 
punishments ( qisas ), which require injury in kind ( talion ) or blood payment ( dhiyya ), 
were integrated into Islamic law; second, the legist tended to draw on ‘ urf  as a source 
of  ﬁ qh  ( jurisprudence), because it founded  ijma ‘ (consensus) and the sunnah of the 
members of the early Muslim community at Medina. 
 Thirdly, to settle a conﬂ ict, special men who hold a precedent in certain types 
of cases act as judges and mediators. In a blood dispute (meaning manslaughter or 
bodily injury), the judicator came from the Biliy of western Arabia. In a matter of 
 irdh (sexual honor), the judicator came from the Masa’id (Stewart in Chatty, ed., 
2006, 243). The vengeance group are those who exert revenge against someone who 
has killed their family member. A blood-money group are all those in the lineage of 
the killed or injured who could collect the  dhiyya (blood payment), often a larger 
group than the vengeance group (Stewart in Chatty, ed., 2006, 257; Hardy 1963). 
In a dispute, the plaintiff  and the defendant agree to two judicators, one for each. 
The trial takes place at the judicator’s house, and he is paid for the proceedings. The 
parties may also hire a lawyer ( kabir ), who prepares a pleading for the plaintiff . The 
defendant responds with his own pleading (Stewart in Chatty, ed., 2006, 263). 
 These cases may present evidence. According to ‘ urf , if there was no evidence, each 
party could take oaths. Also, in the past, they might undergo the  bish ‘ a (or  ba ‘ a ), 
such as licking a heated iron object, like a spoon. If the tongue is unscathed, the 
individual has told the truth. This ordeal was made illegal in some other areas where 

 Chapter 6 Culture
332 |
it was practiced, for example, Palestine. It should be emphasized that ‘ urf was not 
identical in all groups, nor limited to the bedouin or rural regions; being “customary” 
it extends to tribal descendants in settled, even urban areas. 
 Tribal-law procedure is part of business contracts, marriages, and marital dis-
putes. Typically, a three-party contract is formed; A who agrees to do/pay something 
to B, and C, a guarantor must stand up for A and pay back the amount loaned by 
him, for example, if he defaults. If not, C’s face “is blackened with dishonor” (Stew-
art in Chatty, ed., 2006, 268). So strong were the bonds of honor that this type of 
contract usually worked well. 
 Honor was preserved through marriages, and  shari‘ah ’s insistence that a woman 
be represented by her male guardian appears to have come from ‘ urf (a tradition 
that many women and reformers would like to change). The guardian can marry 
off  his female ward and usually did not consult her if she was a virgin. Her husband 
could beat her but not seriously injure her (Stewart in Chatty, ed., 2006, 259). If he 
did injure her, then she would usually go to her guardian, or even move back in with 
him, if divorce were the outcome of such a situation. 
 The behavioral patterns coming from ‘ urf are what leads to honor crimes, that 
is, killing of female relatives who have violated the sexual code of behavior or are 
suspected of doing so (Zuhur 2005). While this is a taboo subject, the principle of 
honor must be respected from the poorest in society to the royal family; the purpose 
of strict separation of men and women is to preserve honor but also Islamic virtue. 
Since honor crimes do not represent marriage as idealized in Islam, some in Saudi 
Arabia will say that honor crimes are not Islamic. 
 TRIBAL AND TRADITIONAL MEDICINE 
 Several alternative forms of medicine are practiced alongside modern Western medi-
cine; some of these are new to the area. Others come from the Arabic medicine 
tradition or from  unani-tibb , which are, respectively, Greco-Arab and Indo-Arab 
Muslim; another form is called  tibb nabawi (medicine of the Prophet), or Islamic 
medicine. 
 Ethnobotany, the use of plants, herbs, and ﬂ owers by the bedouin and others for 
medicine, is extant in all areas where bedouin live; sometimes similar treatments in 
distant areas exist, or local treatments have developed (Abu-Rabia 2005). Similarly, 
whether among the bedouin farther to the north, or in some areas of Saudi Arabia, 
women as well as men served as healers (Doumato, 2000). 
 The following substances are sold by  attarin (herbalists and sellers of oils) or used 
in traditional medical treatments. Alum is an astringent used to staunch bleeding and 
heal wounds. In the form of  shabba  stone, it is a deodorant. Aniseed is brewed as a tea 
( yansun ) for stomach pain, indigestion, and menstrual cramps, and to aid the urinary 
system (Lebling and Pepperdine 2006a). It appears in historical references to Islamic 
medicine and other bedouin traditions (Abu-Rabia 2005) and among settled groups 
to the north. Also sold are asafetida, a sedative, antispasmodic, and circulatory agent; 
 nigella sativa ( habba suda or black seed), also found in cooking (see Food section in 

Tribal and Traditional Medicine | 333
this chapter), which treats asthma, colic, and rheumatism; cardamom ( hail ), which 
treats indigestion and gas; chamomile ( babunaj ) tea, which calms the stomach and 
promotes sleep; garlic, which is put onto ant and scorpion stings; and myrrh, which 
is soaked in water, which is then used on burns, boils, or other wounds, as are soaked 
pomegranates (Lebling and Pepperdine 2006a).  Tarthuth ( Cynomrium coccineum , 
or Maltese mushroom/red thumb) has a long history of use in Islamic medicine and 
by the Knights Hospitaller of St. John of Jerusalem of Malta. This parasitic plant is 
eaten and used to make a red dye and, when the stalks are dried, to treat ulcers and 
colic (Lebling 2003). 
 Qur’anic medicine refers to healers’ practice of chanting Qur’anic verses or writ-
ing them in the liquid ink known as China ink and then soaking these in water (or 
the inscription may be made on earthenware bowels into which water from Zamzam 
is poured). A patient drinks this  mahw  (the water) to treat illness, bad dreams, or 
possession by bad spirits. A  shaykh might recite Surah Ya Sin of the Qur’an (Bog-
ary 1991, 35–101), which is considered important for a cure. While Islam forbids 
witchcraft, folk belief in spells called for antidotes, and this type of treatments were 
not prohibited (al-Jaraisy 2001). People wore amulets to protect them from illness 
or mishap; these amulets were often inscribed with quotations from the Qur’an, or, 
in traditional forms of jewelry, the inscription might be placed inside. People uttered 
supplications following prayer to ask for healing. Until the Wahhabi movement for-
bade it, prayers and supplication were made at the tombs of holy persons; often, 
special prayers were made to request the improvement of health or fertility. 
 Possession by spirits is a special form of psychological illness. It was treated in 
Bahrain, Kuwait, Arabia, Egypt, Sudan, and eastern Africa by holding a  zar , a ritual 
of exorcism. The music and prayers of the  zar would unseat the spirit in question 
(see also Music and Dance section in this chapter). The  zar was offi  ciated over by 
a woman leader for women (and a man for men) and was a sort of cult, in that the 
spirits demanded the  zar and sometimes required additional or repeated ceremonies. 
It was prevalent in Mecca during the Dutch administrator Snouck Hurgronje’s stay 
(1885–1889), from whose writing we obtain a valuable historical chronicle of that 
city (Snouck Hurgronje 1931, 100) and was apparently revived in the 1970s to the 
disgust of Wahhabi  shaykhs (Doumato 2000 , 178). 
 Cautery is another traditional healing method. In years past it was common to see 
patients with scarring from treatment with hot stones (Ahmad 2008; personal ﬁ eld 
notes) or cauterization (cautery), which was used to resolve major wounds, internal 
pain (al-Awamy 2001; al-Bedah 2005; Bogary 1991, 16), and even psychological dis-
orders (Qureshi et al. 1998). The medical studies showed that problems arose with 
such remedies when patients failed  to receive other necessary forms of treatment. 
 Popular healers for horses and camels have been important to the pastoral cul-
ture of Saudi Arabia. They, too, utilize cautery, herbal remedies, bonesetting, and 
modern medicinal remedies. Their methods in treating camels have been studied, and 
some admitted that they would no longer use cautery for certain medical problems. 
Possibly it was eff ective for tendoarthritis, as the underlying principle resembles the 
counterirritation process in 19th-century medicine, when inﬂ ammation was coun-
tered with mercuric and ammonia salts (Abbas, al-Qarawy, and al-Hawas 2002, 377). 

 Chapter 6 Culture
334 |
 POPULAR OCCASIONS 
 Oral poetry and singing competitions were traditionally held in the summer among 
the nomads. Sa‘d al-‘Abdullah Sowayan, a scholar of Saudi Arabia’s popular litera-
ture, recalled that his own grandfather, who farmed for part of the year, had time to 
leave and attend these  mzayyan . His recollections could be compared to the existing 
tradition Sowayan taped and collected. At the  mzayyan , men and women celebrated; 
a young woman, the  hasi , was chosen to dance. She would unplait her hair (presum-
ably to swing it while dancing) and moved between the lines of all those assembled 
(Sowayan 1985a, 119). Music was played, and poems were recited and prefaced with 
their  sawalif (the narratives associated with the poem, which explain it). People re-
ferred to the declaimer, or  rawi , as speaking the “language of real men” ( kalam rijaal ), 
because the texts referred to heroic deeds of men, and only one with a sophisticated 
knowledge of  nabati could really appreciate them. Bedouin life changed with the 
substitution of the car and truck for the camel, but even modern-day compositions 
may resemble the opening of the classic  qasidah . A woman’s  nabati poem declaimed: 
“Since the day they left in the car / My heart ﬂ ed but I brought it back” (Ibn Raddas 
1972, 48, cited in al-Ghadeer 2006, 1006). 
 Just as these narrative and musical events were enhanced with audience participa-
tion, so, too, were the weddings and parties featuring women’s music in urban Saudi 
Arabia. Their setting was the  majlis al-tarab , a guest-reception room that should 
produce ecstasy or enchantment ( tarab ; Campbell 1998). (This should put to rest 
the idea that all who adhere to Wahhabi beliefs disallow happy occasions, music, 
and laughter.) The lyrics of women singer-poets ( mutribaat ) were chanted by all and 
reﬂ ect beliefs about fate, retribution, honor, and so on (Campbell 1985). 
 Feast days also reﬂ ected joy and happiness. There are many popular traditions 
concerning the Mawlid al-Nabi (see Holidays section at the end of the book) and the 
two ‘Id holidays, as well as the  hajj itself. On the ‘Id al-Fitr, either clothes, children’s 
toys, or money are given as gifts called  eidiyya ( ‘idiyya ). Children anxiously await to 
see what they will receive. Muslim servants generally receive a gift of money on the 
d to help them cover the extra expenses of the holiday. 
 Families gather on the ﬁ rst morning of the ‘Id al-Fitr to give a special prayer 
called the Salat al-Mashshad (or  salat al- ‘ id ), during which the  takbir (saying “Allahu 
Akbar”) following the ﬁ rst kneeling is repeated seven times and then ﬁ ve times after 
the second one. Then they eat a special breakfast together. Holiday foods are served, 
which in the Hijaz used to include  halawa turki (Turkish pudding),  shiriyya (sweet 
noodles), and  debyaza (a mixture of apricots, dates, and nuts cooked together). In re-
cent years, many young and even middle-aged Saudi Arabians have begun celebrat-
ing Valentine’s Day and ordering roses for their sweethearts. Some of the  mutawa‘a 
and  ‘ulama publicly denounced this trend and proclaimed it anti-Islamic. 
 CLOTHING AND HISTORIC COSTUME 
 Dress styles diff ered according to wealth, age, gender, geographic area, and tribe 
prior to the uniﬁ cation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The decoration of tradi-
tional popular dress is really a professional craft or art form now disappearing as 

Clothing and Historic Costume | 335
Western-style clothing (off  the rack or tailored) is replacing it, but at folk festivals, 
traditional styles are crucial to the events. 
 A beautiful example of a Hijazi urban upper-class female dress that has been pre-
served is a princess-cut ankle-length dress called a  zabun , made of organdy (a very sheer 
form of cotton);  sirwal (pantaloons) in a cream color; a  sidariyya (a ﬁ tted, buttoned 
underblouse); and, over all, a diaphanous rust-colored (or other colored) rectangular-
shaped gauze  thawb    (robe). Instead of a black scarf, this costume had a  mihrama wa 
mudawara  (light-colored headscarf that was highly embroidered and topped with 
a diamond brooch). An everyday type of headscarf could be of light- colored voile, 
sometimes printed with ﬂ oral designs. Ladies wore red and yellow slippers; in the Ot-
toman period, urban women were given  qubqab , a wooden platform shoe decorated 
with mother-of-pearl. In the past, women wore a  burqa milayya , meaning a long, 
white face veil, and a gray-colored silk mantle (Colyer Ross 1981, 90–92). 
 Near Mecca, Jeddah, and Medina, the dresses of the Harb tribe are typically 
black cotton with heavily decorated shoulders and upper arms, a yoke designed in 
seven squares, and hem panels. The embroidery is in red, yellow, and white shirt but-
tons are added as an integral part of the design   (Colyer Ross 1981, 87). In southern 
Bride's costume from Medina. 
(Palms and Pomegranates: Tradi-
tional Dress of Saudi Arabia. U.S. 
Committee for Saudi Arabian 
Cultural Heritage, c. 1987-1989)

 Chapter 6 Culture
336 |
Hijaz, near Asir, the  badu wore black dresses embroidered in colorful silk thread on 
a rectangular yoke (chest); or the design included embroidery on the yoke, on bands 
around the hem, and in a rectangular stripe from shoulder to hem on each side of the 
front and back. At Ta’if women wore shiny black cotton kaftan dresses with extra 
inserts of fabric at the sides. In the 1980s tailors made these “Taiﬁ  wedding dresses” 
in black or bright-colored velvets with bright-colored embroidery (Colyer Ross 1981, 
96–97). Another highland  mudandash  (long dress) from near Sarawat had a slimmer 
ﬁ t than dresses in the north and was black with red, yellow, and white decorations 
(Colyer Ross 1981, 99, 115). With the Sarawat outﬁ t a black hood decorated with 
buttons, embroidery, or beadwork might be worn. 
 Bedouin embroidery, beading, and textile production are now becoming less com-
mon and often cruder. The stitches (open chain, herringbone, feather bone, etc.) 
tell the origin of a garment, as do the patterns of woven items (Colyer Ross 1981, 
133–153; Hilden 2010). 
 In the highlands, women also wore head circlets ( ‘asayib ) atop cloths and often a 
woven palm-frond hat atop that circlet in Asir or Tihamah . Another Asir  durra ‘ ah (a 
name for a long dress) is black, blue, and yellow patterned on top of a yellow-striped 
black skirt; a piece falls over the yoke and back, and a large striped cotton scarf is tied 
around the hips ( Palms and Pomegranates , n.d. [ca. 1987], 20). In the Hijazi towns, 
women often wore a three-piece head covering with decorations showing, or the two 
pieces of the  shayla and  gnaa . Elaborately decorated burqas (face masks) were worn 
by some groups in the Hijaz (but not all; Colyer Ross 1981, 47). East of Dhahran 
al-Janurb, women wore green dresses and bright yellow headscarves. To the south, 
the  tawb aswad  (colloquial term for  thawb  aswad , or black dress) of Najran is black 
with very long pointed sleeves (Colyer Ross 1981, 101). Sandals made of camel hide 
were eventually replaced with Indian cow-hide imports, and palm-frond sandals were 
made in the West. 
 The Bedouin dress of the northern region used to be a patterned  fustan (dress) 
with shoulder patches of brilliant pink and orange; another dress of a tribe to the 
west and south of the northern region is wide cut and of a unique burgundy color 
trimmed with pink and orange embroidery. Sometimes the dress is green, possibly 
because that color was worn by widows and women pilgrims (Colyer Ross 1981, 
79). The Najdi Bani Tamim  thob is very dramatic—black with wide stripes of pink, 
turquoise, yellow, and some red down each shoulder and side panel (Colyer Ross 
1981, 70; U.S. Committee for Saudi Arabian Cultural Heritagen.d. [ca. 1987], 12). 
The  thawb magassab  is also Najdi, made in silk; it is purple or in other colors, with 
heavy gold-sequined trim and gold and turquoise neckline buttons. 
 The  thob nashal of the eastern regions is a very sheer, very large rectangle with 
a neck opening, decorated with sequined embroidery and worn over a  fustan or 
 dharrah (gown). The wide sleeves of the  thob can be drawn up over the back to 
cover the head. Most are now machine made and imported from India (Colyer Ross 
1981, 72). They are now worn throughout Saudi Arabia, although they are Eastern 
dress. For weddings, a cherry-colored  dharaah , known as an  omasa , was worn or a 
cerise-colored  thob nashal , red being a favorite color for weddings (Colyer Ross 1981, 
56–57). A ﬁ tted kaftan with a back zipper, made in similar bright-colored material 

Clothing and Historic Costume | 337
and a lavishly decorated (in India) front panel, including crossed swords, was the 
Sa‘ud-era dress of the 1940s and 1950s (Colyer Ross 1981, 55). In Najd, a type of 
black  thawb  made of tulle or ﬁ ne lace is worn for special occasions, decorated with 
gold or silver at the yoke and along the sleeve bands. 
 Henna 
 Women also decorate their hands and feet with henna, in either red or black. Henna 
is often used to color the hair as well. Elaborate patterns are made and self-applied 
or applied by a friend or a professional  hinnawah . Henna used to be applied at the ‘Id 
al-Fitr holiday and at the  laylat al-hinna  or  ghumra , a bride’s party prior to her wed-
ding. This party was followed by the  zaff at al-shibshib , which was a festive procession 
held in Jeddah to bring the bride’s belongings to her new home. 
 Some, but not all, tribes used tattoos for decoration, which were generally small 
and on the face; these are seen now solely on the very elderly. However,  Western-style 
Banu Tamim thawb. (Palms and 
Pomegranates: Traditional Dress of Saudi 
Arabia. U.S. Committee for Saudi Arabian 
Cultural Heritage, c. 1987-1989)

 Chapter 6 Culture
338 |
tattoos are popularly said to be un-Islamic with no explanation of the previous 
tradition. 
 Kohl , made from antimony, is a traditional eyeliner and sometimes brow enhancer. 
In the past, men as well as women wore it. Doughty (1921) reported that Muham-
mad ibn Rashid “had his bird-like eyes painted.” Public health researchers have long 
warned that kohl contains lead (al-Ashban, Aslam, and Shah 2004) and recommend 
lead-free varieties. Other premodern cosmetics like  zerkoun  were applied to the lips 
and cheeks. Scent, often made from local ﬂ owers or musk, henna, or amber, was 
applied. Elaborate hairstyles, often with braided sections and hair decorations, were 
worn. A bedouin woman’s jewelry was usually part of her  mahr  (groom’s payment 
to the bride). The contemporary urban woman will collect gold jewelry, some made 
abroad, and wear au courant Western cosmetics and hairstyles (although long hair is 
still preferred); some adult women and younger girls do not wear makeup at all, but 
other women may apply makeup heavily. 
 The Modern  Niqab and Covering 
 For the last two decades, more and more women have been wearing more conceal-
ing clothing and a black face veil ( niqab ); the favorite style has a thin divider on the 
nose. The more conservative add gloves. Covering of the face is a point of contention 
between conservatives and salaﬁ sts, on the one hand, and those who are just as pious 
but are traditionalists or liberals, on the other hand (Zuhur, Personal Interviews, 
2005–2008). The ‘ abaya is required on top of the clothing for older girls and women, 
and it must be black. Many women wear a  shayla , a long black, sometimes deco-
rated scarf over their head, but some also wear a  hijab  (headscarf ) under the  shayla . 
No part of the leg or arms should be revealed. Under the ‘ abaya , all Western styles, 
including tight trousers or jeans, may be worn. 
 Children and Men 
 Children’s clothes were once handmade from gauze. They wore a  gub  (hood) on their 
heads, which was black (to deﬂ ect the evil eye); it was replaced at age eight with a 
 kuffi  ya  (skullcap) for boys or with a  bukhnug (hood) and later a  tarha (headscarf ) 
and ‘ abaya  for girls. School uniforms and other Western dress or versions of adult 
clothing are worn today. 
 Men dress in a white or cream cotton  thob (thawb is the classical word) of cotton 
or a synthetic/silk mixture. It may be decorated with braiding, a tassel at the neck, 
or a decorated or buttoned collar; studs and cuffl  inks may be worn. In the winter, a 
 thob of a heavier fabric in gray or light brown might be worn. The ultraconservatives 
insist that a  thob must be worn short, above the ankles, but other men protest tailors’ 
eff orts to follow the ultraconservatives (al-Dahkil in Craze and Huband, eds., 2009, 
198–199). An outer cape or mantle ( bisht ) might be worn for formal occasions. In the 
past, men wore  sirwal (long pantaloons) and, until the 1940s, a body shirt, called a 
 shillahat or  merodan , which had long, pointed sleeves; over that an ankle-length robe 

| 339
or coat was worn, and on top of that, a jacket. Embroidered jackets ( kote ,  damir , 
 furmaliyya ) are imported from Damascus and worn for special occasions like the 
dancing of the  ardha (sword dance; Colyer Ross 1981, illustr. 42, 40–43). Previously, 
daggers, swords, and riﬂ es were worn in belts and bandoliers, some of which were 
decorated with silver and semiprecious stones. Men also carried a stick and a leather 
bag ( mizuda ). In some tribes in the south and to the southwest men also wore a  fouta , 
fabric wrapped around the waist and then brought back to the front between the legs 
to be tucked up in front, and a shirt. Some groups wore this under a  thawb  and wore 
the  fouta alone, without a  thawb , exclusively when in their own homes. 
 A man’s headgear includes the  kuﬁ yya (skullcap), which is often white but some-
times in other colors and may be embroidered. Over that, the white  ghutra (head-
cloth) or the  shmagh , in a red-and-white checkered pattern, is worn. The  iqal (head 
circlet) holds the cloth onto the head. A man may toss one or both of the side ends 
of the  ghutra or  shmagh back over his head. This headgear of Najd replaced the 
muslin or cotton turban worn in the Hijaz. In some rural areas, the turban is still 
worn (Ingham 1997, 40–53). The ultraconservatives prefer to wear a head covering 
without an  iqal . 
 Practical Weaving 
 Bedouin women weavers made, and still make, the  khayma , or  bayt sha ‘ r (tent), 
from the hair and wool of sheep and goats, and the tents belong to them. The 
 maghzal or  mubrah (spindle) is used to make the warp yarn, and the weft yarn is 
carded, made into ribbon, usually dyed, and then spun (Kay 1978; Colyer Ross 
1981, 125–127; Alruways 1998). Their hand looms ( matarih ) were long and narrow, 
and they sat on the ground to weave  g(q)ummash  (material), using a  misha (stick/
shuttle) as a shuttle, then pressing it with a  natha  (a rod) and a  middrah  (pick) of 
gazelle horn. The back curtain is usually plain colored; the internal dividing curtains 
were woven with patterns particular to the tribe. They also wove handbags, camel 
bags, and rugs. 
 REFERENCES 
 Abbas, B., A. A. al-Qarawy, and A. al-Hawas. “The Ethnoveterinary Knowledge of Tradi-
tional Healers in Qassim Region, Saudi Arabia.”  Journal of Arid Environments 50 (2002), 
367–379. 
 Abu-Rabia, Aref. “Urinary Diseases and Ethnobotany among Pastoral Nomads in the Mid-
dle East.  Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 1, no. 4 (2005). http://www.ethno
biomed.com/content/1/1/4 
 Ahmad, Qanta.  In the Land of Invisible Women: A Female Doctor’s Journey in the Saudi King-
dom . Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, 2008. 
 Alruways, Bader. “The Tent and Its Contents: A Study of the Traditional Arts of Weaving by 
the Otaiba Tribe in Saudi Arabia.” PhD diss., University of North Texas, 1998. 
 Al-Ashban, R. M., M. Aslam, and A. H. Shah. “Kohl (Surma): A Toxic Traditional Eye Cos-
metic Study in Saudi Arabia.”  Public Health 188, no. 4 (June 2004), 292–298. 
References

 Chapter 6 Culture
340 |
 al-Awamy, Dr. Baker H., Dr. Fakhry , and Department of Pediatrics, al-Muhawis Hospital, 
Dammam. “Evaluation of Commonly Used Tribal and Traditional Remedies in Saudi 
Arabia.”  Saudi Medical Journal 12, no. 22 (December 2001), 1065–1068. 
 Baeshen, Lamia.  Youssef et le palais des chagrins: Contes d’Arabie saoudite . Translated by 
Kadria Awad. Paris: L’Harmattan, 2010. (Originally published as  al-Tabat wa al-Nabat 
in 1997.) 
 Ba Ghaff ar, Hind.  Al-aghani al-sha‘biyya ﬁ -l-Mamlaka al-‘Arabiyyah al-Sa‘udiyya h [Folk 
songs in the Saudi Arabian Kingdom]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Qadsiyya li-l-tawzi‘ 
wa-l-nashr, 1994. 
 al-Bassam, Laila. “Traditional Costumes of Asir.”  al-Ma’thurat al-sha ‘ biyya  67 (2003), 8–29. 
 al-Bedah, Abdullah M.N. “Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.” In  World Health Organization Global 
Atlas of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicine , vol. 1, edited by G. Bode-
ker, C.K. Ong, C. Grundy, G. Burford, and K. Shein.   Kobe, Japan: World Health Orga-
nization, 2005. 
 Bogary, Hamza.  Sheltered Quarter: A Tale of a Boyhood in Mecca . Translated by O. Kenny 
and J. Reed. Austin: Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of Texas, Austin, 1991. 
 Brockelman, C. “Mathal.” In  First Encyclopaedia of Islam , edited by Martijn Theodoor Hout-
sma. Leiden, the Netherlands: E. J. Brill and Luzac, 1913–1938, vol. 3, 407–410. 
 Bushnaq, Inea, ed. and trans.  Arab Folktales . New York: Pantheon, 1986. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment , edited by Sherifa Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo 
Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy, producer.  Samra: Songs from Saudi Arabia . Audiocassette, 1985. 
 Chatty, Dawn.  Nomadic Societies in the Middle East and North Africa: Entering the 21st Cen-
tury . Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2006. 
 Colyer Ross,  Heather.  The Art of Arabian Costume: A Saudi Arabian Proﬁ le. Fribourg, Swit-
zerland: Arabesque Commercial, 1981. 
 Cuddihy, Kathy.  Saudi Customs and Etiquette . London: Stacey International, 2002. 
 al-Dakhil, Khalid. “Saudis Resist Eff orts by Clerical ‘Class’ to Create Nation of Fashion 
Slaves.” In  The Kingdom: Saudi Arabia and the Challenge of 21st Century , edited by Joshua 
Craze and Mark Huband. New York: Columbia University Press, 2009. 
 Doughty, Charles M.  Arabia Deserta . Vols. 1 and 2. Philip Lee Warner for Medici Society 
Limited; London and Boston: Jonathan Cape, 1921. 
 Doumato, Eleanor.  Getting God’s Ear: Women, Islam and Healing in Saudi Arabia and the 
Gulf . New York: Columbia University Press, 2000. 
 al-Fuhayd, Mandil.  Min adabina al-sha ‘ biyya. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Yamamah li-l-
bahth wa tarjumah wa nashr, 1978. 
 Al-Ghadeer, Moneera.  Desert Voices: Bedouin Women’s Poetry in Saudi Arabia . London: 
Tauris Academic Studies, 2009. 
 Al-Ghadeer, Moneera. “The Inappropriate Voice: Introducing Bedouin Women’s Oral Po-
etry from the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Nomadic Societies in the Middle East and North 
Africa: Entering the 21st Century , edited by Dawn Chatty. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 
2006, 994–1012. 
 al-Ghamdi, Hayat. “Traditional Women [sic] Clothes on Display in Abha Summer Fest.” 
 Arab.News.com , July 30, 2010. 

| 341
 Ghazanfar, Shahina.  Handbook of Arabian Medicinal Plants . London: CRC Press, 1994. 
 al-Hadhdhal, A. I.  Mukhtarat min al-shi ‘ r al-nabati al-mu ‘ asir . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Matabi‘ 
al-shihri, 1392h. 
 Hardy, M.J.L.  Blood Feuds and the Payment of Blood Money in the Middle East . Leiden, the 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1963. 
 Hawling, G. R.  “The Development of the Biography of al-Harith ibn Kalada and the Re-
lationship between Medicine and Islam.”   In  The Islamic World, from Classical to Mod-
ern Times , edited by C. E. Bosworth, Charles Issawi, Roger Savory, and A. L. Udovitch. 
Princeton, NJ: Darwin, 1989, 127–137. 
 Hilden, Joy Totah.  Bedouin Weaving of Saudi Arabia and Other Countries . London: Arabian 
Publishing; Oakﬁ eld, CT: David Brown, 2010. 
 Holes, Clive.  Dialect, Culture and Society in Eastern Arabia: A Glossary . Leiden, the Nether-
lands: Brill, 2001. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  Min ahadith al-samar . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Matabi‘ sharikat Hanifah lil-
Ofset, 1978. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  Rashid al-Khalawi . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Yamamah lil-bahth wa 
al-tarjuma wa al-nashr, 1972. 
 Ibn Khamis, A.  al-Adab al-sha ‘ bi ﬁ  jazirat al- ‘ arab . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Matabi‘ al-Riyadh, 
1958. 
 Ingham, Bruce. “Men’s Dress in the Arabian Peninsula: Historical and Present Perspectives.” 
In  Languages of Dress in the Middle East , edited by Nancy Lindisfarne-Tapper and Bruce 
Ingham. Richmond, UK: Curzon, 1997. 
 Al-Jaraisy, Khaled, comp. and ed.  Selected Fatwas on Faith Healing and Witchcraft . Trans-
lated by Mohammed Atif Mogahed Mohammed. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: al-Jaraisy Estab-
lishment, 2001 (1422h.). 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 663–669. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Oral Tradition of the Gulf Region and the Arabian Penin-
sula.”  Oral Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 175–187. 
 Katakura, Motoko.  Bedouin Village . Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1977. 
 Kay, Shirley.  The Bedouin . North Vancouver, BC, Canada: Douglas David and Charles, 1978. 
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Arabia of the Bedouins . London: Al Saqi, 2001. 
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Oral Poetry and Narratives from Central Arabia . Vol. 1. Leiden, the 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1994. 
 Lebling, Robert W., Jr. “The Treasure of Tarthuth.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 
2003. 
 Lebling, Robert W., and Donna Pepperdine. “Natural Remedies of Arabia.”  Saudi Aramco 
World , September/October 2006a. 
 Lebling, Robert W., and Donna Pepperdine.  Natural Remedies of Arabia . London: Al-Turath/
Stacey International, 2006b. 
 Long, David E.  Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 
 Murad, Amnah.  Lamhat min tarikh al-tibb al-qadim . Cairo: Maktabat al-Nasr al-Hadith, 
1966, 1–32. 
References

 Chapter 6 Culture
342 |
 “Palms and Pomegranates: Traditional Dress of Saudi Arabia.” Exhibit 1987–1989 that 
toured the United States in 1989 including display at the American Museum of Natural 
History in New York. Curated by Johara Alatas. 
 Palms and Pomegranates: Traditional Dress of Saudi Arabia . Exhibition catalog. Washington, 
DC: The U.S. Committee for Saudi Arabian Cultural Heritage, n.d. [ca. 1987]. 
 Qureshi, Naseem Akhtar, Aladin Hadi al-Amri, Muzamil Hasan Abdelgadir, and Ahmed El-
Haraka. “Traditional Cautery among Psychiatric Patients in Saudi Arabia.”  Transcultural 
Psychiatry 35, no. 1 (March 1998). 
 Rayyes, Fuad. “The Cream of Wisdom.”  Saudi Aramco World 20, no. 1 (January/February 
1969). 
 Al-Said, Mansour Solyman. “Medicine in Islam.” In  Encyclopedia of the History of Science, 
Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures , edited by Helaine Selin. Dordrecht, 
the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic, 1997, 695–698. 
 al-Sa‘ud, Norah bint Muhammad, al-Jawhara Muhammad al-‘Anqari, and Madeha Mu-
hammad al-‘Atroush, eds.  Abha, Bilad Asir: Southwestern Region of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: By the editors, 1989. 
 al-Shatti, Ahmad.  al-‘Arab wa al-tibb . Damascus, Syria: Manshurat Wizarat al-Thaqafa, 1970. 
 Snouck Hurgronje, Christaan.  Mekka in the Latter Part of the Nineteenth Century, 1885–1889 . 
Translated by James Henry Monahan. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1931. 
 Sonbol, Amira.  The New Mamluks: Egyptian Society and Modern Feudalism . Syracuse, NY: 
Syracuse University Press, 2000. 
 al-Sowayan, Sa‘d al-‘Abdullah.  al-Shi ‘ r al-sha ‘ bi ﬁ  al-mamlakah al- ‘ arabiyyah al-sa ‘ udiyyah . 
Doha, Qatar: Arab Gulf States Folklore Center, 1985a. 
 Sowayan, Sa‘d Abdullah.  Nabati Poetry: The Oral Poetry of Arabia . Berkeley and Los Ange-
les: University of California Press, 1985b. 
 Sowayan, Sa‘d Abdullah. “Tonight My Gun Is Loaded: Poetic Dueling in Arabia.”  Oral 
Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 151–173. 
 Stewart, Frank H. “Customary Law among the Bedouin of the Middle East and North Af-
rica.” In  Nomadic Societies in the Middle East and North Africa: Entering the 21st Century , 
edited by Dawn Chatty. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2006, 239–279. 
 Topham, John.  Traditional Crafts of Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey International, 1981. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Changed Identities: The Challenge of a New Generation in Saudi Arabia . Lon-
don: Royal Institute of International Aff airs, 2000. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. Personal interviews. Riyadh and Jeddah, 2005–2008. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Gender ,  Sexuality and the Criminal Laws in the Middle East and North Africa: 
A Comparative Study . Istanbul, Turkey: WWHR (Women for Women’s Human Rights)-
New Ways, 2005. 
 Architecture 
 Architecture encompasses every aspect of the built environment. To focus on what 
is quintessentially Muslim and Saudi Arabian glosses over shared features of Gulf-
state traditions and Persian, Ottoman, and modern global architectural inﬂ uences. 

The Mosque | 343
 Premodern Saudi Arabia reﬂ ected the needs of the tribes, communities, and their 
environments. The tents of the nomadic community (see Popular Culture section in 
this chapter) could be disassembled and carried. They were divided according to the 
gender of the group, with the “male” or public side ﬂ apped up for visits. Each tribe 
had its own  dira (pattern of travel) and its own grazing areas (see Chapter 4, Econ-
omy, section on agriculture), and those who were partially sedenterized also lived 
in homes near their farming areas. When loans became easily available, a building 
boom also took place, with a shift into new housing. This took place in cities as well, 
where the availability of funding, and some degree of peer example, led elite families 
to leave their older homes in cities like Jeddah, They moved into single-family villas 
set in gardens, very diff erent from the historic homes (Altorki 1986, 29–30). People 
ﬁ rst settled al-Raghbah in Najd in 1668, moving from a disputed original site to 
al-Bilad al-Suﬂ a, and from there to two neighborhoods, al-Hazm and al-Nab‘a, in 
about 1695; then they moved to al-Jaw al-Zahiri until the construction boom. Two 
ﬂ oods in 1979 and 1985 damaged homes, which encouraged all others to move to 
new homes. Thus, they left behind the old quarters that illustrate living styles of the 
past (al-Jeraisy 1999, 92–95). 
 Historians and architectural specialists sometimes speak about the Islamic nature 
of cities and towns, which, in addition to their relationship to production, impacted 
their building patterns and appearance. In the premodern era, villages and towns 
included public markets, mosques and other places of prayer, shopping areas (often 
organized by product), areas for any unclean work (tanneries), fountains or wells, 
and homes. Private, inner spaces diff ered from public-facing facades; often, in parts 
of Arabia, the lower ﬂ oors had no windows for reasons of security. The use of the 
home oriented inward, and some included an area, or manger, for animals. Elite 
homes reﬂ ected the gender division with a salon for men and another family or 
female-only living space. In certain areas, such as Najd, due to battles between diff er-
ent groups, the older buildings date back to about the 18th or at the earliest the 17th 
century. Historical works describe the older settlements; in some cases their ruins lie 
nearby (as in Diriyyah or Raghbah) or were built over (Ministry of Education [ca. 
2001]). Most of the older homes have been abandoned for new housing. The homes 
of middle- and lower-class residents were often built in adjoining fashion, with com-
mon walls, and there were narrow walkways in between blocks of homes. Depending 
on the area, some homes had roofed-over portions, as well as open-roofed sections, 
and might be multilevel. Families could incorporate new members when their sons 
married. In Mecca, large numbers of families used to rent out sections of their homes 
during the  hajj season and retreated to alternate rooms. Throughout the peninsula 
common building material was mud brick, and in some places stones are incorpo-
rated into the architecture. 
 THE MOSQUE 
 The mosque was the ﬁ rst speciﬁ cally Muslim structure; it may be called a  masjid (place 
of bowing), a  musallah (place of praying), or a  jami‘ , a congregational mosque meant 
for Friday communal worship. The ﬁ rst mosque was established by the Prophet 

 Chapter 6 Culture
344 |
Muhammad leading his community in prayer at Medina. The Prophet ascended a 
stone platform to give his sermon ( khutbah ) and leaned, according to hadith, on a 
palm trunk. Since 750  CE , the  minbar , a set of stairs leading to a short platform, are 
used for the  khutbah  and stand next to the  mihrab , a niche in the  qiblah (direction of 
prayer) wall facing Mecca. It is thought that the  mihrab  used to contain a hanging 
lantern, but today’s are normally empty (Ettinghausen 1976). The  qiblah , or direc-
tional orientation of prayer, originally faced Jerusalem but was altered to face Mecca 
in 629  CE . The  qiblah was indicated by a spear thrust into the sand for those praying 
out in the open desert or with a piece of rock, as in the Prophet’s house, which like 
other houses was made of mud brick. His house had a large courtyard surrounded 
by brick walls with a row of sheltered areas against two walls. Historians agree that 
the early mosques built in and outside of Arabia, in Iraq up to 650 or so, were based 
on the Prophet’s house in Medina (Kuran 1995, 135). 
 The Islamic expansion moved into Mesopotamia, and the Basra and Kufa 
mosques, which had been based on this plan, were renovated in 665 and 670  CE , 
thereafter featuring a  haram (prayer hall) and a  sahn (court) with double rows of 
 riwaq s (porticos) surrounding it. Large mosques in other areas of the Muslim empire 
incorporated the use of aisled  haram s with supporting pillars and porticos surround-
ing a court. The mosques of Samarra, Abu Dulaf, and Ibn Tulun at Fustat were all 
surrounded by a  ziyadah with walls. The  ziyadah  was an open space converted to a 
Ruins of the city of Diriyyah, Saudi Arabia, site of the First Saudi Arabian state. (Saudi 
Aramco World/SAWDIA)

Markets | 345
prayer area when very large crowds attended (Kuran 1995, 136–137). A minaret from 
which the  mu’adhdhan (muezzin) delivered the call to prayer was built; at Medina, the 
 mu’adhdhan Bilal had simply climbed atop a wall. Minaret styles have developed in 
each geographic area. Another design feature incorporated as Muslim rule expanded 
was the use of mosaic tile as decoration, typically on interior walls or on exterior 
walls and even domes. All of these styles and features eventually moved back again 
to larger mosques built on the Arabian Peninsula. 
 The minarets of the old Imam Turki bin ‘Abdullah (Grand Mosque) in Riyadh 
were a mix of Ottoman and Egyptian styles, with two rectangular sections topped by 
three rounded sections and a top section coming to a point with round shapes atop 
it; the courtyard porticos rose in a triangular point with decor above. The minarets 
were rebuilt in rectangular neo-Najdi shapes, the courtyard was completely resur-
faced, and the porticos are now a modernized version of their former shape (High 
Commission for the Development of Arriyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia al-Riyadh, 
1424h., 9–10). 
 MARKETS 
 In the older cities of the Muslim world, markets (suq s. or aswaq. pl. ) were located near 
large or important mosques. Women could shop in their own areas of larger markets 
Riyadh Mosque, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (Saudi Aramco World/SAWDIA)

 Chapter 6 Culture
346 |
( suq al-harim ). The Haraj, or Auction market, was next to the Grand Mosque in the 
1940s. It remains as a partially open discount market with booths roofed in red and 
white (High Commission for the Development of Arriyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Ara-
bia, al-Riyadh 1424h., 7–8). Shops were housed in permanent buildings for heavier 
items or those requiring equipment. Vendors of clothing were grouped near each 
other, housewares in their own section, and so on. Malls and shopping centers have 
begun to displace older shops, although certain planned communities retain their 
shopping areas. Much of this new construction is cement-block, although some of 
the larger malls have attractive, modernist exteriors. 
 GENERAL FEATURES OF THE HIJAZ 
 The cities of the Hijaz feature multistoried traditional houses up to seven stories tall. 
Most houses are not more than 200 years old; the climate varies from the cooler areas 
in the highlands to the extreme heat of the valley where Mecca is located (the Batn), 
and houses deteriorate from the heat. Architecture in Jeddah and Mecca was inﬂ u-
enced in some ways by the Ottomans and by the availability of wood imported from 
India. Elaborately carved doors and balconies from this wood can be seen on older 
buildings. Also typical is the use of  mashrabiyya or  rushan (also given as  rawshan ); 
these are carved screens put over the windows or balconies to maintain the privacy 
of women inside. The women’s quarters were often in the upper stories of the houses; 
the  rushan are located over these windows. 
 Mecca’s jewel is the Masjid al-Haram, or Holy Mosque, which contains the 
Ka‘ba  , a tall rectangular structure in a courtyard at the center of the mosque. The 
Ka‘ba is pre-Islamic in origin but was cleansed of its idols and reestablished as an 
object of pilgrimage after the conquest of Mecca in 628. The pilgrims walk around 
the Ka‘ba in the  tawwaf (circumambulation). The area around the Ka‘ba was ﬁ rst 
enclosed by a wall in 638 to provide space for the  tawwaf , and that area was enlarged 
in 646 when a new enclosure wall with arcades was built. The mosque was again en-
larged in 684 under the rule of ‘Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr and beautiﬁ ed with marble 
and mosaic decoration. 
 Caliph al-Walid covered the arcades of the mosque in 709 with a teak roof resting 
on marble columns. Caliph al-Mansur enlarged the mosque from 754 and 757, and 
its ﬁ rst minaret was built. In 1564, the Ottoman sultan Sulayman the Magniﬁ cent 
ordered rebuilding, and the ﬂ at roofs of the arcades were given stone domes, and the 
minarets were rebuilt. Further renovation took place under the al-Sa‘ud; the mosque 
is now the largest in the world and has two-story arcades around a larger courtyard 
and seven minarets. 
 The well of Zamzam is also located here and had been covered with a roof in the 
ninth century. From the Ottoman period, this Maqam (“place or area of”) Zamzam 
was used as a teaching area for jurisprudence, with each  madhhab (legal school) 
possessing its own  maqam in the courtyard. The Saudi Arabian renovation removed 
these areas to make more room for the growing number of pilgrims. Two under-
ground rooms for ablutions performed prior to prayer were built and fed by the well 

General Features of the Hijaz | 347
of Zamzam. Another feature, the Maqam Ibrahim, was a building with a stone with 
footprints said to be those of Ibrahim (Abraham) the Prophet, and this was restored 
in the 1950s. 
 Mecca grew with pilgrim settlement; many built their homes on hills to avoid the 
seasonal ﬂ oods. As there were no hotels and many made an income from provid-
ing lodging, food, or guide services to pilgrims, homes were built to accommodate 
families and visitors. The roofs were ﬂ at and, in the hottest season, could be used for 
sleeping. The architecture was inﬂ uenced by the Ottoman era and also by the need 
for privacy. In traditional homes, a heavy and elaborate door in a brick-decorated 
facade led to the ﬁ rst-ﬂ oor hall, or salon, which was reserved for men and visitors 
and had built-in benches for seating. Another room on this ﬂ oor, a  maq ‘ ad , was for 
entertaining close friends. A winding enclosed staircase led upstairs; the upper ﬂ oor 
was reserved for women and the men of that family and contained the bedrooms, 
bathrooms, kitchen, and an additional salon area. Additional areas and bedrooms 
might be roofed or not, and mosquito nets could be hung to cover those sleeping 
under the stars. The  rawshan , or  mashrabiyya , screens lent charm and status to the 
buildings (Bogary 1991, 57, 66–67; Uluengin and Uluengin 1993, 22–29). Today, 
contemporary housing has been built in much of Mecca and is, according to many 
Meccan natives, so expensive as to force them to move to the suburbs or live in Jed-
dah. For a view of the Grand Mosque, one pays triple the price, and many residences 
are used solely during the pilgrimage season. Special objections to this commercial-
ization of the holy city have been expressed with respect to the Royal Mecca Clock 
Tower, a gigantic complex housing 800 hotel rooms, a mall, and prayer halls and 
topped by an Arabicized Big Ben ( New York Times , November 29, 2010). 
 Medina is the second holy site in Islam. Located to the north of Mecca and about 
110 miles from the Red Sea, the city is built on an ancient oasis. Here, the Prophet 
Muhammad’s home and grave are located. The Prophet died in his wife’s apartment, 
and he is buried just off  the courtyard of his house, used as the ﬁ rst mosque. His 
sarcophagus is within a draped, and fenced, area, the Qubbat al-Nabi (Dome of the 
Prophet), within the enlarged Masjid al-Nabawi. 
 Medina is surrounded by walls, and nine gates permit access to and from the city. 
Travel from Mecca to Medina used to be undertaken by camel, and pilgrims might 
hire a  muzahhid , who sang to inspire people to abandon their normal life and go to 
visit Medina (a practice later frowned on; Bogary 1991, 18–19). The original area of 
prayer was a rectangular space of about 98 by 114 feet, with mud walls reinforced 
with palm trunks and three entrances. In 629, the mosque was expanded. In 707, 
Caliph al-Walid ibn ‘Abd al-Malik replaced the structure with a larger one about 
276 by 330 feet, with a teak roof supported on stone columns. Mosaics decorated the 
walls. Caliph al-Mahdi enlarged the mosque further between the years 778 and 781 
and added 20 doors. A dome was erected over the Prophet’s tomb during the reign 
of the Mamluk sultan Qalawun, and a fountain was built outside the Bab al-Salam, 
one of the entrances. The surrounding mosque complex was expanded, rebuilt, and 
gained additional minarets of an Ottoman style under Qaitbay and Sulayman   the 
Magniﬁ cent. Also, a new dome atop Muhammad’s tomb was painted green. The Ikh-
wan were averse to tomb mosques in general, because they disapproved of Muslims’ 

 Chapter 6 Culture
348 |
visits and rituals there in pursuit of intercession by these holy ﬁ gures; however, the 
Prophet’s tomb is an exception. Under Sultan Abdulmejid’s reign in the 1840s and 
1850s, more expansion occurred; the mosque’s domes were decorated with poetry, 
and calligraphic tiles were added to the  qiblah wall. Further changes were made under 
King Faysal and King Fahd to a now-vast, air-conditioned structure with seven 
minarets, encircled with a wall (King 1986; Pierpaoli and Zuhur 2008). 
 Jeddah has a population of at least 2,110,000, which swells in the pilgrimage sea-
son and during Ramadan. Being built along the sea gives the city a unique character. 
Its Corniche, a boulevard along the sea, is full of hotels. The traditional architecture 
of Jeddah shares some similarities with that in Mecca, in its Ottoman inﬂ uences. In 
the old city, limestone was used, and the balustrades of balconies, the decor, and 
 rawshan are in white or light colors (Pesce 1976). As already noted, however, many 
people originally from Jeddah have moved out of these older areas, which are now 
owned or rented by more recent settlers from other areas in Saudi Arabia and by 
immigrants. A noted example of older architecture is the Aseef House; the  rawshan 
and decor are darker wood, and the top of the house is an ornate square. Jeddah is 
also home to at least 40 skyscrapers, with others under construction. Some noted 
buildings include the National Commerce (Commercial) Bank, shaped like a giant 
isosceles triangle; the Islamic Development Bank; Abraj al-Farsi, the 30-ﬂ oor mainly 
residential Farsi Towers; and several hotels, including the Westin, along the Cor-
Dome of the Prophet Muhammad's mosque in Medina. (Ali Jarekji/Reuters/Corbis)

Najd | 349
niche. The Jeddah Port Control Tower, completed in 1990, has a unique shape and 
an observation deck. It is lit at night, as is the King Fahd Fountain, the tallest in the 
world at 1,024 feet. 
 ASIR AND ABHA 
 Abha is located in the Asir Mountains of southwestern Saudi Arabia at about 7,300 
feet above sea level. It has a population of more than 200,000 drawn from the Zamir, 
Qahtan, Asir, and Ghamid tribes. The traditional architecture of Abha and Bahah   
is built of stone and mud brick, which is painted in bright colors. Specialists come to 
paint the houses according to the taste of their residents, and the designs are bold, 
in brilliant colors, and geometric (Mauger 1996). The typical building type is a tall, 
multistory house, as in other parts of the western Arabian Peninsula. However, on 
the Tihamah Plateau, a conical type of hut ( usba ) used to be constructed out of reeds 
and fronds of the palm tree. Dwellings in Khaybar, in Charles Doughty’s time were 
built with an upper room,  suff a , whereas the area below was used as a stable with a 
palm ladder. Doughty was surprised by the black residents, the volcanic soil, and the 
houses and wrote, “Kheybar is as it were an African village in the Hejaz” (Doughty 
1968, 227). 
 NAJD 
 In Najd, buildings were primarily made from mud brick, with tree trunks and palm 
fronds for roofs. Towers, turrets, and walls were built for fortiﬁ cation in the various 
wars carried out between the leading groups in the region. These wars and the shifts 
in allegiances to the al-Sa‘ud and the  da ‘ wah  of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, 
and then the Ottoman incursion and next set of wars, changed settlement patterns 
as well. Parts of the al-Sa‘ud family’s buildings and guesthouse at Turayf at the 
Diriyyah oasis and some of the main oasis walls have been restored (Muhammad al-
‘became the ruler of Diriyyah in 1726). Life there was complicated by droughts and 
by conﬂ icts within tribes, with the  ashraf , and then with groups resisting the political 
and religious movement of Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and the al-Sa‘ud rulers. Ibrahim 
Pasha’s forces blockaded it for six months, and the town fell in 1818. The ruins show 
the skeletons of large and small dwellings, fortifying walls with narrow openings, and 
also large dwellings and a large walled bathhouse combined with a guesthouse for 
visitors (Ministry of Education 1419–1420h.; Facey 1997, 48–53). Most walls and 
roofs showed a unique triangular shape making a zig-zag design. 
 The storming of the Musmak fortress in Riyadh in 1902 was the symbolic be-
ginning of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud’s eff orts to conquer and unite the country. Qasr 
(fortress) al-Musmak was built in 1895. It had a large wood door with a smaller door 
inside and is built around four small courtyards, with a watchtower at each end and 
a well inside one room. It is used as a museum, housing photographs, weapons, and 
historical information (Ministry of Education 1999). 

 Chapter 6 Culture
350 |
 Characteristic mud-brick shapes with small geometric designs are seen elsewhere 
in Najd. Raghbah had joined the  da ‘ wah of Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and withstood 
a siege in 1751 by enemies of the al-Sa‘ud. Al-Jeraisy’s son supported ‘Abdullah 
ibn Sa‘ud. Therefore, the Ottomans destroyed al-Uqdat, the castle of Shaykh ‘Ali 
al-Jeraisy. Its ruins have been studied and preserved. The castle was a square for-
tress with four rounded watchtowers (al-Jeraisy 1999, 42–43). In the middle of its 
courtyard was a well; a  diwan (entertaining area) was at one end, and a mosque at 
the other (al-Jeraisy 1999, 121). Another interesting ruin is the al-Marqab Tower, a 
tall observation tower built in the 1840s of mud and bricks with stone tiles. Inside is 
a cylindrical staircase (al-Jeraisy 1999, 124–129). Mud-brick building required the 
digging of a shallow foundation and then partial construction of a stone foundation 
and walls (if the builder could aff ord it) and then atop it mud brick. Mud, straw, and 
water were used to form blocks; a chiseler evened out the walls and added more mud 
and straw to smooth them (al-Jeraisy 1999, 115). 
 This is quite similar to the building methods found in Nubia and the old American 
southwest, and it is promoted by the Egyptian architect Hassan Fahmy. The older 
The Kenyan Embassy 
in Riyadh shows the 
architectural detail, 
especially on the rooﬂ ine, 
of the Najd region. (Saudi 
Aramco World/SAWDIA)

Eastern Province | 351
homes have nearly all been abandoned; one, built by Yahya al-Hameedi, is divided 
into two sections, one for men and one for women, each with its own entrance and 
courtyard, and two staircases at each end of the house. There are no windows or 
openings in the ﬁ rst-level walls, but an elevation at the front of the house has three 
windows, each with wooden screens. The other house has windows on each wall of 
the lower ﬂ oor and surrounds a courtyard. A loggia, held up with pillars, surrounds 
the courtyard. In addition to its use as a diwan, for sitting and entertaining, the roof 
could be used for sleeping at night in the hot weather (al-Jeraisy 1999, 106–113). 
These older homes contrast with typical two-story modern villas in Raghbah with a 
staircase at one end, sitting rooms, a kitchen, and a dining room on the ground ﬂ oor 
and another hall and bedrooms on the ﬁ rst ﬂ oor (al-Jeraisy 1999, 134–135). 
 At ‘Udhaibat, another town that has undergone a complete shift in housing from 
the old to the new, a very elegant remodeling of an older farmhouse was undertaken 
by Prince Sultan ibn Salman al-Sa‘ud. As elsewhere in Najd, the very thick walls 
help to keep the building cool. Traditional-style built-in seating and wood in the 
roofs have been used. With so many people moving into housing developments with 
little character, Prince Sultan ibn Salman hopes to encourage the preservation and 
appreciation of unique indigenous architecture (Facey 1997, 1999, 32–46). 
 At Ha’il to the north, stone was used as well as mud brick. In his approach to 
the city, Charles M. Doughty wrote, “We saw afterward some high buildings with 
battled towers. These well-built and stately Najd turrets of clay-brick are shaped like 
our lighthouses.” Of the Amir Rashid’s summer house, he wrote, “As we approached 
Hayil I saw that the walls extended backward, making of the town a vast enclosure 
of palms, closed by high walls. Now it appeared as it were suspended above the 
town, the whitened donjon of the Kasr,—such clay buildings they whiten with jiss” 
(Doughty 1968, 149–150). 
 Riyadh, the capital, has expanded in an amazing and startling fashion, not all of it 
beautiful. Eff orts have been made to create aesthetically pleasing spaces, and in addi-
tion to many ordinary skyscrapers, the Faisaliyyah Tower, with its unique triangular 
shape, and the Kingdom Tower, constructed like a curving rectangle with a cutout 
circular shape at the upper ﬂ oors, stand out. Offi  cial buildings such as the Ministry 
of the Interior and the design of the gate at the King Khalid International Airport at 
Riyadh are striking. Since the 1960s, roundabouts have been built as well as major 
thoroughfares, now quite crowded. Some more traditional shopping areas persist; 
the al-Migaybrah Market is today’s al-Zal market, known as  al-mashaleh , which 
sells carpets,  ‘ud , and clothing. The al-Dokhnah Gate has been renovated but is now 
dwarfed by other architecture. The Diplomatic Quarter, primarily a residential area 
with greenery, has been built on an area that was barren prior to the 1980s. Land is 
quite expensive there; villas are built with walls, and the newer styles are multiﬂ oored 
with large reception areas. Security guards check automobiles entering certain areas. 
 EASTERN PROVINCE 
 The traditional architecture of the Eastern Province exhibits some Ottoman and Per-
sian inﬂ uence. Buildings may be built from coral brick, stone, mud brick,  limestone, 

 Chapter 6 Culture
352 |
or other types of stone and wood and are plastered or stuccoed. A pointed arch 
was often used in the designs of buildings, and openings were constructed in the ﬂ at 
roofs that catch the breezes and carry them into the house, like a natural form of 
air-conditioning. These are called  barajil . At one time, huts were built of palm fronds 
called  barasti . 
 The Eastern Province is Saudi Aramco’s base, and the originally American com-
pany has strongly inﬂ uenced the built environment. The housing of Arab workers 
was far inferior to that for the American and Western workers, but the company 
sponsored land for its workers, giving rise to several waves of building. The eastern 
cities still provide services for traveling businessmen related to the petroleum in-
dustry and to their own. Today, the city of Khobar has at least 22 hotels, including 
high-rises, and many housing complexes. The city of Dammam has a popular Cor-
niche along the sea featuring large-scale art installations and many clubs for sports 
and recreation on the way to Khobar. Half Moon Bay is a popular beach area to the 
south of Dammam with two amusement parks. 
 The construction boom in Saudi Arabia has provided many opportunities for 
those in engineering and architecture, as well investments in real estate. The changes 
in the built environment, whether in the cities or in the rural areas, are widespread. 
One may hope for preservation of and interest in the traditional architecture and that 
designs of the future will continue to reﬂ ect a sense of Saudi Arabia’s unique culture. 
 REFERENCES 
 Altorki, Soraya.  Women in Saudi Arabia: Ideology and Behavior among the Elite . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 Arab Urban Development Institute.  Riyadh: City of the Future . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: al-
Ma‘ahad al-‘arabi li-inma al-mudun, 1984. 
 Ba-Ubaid, Ali Yeslam. “Environment, Ethics, and Design: An Inquiry into the Ethical Un-
derpinnings for a Contemporary Muslim Environmentalism and Its Environmental Design 
Implications.” PhD diss., University of Pennsylvania, 1999. 
 Bogary, Hamza.  The Sheltered Quarter: A Tale of a Boyhood in Mecca . Translated by Olive 
Kenney and Jeremy Reed. Austin: Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of Texas, 
1991. 
 Doughty, Charles M.  Travels in Arabia Deserta. Abridged by Edward Garnett. Gloucester, 
MA: Peter Smith, 1968. (Abridgement ﬁ rst published in 1931. Doughty originally wrote 
 Travels in 1879, and it was published in 1888.) 
 al-Doussari, Mohammed Hasan.  Evolution of the Urban System in the Eastern Province of 
Saudi Arabia 1900–1970 . Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia: King Faisal University, 1999. 
 Ettinghausen, Richard. “The Man-Made Setting.” In  Islam and the Arab World , edited by 
Bernard Lewis. London: Thames and Hudson, 1976, 57–72. 
 Facey, William. “Al-’Udhaibat: Building on the Past.”  Aramco World  50, no. 3 (July/August 
1999), 32–46. 
 Facey, William.  Back to Earth: Adobe Building in Saudi Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Al 
Turath and St. Martin’s, 1997. 

| 353
 Facey, William.  The Story of the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey Interna-
tional, 1994. 
 Facey, William.  Riyadh: The Old City from Its Origins until the 1950s . London: Immel, 1992. 
 Grabar, Oleg. “Art and Architecture.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renais-
sance , edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 107–130. 
 al-Harbi, Abdullah. “The Impact of New Towns in Saudi Arabia: A Case Study of Yanbu.” 
PhD diss., University of Lancaster, 1991. 
 al-Hathloul, Saleh Ali, and Narayanan Edadan.  Urban Development in Saudi Arabia . Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Sahan, 1995. 
 Hattstein, Markus, and Peter Delius.  Islam kunst en architectuur . Amsterdam: Könemann, 
2006. 
 High Commission for the Development of Arriyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Al-Riyadh: 
Abq al- ‘ Asala wa Rawnaq al-Hadith [Riyadh: The Redolence of the Original (City) and the 
Beauty of the Modern]. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: High Commission for the Development of 
al-Riyadh, 1424h. (2003). 
 Hillenbrand, Robert. “Traditional Architecture of the Arabian Peninsula.”  Bulletin of the 
British Society of Middle Eastern Studies 16, no. 2 (1989), 186–192. 
 Ismail, Muhammad Kamal, and Committee Members.  The Architecture of the Holy Mosque, 
Makkah. London: Hazar, 1998. 
 Al-Jeraisy, Khaled Abd al-Rahman.  Raghbah . Raghbah and Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Khaled 
al-Jeraisy, 1420h. (1999/2000). 
 Kay, Shirley, and Darius Zandi.  Architectural Heritage of the Gulf . Dubai, United Arab Emir-
ates: Motivate, 1991. 
 King, Geoff rey.  The Traditional Architecture of Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 1998. 
 King, Geoff rey.  The Historical Mosques of Saudi Arabia . New York: Longman, 1986. 
 King, Geoff rey. “Some Notes on Mosques in Eastern and Western Saudi Arabia.”  Bulletin of 
the School of Oriental and African Studies 42, no. 2 (1980), 251–276. 
 King, Geoff rey. “Traditional Najdi Mosques.”  Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 41, no. 3 (1978), 464–498. 
 Kuran, Aftullah. “Mosque Architecture.” In  Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World , ed-
ited by John Esposito. New York: Oxford University, 1995, 135–140. 
 Mauger, Thierry.  Impressions of Arabia, Architecture and Frescoes of the Asir Region . Paris: 
Flammarion-Pere Casto, 1996. 
 Ministry of Information and Deputy Ministry of Tourism, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. In-
formation posted in Diriyyah, the Al-Sa‘ud’s original capital. Some is circa 2001; other 
displays are older. Sighted and recorded, 2005. 
 Ministry of Education, Deputy Ministry of Antiquities and Museums, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.  al-Musmak Museum Guide . Riyadh: Deputy Ministry of Antiquities and Muse-
ums, Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 1419h. (1999). 
 Ministry of Information and Deputy Ministry of Tourism, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Hamam 
al-Turayf wa qasr al-dhiyafah . Riyadh, 1419–1420h. 
 Mogassabi, Khalil S. “Modernity and Tradition in the Design of New Towns: Sadat City, 
Egypt and Yanbu, Saudi Arabia.” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
1990. 
References

 Chapter 6 Culture
354 |
 Nawwab, Ni’mah Ismail. “The Suqs of Asir.”  Saudi Aramco World 49, no. 4 (1998), 2–9. 
 Nomachi, Ali Kazuyoshi, and Sayed Hossein Nasr.  Mecca, the Blessed, Medina, the Radiant: 
The Holiest Cities of Islam . New York: Aperture, 1997. 
 Pampanini, Andrea H.  Cities from the Arabian Desert: The Building of Jubail and Yanbu in 
Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997. 
 Pesce, Angelo.  Jiddah—Portrait of an Arabian City . Cambridge, UK: Falcon, 1976. 
 Pesce, Angelo, and Khalid Khidr.  Taif: The Summer Capital of Saudi Arabia . Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia: Immel, 1984. 
 Peters, Francis E.  The Hajj: The Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy Places . Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996. 
 Peters, Francis E.  Mecca: A Literary History of the Muslim Holy Land . Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University, Press, 1994. 
 Pierpaoli, Paul G., and Sherifa Zuhur. “Medina.” In  Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Wars , 
edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2008, 673. 
 al-Qarney, Mohsin ibn Farhan.  al-Qura al-taqlidiyya bi al-mantaqah al-janubiyah (Traditional 
Villages in the Southern Region).  King Saud University, 1414h. 
 al-Shayeb, Abdullah A.  Al-Jubail: Saudi Village (Architectural Survey) . Doha, Qatar: Arab 
Gulf States Folklore Center, 1985. 
 Tarabulsi, Mohammed Yusuf (given Yusof ).  Jeddah: A Story of a City . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: 
King Fahd National Library, 2006. 
 Uluengin, Bülent, and Nihal Uluengin. “Homes of Old Makkah.”  Aramco World 44, no. 4 
(July/August 1993), 20–29. 
 Wheeler, Brannon.  Mecca and Eden: Ritual, Relics and Territory in Islam . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2006. 
 Wolfe, Michael.  One Thousand Roads to Mecca: Ten Centuries of Travelers Writing about the 
Muslim Pilgrimage . New York: Grove, 1997. 
 

355
 CHAPTER 7 
 Contemporary Issues 
 Many contemporary issues concern Saudi Arabia’s ability to provide security and 
justice to a wider constituency (including women) while adapting to globalization. 
Contemporary issues are hotly debated within Saudi Arabia and are not extricable 
from the political interests of its ally, the United States, and the forces that nation 
confronts in the Middle East. At the same time, Saudi Arabia’s national interests 
and concerns are quite distinct from those of the United States, which, in regard to 
Saudi Arabia, chieﬂ y reﬂ ect concerns about the petroleum supply and securing stable 
political conditions to protect that vital interest. 
 DEFENSE 
 Saudi Arabia’s defense sector is made up of the Royal Saudi Air Defense, Royal 
Saudi Navy, Royal Saudi Land Forces (RSLF), the Saudi Arabian National Guard 
(SANG), the Saudi Royal Guard, and the Emergency Forces, totaling 250,000 (some 
other sources give higher estimates of 260,000 and lower ones). That number could 
be slightly inﬂ ated and includes reserve and militia forces. The Ministry of Defense 
and Aviation (MODA), which is also responsible for all meteorological operations 
and civilian airports, commands these services, although SANG has been separate. 
For decades, it had been under the authority of King ‘Abdullah, until November 
2010. At that time, he stepped down and assigned the leadership of the SANG to his 
son Prince Mitab. The minister of defense and aviation is Crown Prince Sultan ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz, although it has been rumored that he might eventually stand down for 
health reasons. The vice minister is his brother Prince ‘Abdulrahman. Sultan’s eldest 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
356 |
son, Khalid ibn Sultan, is assistant minister of defense for military aff airs. Other al-
Sa‘ud princes are represented within the armed forces as well. 
 U.S. military advisory and training missions established a program in 1952 that 
was intended to create an army of three to ﬁ ve regiments over three years, but that 
goal was not achieved even after 10 years. Among the reasons were the shifts in Saudi 
Arabian foreign policy, which oriented the country ﬁ rst away from cooperation with 
the United States and then back again (as described in Chapter 2, History). Saudi 
Arabia gave special attention to building up its air forces because of the country’s lack 
of road infrastructure and great distances. With regard to aircraft, up to 1958, Saudi 
Arabia received 9 Douglas B-26 Invader bombers, 10 Lockheed T-33A trainers plus 
some Beech A-45s, 6 C-123 Provider transports, and 12 F-86 Sabre ﬁ ghter aircraft. 
 The Royal Saudi Land Forces, or Army, commanded 100,000 troops as of 2003 
(Cordesman 2003a) and is now estimated at 150,000 troops (Center for Strategic 
and International Studies 2005); in contrast, Willbanks (2008, 894; 2010, 1075) gives 
a ﬁ gure of 75,000. (For comparative purposes, Iran’s Army was then estimated at 
350,000, its Revolutionary Guard at 125,000, its Navy at 38,000, its Air Defense at 
15,000, and its Air Force at 52,000, for a total force of 580,000. Iraq’s Army was 
in the process of expanding to 375,000 troops, not all operational at the time these 
statistics were drawn up by  Military Balance .) The Saudi Arabian Army has 4 ar-
mored brigades, 17 mechanized infantry brigades, 3 light motorized riﬂ e brigades, 
1 airborne brigade, and 5 independent artillery brigades and an aviation command. 
The main point of interest is that the Army has equipment for a force perhaps one 
and a half times its actual size. 
Members of the Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG) in 1980. (AP/Wide World Photos)

Defense | 357
 It possesses 1,055 main battle tanks (315 M-1A2s, 450 M-60A-3s, and 290 AMX-
30s)—about half of these have been in storage—and 300 tank transporters. Informa-
tion from 2007–2008 showed there were 1,000 tanks, 3,000 other armored vehicles, 
and 500 important artillery pieces, according to (Willbanks 2008; 2010, 1075). Not 
all the tanks were operational when reviewed due to conversion issues. Saudi Ara-
bia has about 2,600 other armored vehicles; enough of these are of American make 
as to aff ord multioperationality. The RSLF is complemented by the SANG; and 
during the Gulf War, forces of 500,000 were stationed in Saudi Arabia. In much 
recent literature on the military, the underlying presumption is one of coalition readi-
ness and that U.S. forces would presumably be involved in a defense of Saudi Ara-
bia. This presumption underlies Cordesman’s main critique of the Saudi Arabian 
armed forces: that they possess more equipment than they can reasonably deploy 
on their own. Their overarmament for their troops makes sense so long as the Saudi 
 Arabian–American alliance is strong, but it has engendered strong critiques from 
the Islamist strand of opposition in the country from the Gulf War on. This obvious 
dependence on Western military support sparked Osama Bin Laden to argue that his 
forces should protect the land of the Two Holy Places (Saudi Arabia) rather than the 
foreign alliance that promotes political stances alien to Saudi Arabia’s best interests. 
 SANG is a regular, professional force of more than 125,000 troops. The SANG 
is a mechanized infantry and a light infantry known for its mobility and rapid ﬁ re-
power, providing a balance to the more heavily armed RSLF. One segment, an 
 THE SAUDI ARABIAN NATIONAL GUARD (SANG) 
 The Saudi Arabia National Guard (SANG) is a regular, professional force of 
an estimated 125,000 troops. Unlike the National Guard in the United States, 
which has been considered a paramilitary ancillary force (until the manpower 
needs of the engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan), the SANG was sometimes 
said by foreign analysts to be even more effective, and possibly more loyal, 
to the al-Sa‘ud than the regular army. One segment, an estimated 25,000 
troops, is a militia. SANG is, however, like the U.S. National Guard in that it 
meets internal challenges to security, including counterterrorist campaigns, and 
it also proved itself in the Gulf War. The Ikhwan of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz formed 
the basis of SANG, and its tribal structure and loyalties have been important. 
King ‘Abdullah served as the commander of SANG from 1962 to 2010. Until 
2005 (when he became king) he was also the crown prince. He reported di-
rectly to the king, rather than through the Ministry of Defense and Aviation. In 
2010 King ‘Abdullah handed over command of SANG to his son Prince Mitab 
ibn ‘Abdullah ( Saudi News Agency and  Washington Post , November 17, 
2010). National Guard military schools, regional training centers, the SANG 
Signal School, the Allied Health Science Military School, and the King Khalid 
Military College provide education and training functions for SANG. SANG 
was modernized and then expanded following the Gulf War and is now again 
undergoing modernization. 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
358 |
estimated 25,000 troops (in 2008) is a militia. As the Ikhwan of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
formed the basis of SANG, the large numbers of tribal members with special loyal-
ties to the al-Sa‘ud have been important. King ‘Abdullah  served as the commander 
of SANG from 1962 to 2010 and reported directly to the king, rather than taking his 
direction through the MODA. His handoff  of the SANG to his son is thought to be 
foresight. It was necessary in light of his increased responsibilities as king and due 
to his back problems in 2010. SANG’s headquarters are in Riyadh, and it has two 
regional command centers, at Dammam and Jeddah. 
 The Saudi Royal Air Force has 11 wings stationed in diff erent parts of the country, 
and one estimate is of 20,000 men organized into six wings (Willbanks 2010, 1076). 
Its most important aircraft are probably the Panavia Tornados and Boeing F-15 
Eagles, and it should be receiving 72 Euroﬁ ghter Typhoons under an agreement with 
BAE (British Aerospace Systems). The Air Force performed well in the Gulf War, 
ﬂ ying 6,582 sorties between January 17 and February 28, 1991 (Willbanks 2010, 
1076). About 50,000 Saudi Arabian ground forces fought along with other Arab and 
national forces under Prince Khalid ibn Sultan’s command during the Gulf War. 
 That war was a major cause of the next phase of expansion and modernization of 
the defense forces. With the end of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, Saudi Arabia considers 
Iran with its large armed forces a potential threat (and other than Iran, the Israeli 
Defense Forces would be the main strategic threat to Saudi Arabia). The revelation 
of U.S. diplomatic documents in November 2010 by Wikileaks showed that at least 
two strands of opinion existed, with the king and the ambassador to the United States 
arguing that the United States should strike Iran and the Saudi Foreign Ministry 
tending to call for caution and restraint with respect to Iran. 
Royal Saudi Air Force troops pose in front of a Mirage F1 during Operation Desert Shield 
in 1990. (Department of Defense)

Defense | 359
 The Israeli Defense Forces are the most skilled and largest threat in the region and 
possess nuclear weapons. As well, if the new Iraqi government were ever to become 
hostile to Saudi Arabia, its newly constituted armed forces would far outnumber the 
Saudi Arabian services. However, Iran’s forces are larger than either Iraq’s or Saudi 
Arabia’s. 
 The Saudi Navy consists of 15,500 men with 3,000 Marines. There is also a 7,500-
man Coast Guard based at Azizam, whose primary function is to deter smuggling. 
The Navy’s Gulf-based force at King ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Naval Base in Jubayl has the 
capacity to ﬁ ght wars, but its Red Sea force does not, according to military sources. 
However, the Navy had not been part of joint war-ﬁ ghting operations. Its equip-
ment includes three al-Riyadh-class (modiﬁ ed La Fayette–class, F3000S) frigates 
armed with eight MBDA Exocet 40 Block II surface-to-surface missiles, launch 
systems for the Eurosam Aster 15 surface-to-air missiles, four torpedo tubes for 
the DNS 517 (heavyweight antisubmarine torpedo), and a single helicopter landing 
spot. It has four al-Madina-class (F-2000) frigates based on the Red Sea, armed with 
one 8-cell surface-to-air missile (SAM) and torpedo tubes. It also has four Badr-
class missile corvettes (in the Gulf), nine al-Siddiq-class guided-missile craft, three 
Dammam-class (German Jaguar) torpedo boats, other fast craft and patrol craft, 
and three Sandown-class minehunter ships. The U.S. assessment of Saudi Arabian 
naval capacity mostly concerns scenarios of Iranian Navy attacks or other defense 
of oil facilities. 
 The King Khalid Military City was designed by the United States and ﬁ nanced 
by Saudi Arabia; it was the largest project ever undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers. The base hosted U.S. and Coalition troops during Operation Des-
ert Storm and Operation Desert Shield. Construction of this military base approxi-
mately two hours from the Kuwaiti border began in 1974. It can accommodate an 
army division of three brigades, approximately 65,000 persons, and includes some 
3,398 family housing units. The city has its own airﬁ eld, which by itself cost some 
$700 million, and ﬁ ve mosques. The U.S. Military Training Mission was stationed at 
the King Khalid Military City from the late 1980s until 2005, when the mission was 
reduced. There are now fewer than 50 U.S. personnel there. The base was crucial to 
the war eff ort against Iraq; it was ﬁ red on by Iraqi scud missiles, but it was protected 
by Patriot missiles that surround the base. After 1995, most American equipment 
was moved from the base, and additional living quarters and a presidential complex 
were added (Pierpaoli in Tucker, ed., 2010; Bronson 2008). 
 In general, most critique of the defense services concerns their need for joint-
ness (joint training with other services and other militaries) and peacetime. SANG, 
once the Ikhwan or White Army, was trained for many years by the Vinelli Corpo-
ration, and hence the attack on it, mentioned later, calls into question the continu-
ing practice of Western ﬁ rms hiring and training defense personnel. That practice, 
which is also the case in Iraq and Afghanistan, has become routinized, even as 
the United States withdrew most of its personnel from Saudi Arabia and has op-
erated from Kuwait, Doha, Qatar, and Bahrain, where the U.S. Fifth Fleet has 
been stationed. 
 According to some other expert analyses of Saudi Arabia’s strategic readiness, it 
may not possess suffi  cient defenses against attacks by air—its CSS-2 missiles are a 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
360 |
deterrent of sort but not a suffi  cient one against Iranian CBRNs. The United States is 
scheduled to commit to a major arms sale to Saudi Arabia under the philosophy that, 
given Iranian movement toward (what they believe is probable) off ensive nuclear 
capability, bolstering Saudi Arabia’s conventional weapons makes more sense than 
denying it those weapons and thereby encouraging nuclear proliferation in the re-
gion. The sale, yet to be approved at the time of writing by the U.S. Congress, would 
include 84 Boeing F-15 ﬁ ghter jets and 72 UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters, as well as 
refurbishing of 70 Saudi Arabian F-15s ( Bloomberg , October 24, 2010). 
 The Gulf War of 1991 was a turning point for Saudi Arabia’s defense sector and 
foreign policy, and it sparked opposition to the country’s alliance with Western forces 
(see Chapter 2, History). The RSLF, Air Force, and SANG all performed well, but it 
was fairly clear to observers that the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) forces could 
not have overcome the Iraqis, even if they fought together in a well-coordinated 
manner. How could they combat the much larger Iranian or the current Iraqi forces 
(should that nation oppose them for some reason)? Perhaps it is unnecessary to ask 
what might happen if they were drawn into conﬂ ict with Israeli forces, which are 
believed to be the strongest, if not the largest, in the region. 
 Continued alliances with Western militaries are likely for the foreseeable future. 
To foster this and advance the higher-level training and strategic understanding of 
the armed forces, the War College has been established, and a strategic studies insti-
tute is to be established within it along the lines of the specialized Strategic Studies 
Institute of the U.S. Army. Strategic studies has already been developed as a program 
within the Institute of Diplomatic Studies. Unfortunately, no women are involved 
in any of this, although they might well play an important role in the brainpower of 
the military. Some women are employed by the SANG and utilized at women-only 
events as guards. 
 The questions about Iran’s nuclear capabilities, given the discovery of nuclear sites 
in that country, opened parallel queries about Saudi Arabia’s air defenses, possible 
development of nuclear forces, and, most certainly, nuclear energy capabilities. In 
2010, U.S. embassy cable correspondence was leaked to the world press; it showed 
that Saudi Arabia was unwilling to reopen its embassy in Iraq in 2008 but supported 
U.S. views that Iran was increasing its power in that country. The Saudi Arabian 
ambassador to the United States indicated in a meeting between Saudi Arabian and 
American offi  cials, including General David Petraeus, that King ‘Abdullah had 
urged the bombing of Iran to “cut off  the head of the snake” (Cable U.S. Embassy 
in Riyadh, April 20, 2008). Further notes by the deputy chief of mission (DCM) at 
the cable U.S. embassy in Riyadh, Michael Gfoeller, who had then been in Riyadh 
for somewhat more than three years and had previously been posted in Iraq, alluded 
to frequent bellicose statements by certain royals. These were contrasted to Saudi 
Arabian Foreign Ministry representatives, who urged prudence, caution, and use of 
other means to discourage Iranian ambitions, just a few months after the “cut off  the 
snake’s head” incident (U.S. Embassy in Riyadh, July 22, 2008). A variety of Saudi 
Arabian views on the threat represented by Iran were obvious in the summer of 2008 
(Zuhur 2008  ), but it is interesting that the more hawkish views were expressed by 
leadership in private high-level meetings. 

Islamist Opposition and Terrorism | 361
 Other matters that appeared in the leaked documents were Israeli offi  cials’ oppo-
sition to Saudi Arabia’s receipt of F-15 aircraft and their own intentions regarding 
Iran (U.S. Embassy, Tel Aviv, November 18, 2009); however, Israeli opposition to 
Saudi Arabian military upgrading was no secret. More surprising were revelations 
that the United States and Yemen’s foreign minister agreed to go on falsifying 
the American role in bombings in that country, where Saudi Arabia has also been 
involved in attacking the Houthi rebellion and, more recently, al-Qa’ida. Yemen 
was wracked by attacks by a separatist movement and six months of huge popular 
demonstrations against President Saleh  , who, wounded, left the country in early 
June 2011. Saudi Arabia’s military activity in Yemen will depend on its political 
restabilization. Since the fall of Saddam Hussein’s government in Iraq, the greatest 
security threat in Saudi Arabia has been internal opposition—violent attacks by 
salaﬁ st militants. Although various sources claimed that this terrorist threat had 
been dealt with by 2006, the media continue to report attempted plots and incidents, 
including one as recently as late November 2010, when 149 were arrested, includ-
ing 124 Saudi Arabian nationals alleged to be members of al-Qa’ida ( CNN.com , 
November 26, 2010). Most of the focus on al-Qa’ida has moved to Yemen, where 
the organization was able to take over in Zinjibar, although the Yemeni forces 
continued to ﬁ ght them. However, the organization is still believed to be active in 
Saudi Arabia as well. In addition, other groups who are part of the sahwa (islamic 
Awakening) are possibly a larger entity that might oppose very liberal reforms. 
Since the Arab Spring of 2011, the Saudi Arabian government has been concerned 
about opposition to its tenure from sources other than Islamic radicals as well, fac-
ing protests in the Eastern province. 
 ISLAMIST OPPOSITION AND TERRORISM 
 Saudi Arabian security and intelligence services have been confronting a violent op-
position movement since 2003 and operating since about 2001. Many Western and 
some Middle Eastern sources treat this threat as al-Qa’ida’s “third front” (Riedel and 
Saab 2008), but the operations of various cells appear to be independent of direction 
from al-Qa’ida in Pakistan and Afghanistan.. Its origins are a mixture of external 
and internal inﬂ uences, including the following: 
 •  The indirect eff ect of policies established in the wake of the 1979 takeover of 
the Grand Mosque in Mecca by Juhayman al-‘Utaybi and his brother-in-law 
Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah al-Qahtani (Zuhur 2005b  , 21–22; Troﬁ mov 2007). 
 •  Causes and stances raised by the internal  sahwa (Islamic Awakening)  move-
ment, which emerged in 1992. 
 •  Saudi Arabians who went to ﬁ ght in Afghanistan, Bosnia, or Chechnya on 
behalf of Muslims and were trained by or had contact with Osama Bin Laden 
or the charity and movement of ‘Abdullah ‘Azzam, and the impact their experi-
ence had on their personal networks (Hegghammer 2010, 38–43, 45). 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
362 |
 •  Saudi Arabians who fought or were active in Iraq in militant Islamist groups 
ﬁ ghting the Coalition forces, the new Iraqi army, and Shi‘a organizations and 
civilians, although many of these were detained upon reentry into Saudi Arabia 
(Zuhur 2010b). 
 •  Saudi Arabians and others who had no external militant training but were re-
cruited within Saudi Arabia to engage in actions against Westerners, oil facili-
ties, or the government. 
 •  The deaths of senior conservative ‘ ulama  and imprisonment of the  Sahwa 
preachers, leaving the ideological ﬁ eld open to the inﬂ uence of the militant al-
Shu‘aybi network. 
 •  Jihadists’ revenge and despair over the brutality toward, torture, and murder of 
prisoners prior to 1999 (Hegghammer 2010, 76–77) and hardnosed police tactics 
in 2002 (by which time it was too late to eradicate the movement). 
 The ‘Utaybi uprising of 1979 with its millenarian claims and direct challenge to the 
Grand Mosque in Mecca and the royal family (see Chapter 2, History) was quite 
diff erent from the contemporary opposition movement. However, the government’s 
response to that incident, in attempting to preempt conservative and Islamic ob-
jections, increasing funding for religious endeavors, and heightening support for 
threatened Muslims overseas (1979 was also the year of the Soviet invasion of Af-
ghanistan), was signiﬁ cant. Some observers trace the enlarging ultraconservative 
population to this period and its policies (Yamani 2001, 2005). 
 Given the impact of 9/11 on scrutiny of Saudi Arabia’s “Islamic” foreign policy 
and its links to the transnationalism of Islamic radicalism, extricating sound analysis 
from a muddle of prejudice is very diffi  cult. In Chapter 3, Government and Politics, 
we summarized the evolution of Saudi Arabia’s Islamic policies as a counterweight 
to the radical Arab nationalism operative in King Faysal’s era. Islamized foreign 
policies have also been pursued at times by Pakistan, Malaysia, and Indonesia—and 
these need not automatically lead to global terrorism. 
 Events in the 1990s were also important. During the Gulf War, the  Sahwa (Islamic 
awakening) preachers arose in Saudi Arabia. Safar al-Hawali and Salman al-‘Awda 
argued strongly against the United States’ penetration of Saudi Arabia and the re-
gime’s alliance with the United States, American support for Israel, and corruption 
and socioeconomic ills within Saudi Arabia (Hawali 1991; Fandy 1999, 61–133; In-
ternational Crisis Group, September 21, 2004; Zuhur 2005b, 25–26). Audiocassettes 
of their sermons circulated through the country, as did those of preachers refuting 
or agreeing with them. Two groups called for reforms and publicly presented their 
demands to the Saudi Arabian government. One was mainly composed of progres-
sive reformers calling for the consultative council (which was eventually created), 
women’s rights, educational reform, and judicial independence; the second group 
in 1992 called for ending relations with Western powers, cessation of corruption, 
and a return to  shari‘ah . The second group was condemned; the  sahwa  clerics were 
imprisoned, and some members of the Islamic opposition ﬂ ed the country (Zuhur 
2005b, 26–27). 

Islamist Opposition and Terrorism | 363
 The  mujahidin movement in Afghanistan attracted young Muslims from through-
out the world, including Osama Bin Laden. The anti-Soviet movement was sup-
ported by various Muslim governments and aid societies. It was here that Bin Laden 
and his colleagues developed ideas about jihad, the need to resist anti-Muslim forces. 
And yet it was the Gulf War that proved a catalyst for Bin Laden’s opposition to 
King Fahd’s leadership in Saudi Arabia. 
 When the Saudi Arabians who participated in jihad in Afghanistan returned in 
1992, they were interested in the  Sahwa preachers’ complaints and the salaﬁ st opposi-
tion, some of whom were being detained in prison. On November 11, 1994, Abdullah 
Hudayf threw sulfuric acid at the face of a Riyadh policeman. His father, brother, 
and friends were being held by the police; Hudayf believed they were being tortured. 
Hudayf was part of a network of extreme radicals who knew and admired the  Sahwa 
preachers but were not closely connected to them. Hudayf was detained and appar-
ently executed on August 11, 1995. The November 13, 1995, bombing attack outside 
the Vinelli Corporation (see the Timeline in Chapter 2) was carried out in response 
by three Afghan veterans and a fourth who was a friend of the Jordanian preacher 
Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi (Hegghammer 2010, 71–72), Following this bombing, 
the Saudi Arabian government proceeded to arrest and interrogate large numbers 
of former jihadists who had gone to Afghanistan and Bosnia. After the 2006 Kho-
bar bombing, unrelated to the preceding group, several more waves of arrests took 
place, along with torture and accusations by prison offi  cials that the militants were 
“ takﬁ r ists”—that they denied the Muslim nature of their own rulers. These brutal 
tactics led to revenge operations (Hegghammer 2010, 75–76). In 1999, prison reforms 
took place, but the internal opposition movement grew. 
 Bin Laden’s statements and actions garnered some sympathy in Saudi Arabia, 
particularly from the growing numbers of neosalaﬁ sts. His reproaches to the Saudi 
Arabian government in 1995 mostly concerned the alliance with the West. He said, 
“Your kingdom is nothing but an American protectorate, and you are under Wash-
ington’s heel” (Jacquard, ed., 2002, 174). He, stripped of his citizenship, had relo-
cated to the Sudan and then again to Afghanistan. In 1994, Bin Laden was deeply 
disturbed by the arrests of Shaykh Salman al-Awdah and Shaykh Safar al-Hawali. 
He is reported to have said that he would not have raised his voice but for their arrests 
and silencing by the government (Bergen 2006, 149). His mother and other family 
members made numerous visits to Khartoum to request his return to Saudi Arabia 
to apologize to King Fahd, which he refused to do (Bergen 2006, 151–152), and the 
Saudi Arabian authorities again sent the same request to Kandahar (Bergen 2006, 
239). By 1996, Bin Laden had started a network in Saudi Arabia, but it encountered 
many diffi  culties due to its visibility to authorities and the ongoing investigations 
of the Khobar bombings in that year, which had been carried out by a separate 
group, Hizbullah. Some evidence suggests that Bin Laden imposed a moratorium 
on al-Qa’ida attacks in Saudi Arabia after an abortive eff ort in 1998. Saudi Arabian 
recruits continued moving to Afghanistan up to 2001. ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri 
(a pseudonym used by ‘Abdul-Rahim Husayn Muhammad ‘Abdu, also known as 
Abu Bilal) was recruited in 1997 and organized the USS  Cole  attack and other op-
erations until 2002, when he was captured. He was water-boarded at Guantanamo, 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
364 |
subjected to a false execution, and forced to make various confessions, including that 
Bin Laden had a nuclear bomb. Al-Nashiri, however, did not organize the movement 
that was to erupt in Saudi Arabia. 
 During the late 1990s and early 2000s, the opposition movement (not in direct 
contact with Bin Laden) was galvanized by the Chechnya conﬂ ict, the Western an-
tipathy to the Taliban, and the second Palestinian (al-Aqsa)  intifadhah . Many unex-
plained bombings and attacks on Westerners occurred in these years, and bombings 
attributed to alcohol traders were all probably activities of the militant opposition 
(Hegghammer 2010, 81–83). Also, ﬁ ve ‘ ulama of varying statures became more vis-
ible, issued increasing numbers of  fatawa , and supported extreme positions (Hamid 
ibn Uqla al-Shu‘aybi, Nasir al-Fahd al-Humayyin, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Jarbu, ‘Ali al-
Khudayr, and Sulayman al-Ulwan). 
 In late 2002, Saudi Arabian police arrested about 100 people with alleged links to 
terrorism. The ﬁ rst gunﬁ ghts broke out with police. The United States was pressing 
for action, and the security forces had discovered plots against the Prince Sultan Air-
base and Ra’s Tanura  in the spring of 2002. The ‘Uyayri network of al-Qa’ida in the 
Arabian Peninsula was by then avidly organizing, but the police arrested about 400 
other people with terrorism links and certain religious scholars. The Saudi Arabian 
police realized that there was a threat of suicide operations in the kingdom by May 
6, 2003, when they discovered explosives and the testimonies of “martyrs”; however, 
Saudi Arabian police and seized weapons and ammunition captured at al-Rass on April 6, 
2005 where a shoot-out between security forces and suspected militant extremists killed 14 
of the extremists. (AP/Wide World Photos)

Islamist Opposition and Terrorism | 365
they lacked the security intelligence necessary to prevent the May 12 attacks by sui-
cide bombers, who successfully launched three bombs (Zuhur 2005b). Al-Nashiri 
had been operating independently of Yusuf al-‘Uyayri, known only as the Sabre 
( battar ), and his recruits, who were mainly responsible for the growth of al-Qa’ida on 
the Arabian Peninsula (Hegghammer 2010, 171). ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Muqrin was a key 
recruiter, primarily from former Saudi Afghan ﬁ ghters. The militants tried, through 
extensive Internet postings and publications, to make the organization look larger 
than it was. Numerous attacks against Westerners shook the expatriate community’s 
conﬁ dence, and quite a number left Saudi Arabia after many years there. Perhaps 
most shocking to this community was the beheading of Paul Marshall Johnson Jr., 
an American helicopter engineer who worked for Lockheed Martin. He was kid-
napped at a fake checkpoint on June 12, 2004, and beheaded several days later by 
an al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah cell. 
 Two networks in Riyadh and one in the Hijaz continued to mount attacks, but 
nearly all of the original leaders were killed off  by 2006, when an attack on the Abqaiq 
oil facility failed. Probably, most signiﬁ cantly, Donald Rumsfeld, the U.S. defense 
secretary, announced that all U.S. forces would be exiting from Saudi Arabia except 
a small number attached to the U.S. Military Training Mission. Many Americans 
took this as a sign that Saudi Arabia was hostile to the United States or too unsafe 
to host its military personnel; this U.S. withdrawal met one of the terrorists’ aims—
decreasing Western presence but without increasing their inﬂ uence. That was not 
the end of terrorist eff orts, however. The Saudi Arabian government responded to 
the 9/11 Commission’s report and took hundreds of legal, regulatory, and security 
actions to address to international and local terrorism, including establishing a Fi-
nancial Intelligence Unit to combat the transfer of funds to terrorists (Cordesman 
2003b). Terrorist actions and gun battles with security forces continued from 2003 
until 2007 with frequency. Thereafter, many attempted incidents were not widely re-
ported in the international media, but eff orts to destabilize the regime continued. The 
government detained thousands of individuals in Saudi Arabia and tried 330 persons 
for terrorist crimes in 2009. About 991 suspected militants were charged for partici-
pation in terrorist attacks between 2004 and 2009, and more have been charged since. 
 A successful attack killed four French tourists at the Mada’in al-Saleh  archaeolog-
ical site on February 27, 2007. This attack was carried out by a cell based in Medina, 
whose members were then hunted down (Hegghammer 2010, 216). Security services 
foiled an attack involving seven cells at the end of April 2007, and some 172 persons 
were arrested (Associated Press, April 28, 2007). Then, a plot meant to take place 
during the  hajj was interrupted at the end of 2007. Almost every year there were an-
nouncements that a plot had targeted the  hajj , so it is diffi  cult to know if this was a 
fact or part of the antiterrorism strategic communication campaign. More detentions 
and arrests took place in 2008 (Zuhur 2009b). Several key al-Qa’ida in the Arabian 
Peninsula operatives escaped, and a new coalition between the Saudi Arabian based 
al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah and two Yemeni jihadist organizations was an-
nounced in 2009—again under the name of al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah. On 
August 27, 2009, a suicide bomber and intended assassin, ‘Abdullah Hassan al-Asiri, 
went to meet the deputy minister of the interior on the pretext of seeking amnesty. 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
366 |
He detonated his bomb, killing himself but only wounding Prince Muhammad, the 
deputy minister. Two terrorists and one policeman were killed and one terrorist was 
arrested in an incident at a checkpoint in Jazan on October 13, 2009. Saudi Arabia 
mounted aerial attacks on Yemen in early 2010, actually aimed at the Houthi rebel-
lion, but these were justiﬁ ed as attacks on the al-Qa’ida operatives now active in 
Yemen. In October 2010 a warning was issued to Americans in Qasim  , although this 
would most likely have involved a cell of militants unconnected to the al-Qa’ida in 
the Arabian Peninsula cells in Yemen.. 
 The Saudi Arabian government has taken very seriously the issue of a broader 
militant salaﬁ st recruiting base utilizing particular religious ideas. It mounted a pro-
paganda campaign against the movement in the press, depicting it as revolutionary 
and violent and showing its Muslim victims on billboards and in news photographs. 
The government also began the Sakinah campaign, an eff ort to counter the move-
ment and its inﬂ uence on the Internet, by monitoring transmissions and also arguing 
with the ideas of Ayman al-Zawahiri and other theorists of al-Qa’ida. Third, eff orts 
were made to get prisoners who were guilty only of association with militant elements 
to recant. Saudi Arabian government offi  cials acknowledged that political disaff ec-
tion with U.S. policy in the region was a factor in recruitment of would-be jihad 
ﬁ ghters. Nonetheless, the government’s response and prison-based deradicalization 
program primarily address the religious justiﬁ cations for violence or extremism. It 
has been using leaders formerly involved in violent opposition to appeal to possible 
recruits and to teach them moderation ( wasatiyya ) and encourage them relinquish 
extreme views as part of what is called a “reeducation” (counseling) process (Boucek 
2009; Zuhur 2009a, 2010a ). Those detainees who had not engaged in proven acts of 
violence, as well as others, were eligible to volunteer for this Counseling program 
established in 2004 (those who had engaged in violence could enroll, according to my 
sources, but would not be released). Also, group of about 10 to 15 percent of these 
prisoners refused to participate or listen to the authorities leading the rehabilitation 
eff orts (Zuhur 2010a). 
 A large group of religious specialists, psychiatrists, and counselors devised the 
program. It consisted of a review of each individual enrollee and then what could be 
called a deradicalization course of study. Diff erent subjects were addressed, such as 
the improper rationale for jihad, that is, following an illicit Muslim authority instead 
of one allowed to lead the jihad; the wrong use of  takﬁ r , inﬁ delizing fellow Muslims 
who do not meet the salaﬁ sts’ religious standards; the need for moderation in reli-
gion; and relations between Muslims and Peoples of the Book (Jews and Christians; 
Ansary 2008, Boucek 2008; Zuhur 2009a, 2010a). The program issued carefully posi-
tive media statements, and journalists were permitted to see the facilities, among the 
seven new prisons built in Saudi Arabia, and meet with the Ministry of the Interior’s 
spokespersons. A similar program was established in the formerly American-run 
prisons in Iraq, and more than 21 Islamist-generated books of recantation or “self-
correction” issued by incarcerated Egyptian and Libyan militants mirror some of 
the same ideological principles (Zuhur 2010a). It is not clear the original branch of 
al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah (the branch in Saudi Arabia, as opposed to the 
2009 consortium of Yemeni and Saudi Arabian organizations formed in Yemen) has 

Islamist Opposition and Terrorism | 367
been fully defeated, because every few months there are reports of new arrests. In late 
November 2010, the spokesman of the Ministry of the Interior, General Mansour 
al-Turki, said that the 149 persons arrested (Saudi Arabians as well as Egyptians 
and other Arabs) were al-Qa’ida members who planned to kill government offi  cials, 
 security forces, and media employees; that they had been part of 19 diff erent cells; 
and that 2.24 million riyals (about $600,000) had been seized ( CNN.com , November 
26, 2010). Saudi Arabia has previously hinted at the involvement of Yemen and 
Somalia as training grounds for al-Qa’ida, but it appears more likely that recruit-
ment and training had been going on within Saudi Arabia, with foreigners traveling 
into the country. Shifting the media and policy focus on al-Qa’ida to Yemen was 
somewhat natural because the levels of violence there have risen (particularly in 
May and June 2011). In January 2011 the Saudi Arabian government acknowledged 
the ﬂ uidity of the terrorist networks and had identiﬁ ed and given information and 
photographs to Interpol about 47 Saudi Arabians operating abroad who were “part 
of the deviant ideology,” dangerous, and likely to form activist cells ( Mail Online , 
January 13, 2011). 
 The larger dilemma for the Saudi Arabian government is that resistance from 
its Islamist-oriented opposition is likely to arise again in the future from within the 
country even if al-Qa’ida is contained via a combination of security measures, truces, 
and deprivation of operating space. To the degree that the reform agenda of King 
‘Abdullah is successful, resistance could continue to arise from both the salaﬁ st op-
position and conservatives. 
 Many critics of Saudi Arabia charged it with either direct or indirect funding 
to al-Qa’ida, the mother organization that had surrounded Osama Bin Laden and 
similarly extremist groups, but many Saudi Arabians strongly disagree. At issue is 
the role of funding for religious materials, propagation of Islam ( da‘wah ), and activi-
ties by charitable institutions. To Muslims, this is a completely valid form of  zakat , 
one of the requirements of all Muslims. But critics charged that the funding for 
salaﬁ , or radical preachers, or those with a connection to Saudi Arabia, and those 
who teach Qur’an memorization in the United States, Asia, Europe and elsewhere 
tended to increase support for Wahhabism, and salaﬁ sm, and thus for extremism. 
In 1985 alone, funding for such persons in the United States amounted to 2,477,000 
Saudi riyals, and in 1983 worldwide support was 25,655,000 SR (AbuKhalil 2004, 
142–143). AbuKhalil is not convinced that those in the Wahhabiyya can be moderate 
(AngryArab.blogspot.com). Nor are many other Saudi-phobic and Islamophobic 
forces (AbuKhalil is not of this latter group, and he opposes the rulers, not the Saudi 
Araiban populace) in the United States which forced the closure of several Islamic ed-
ucational endeavors in the United States, charging that they had terrorist Saudi Ara-
bian links. The Saudi Arabian rulers can hardly separate themselves from the beliefs 
of their esteemed teacher, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al- Wahhab, and are instead allow-
ing a certain amount of external publication that is either critical of extremism in his 
thought or suggests he has been misinterpreted. Supporters of the Saudi Arabian rul-
ers point to the fact that King ‘Abdullah launched a major eff ort to condemn militant 
preaching and reeducate preachers and that a major social discussion has been carried 
out about the dangers of militance. It is safe to predict that Wahhabist thought will 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
368 |
remain important in the large community of Islamic studies in Saudi Arabia, which 
had passed on and ampliﬁ ed its core puritanism, and that the government must con-
tinue to address the root causes of politicized opposition. 
 HEALTH 
 Public health in Saudi Arabia has improved vastly since the ﬁ rst half of the 20th 
century due to increases in income, inoculations, better water supplies, dissemination 
of health-related information, and the availability of clinics, hospitals and medical 
personnel. Spending on health care is relatively high in comparison to other coun-
tries. According to United Nations (UN) statistics (“Prospects 2010”), Saudi Arabia 
ranks 86th in the world (among countries with populations over 100,000) for life 
expectancy, which is at 72.8 years (70.9 years for males and 75.3 years for females). 
This compares with the average life expectancy in the United Kingdom, ranked 22nd 
at 79.4 years, and in the United States, ranked 38th at 78.2 years. These ﬁ gures are 
lower than those provided in the  CIA World Factbook (2010) statistics, which show 
Saudi Arabia ranked 69th in the world with an average life expectancy of 76.3 years 
(74.23 years for males and 78.28 years for females). 
 Some particular problems come from traditions and cultural practices, aspects of 
traditional or modern lifestyles, and women’s subordinate status. Others arise from a 
health-care situation in which many non–Saudi Arabians are cycled in and out of the 
Medical technician adjusts a patient’s position in an MRI scanner at the King Faisal Spe-
cialist Hospital in Riyadh. (Saudi Aramco World/SAWDIA)

Health | 369
nursing and physician pool, while Saudi Arabians have been reluctant to enter nurs-
ing in particular because of its low status and because of accusations of an immoral 
atmosphere, as women and men must work together. Despite this, some dynamic 
Saudi Arabian women have promoted nursing, specialist training, and master’s-level 
nursing programs and are determined to improve the profession (El-Sanabary 1996, 
71–83; Personal Interviews  , 2005). 
 Resorting to traditional medicine when modern medicine could provide relief is 
an issue dependent on intervention and education. Some of the traditional meth-
ods include herbal treatments, cupping, cautery, and Islamic medicine (see Popular 
Culture). Public health personnel and journalists only began to mention female cir-
cumcision in the country in about 2006. A serious study was discounted because the 
population it studied included African immigrants and others impacted by a diff er-
ent, more severe form of female genital mutilation (FGM) (FGM is now classiﬁ ed 
into types I, II, and III; certain African countries practice type III (sometimes called 
“Pharaonic”) FGM with removal of the outer labia as well as the clitoris and inﬁ bu-
lation) and not the “ sunnah ” version of FGM inﬂ icted on little girls by physicians 
as well as parents or grandparents in Saudi Arabia. In this form, the clitoris is fully 
 NURSING IN SAUDI ARABIA 
 Nursing is not yet a fully respected profession for women in Saudi Arabia, 
because doctors and nurses work with the opposite sex. A pioneer for female 
education and health facilities and inoculations for women and children was 
Lutﬁ yya al-Khateeb, dubbed Saudi Arabia’s Florence Nightingale, who earned 
her nursing diploma in 1941 in Cairo (El-Sanabary in Sabbagh, ed., 1996). 
Large numbers of nurses have been expatriates working on contract; however, 
Saudi Arabian nurses have grown from 9 percent of the nursing workforce in 
1996 to 18 percent in 2003. A regulatory Nursing Board was established 
in 2002. By this time, nurses could obtain a three-year diploma of nursing 
or a ﬁ ve-year bachelor of science in nursing. The ﬁ rst class of 12 nurses with 
bachelors of science graduated from the College of Nursing and Allied Health 
Sciences at King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Medical City in 2004. By then, an advanced 
diploma and several diplomas of specialization were available (Rosser et al. 
2006). International bridging groups have been created between Western 
and Saudi Arabian professional nurses. In 2009, an international symposium 
on nursing was held at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and a conference at the 
College of Nursing at al-Hasa, where Dr. Elham Al Ateeq, who obtained a 
doctorate in nursing, is associate dean. 
 Sources:  Miller-Rosser, Kolleen, Chapman, Ysanne and Francis, Karen.   “Historical, 
Cultural, and Contemporary Inﬂ uences on the Status of Women in Nursing in Saudi 
Arabia.”  Online Journal of Issues in Nursing  11, no. 3 (2006); El-Sanabary, Najat. 
“Women and the Nursing Profession in Saudi Arabia.” In  Arab Women: Between Deﬁ -
ance and Restraint , edited by Suha Sabbagh. New York: Olive Branch, 1996, 71–83. 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
370 |
or partially removed. It cannot be accurately claimed to be “sunnah” because the 
Prophet Muhammad prescribed circumcision for men, not women, although he was 
aware that it was practiced on females during his lifetime. Sexual satisfaction of 
women is considered important in Islam, and the procedure can interfere with that; 
it is primarily practiced due to a belief that it will inhibit sexual desire. Hopefully, this 
stage of denial (even some physicians claim there is nothing wrong with lesser forms 
of FGM) will abate so that families can be educated about the negative impact of all 
forms of the practice. (Zuhur 2009b; Akeel 2005). 
 The cultural preference for endogamy, particularly cousin marriage, has put Saudi 
Arabians at risk for various genetic-linked disorders, such as sickle-cell disorder, he-
moglobin deﬁ ciencies, and other problems, such as a higher rate of congenital heart 
failure (El Mouzan et al. 2008). Some medical research appears to address the issue de-
fensively, asserting lesser risks for consanguinity than is claimed in Western research, 
but hopefully neutral and objective scientiﬁ c research on such issues will continue. 
Some suggestions have included counseling for couples as well as genetic testing. 
 Maternal mortality and medical problems because of childbearing by teenagers 
have been problematic in the past, as in other developing countries. Cultural pressure 
to bear children, easy divorce for men, and polygamy have separately and together 
subjected women to great stress, complicated by divorce, life as or with a second wife, 
and accompanying depression and insecurity. Interest in medically assisted fertility 
procedures is also high. 
 A fairly high percentage of children are malnourished: About 14 percent of chil-
dren under age ﬁ ve are underweight, 20 percent are stunted, and 11 percent suff er 
acute malnourishment. The causes are neglect, poverty, lack of dietary information, 
and insecure circumstances due to a parent’s remarriage or relocation for children. 
At the same time, more Saudi Arabians are becoming obese, about 25 percent of 
women and 15 percent of men (Ministry of Health 2006). Obesity is considered a 
lifestyle and dietary issue. It is not helpful that women cannot walk or exercise out-
side of fee-based clubs (to which they must be driven). Also, smoking of cigarettes 
is extremely prevalent, and most people do not recognize the connection to cancer 
and risk for strokes or heart attacks. 
 The belief that families must care for their own ill members, elderly, or mentally 
or psychologically challenged can lead to abuse or neglect and to improper treat-
ment due to lack of skills, resources or training, or home health care. On the other 
hand, it is more aff ordable to hire nonspecialist home care than in the West, allow-
ing more people to remain in their homes and alleviating the pressures on family 
caregivers. 
 It is my understanding that relatively few clinics providing physical rehabilita-
tion services existed as of 2006, at least in the western part of the country. These are 
needed due to stress injuries, automobile accidents, and other problems. Automobile 
accidents are a major cause of injury and death (Ahmad 2008). The high incidence 
can be reduced only by increasing penalties on poor drivers. Alcohol poisoning and 
drug use are other diffi  cult issues to address in Saudi Arabia; the heavy penalties are 
not suffi  cient to deter everyone from illegal pursuits, as is usually claimed (al-Menaa 
1995). Finally, AIDS, HIV, and pandemic diseases pose threats to the population. 

Health | 371
The Saudi Arabian government took measures to contain the H1N1 version of the 
ﬂ u, which hit many of the pilgrims in 2009. 
 Some health threats exist due to cultural factors. For instance, breast cancer, as in 
other developing countries, is often discovered by medical personnel at too advanced 
a stage to help women. Princess Reema Bandar ibn Sultan has led a breast cancer 
awareness initiative called the Zahra Breast Cancer Association, providing education 
about the disease and support to those affl  icted by it. According to her, 10,513 cases 
of all types of cancer were reported to the Saudi Cancer Registry in 2005. Of these, 
948 were breast cancer. Other important health problems arise from consanguin-
ity. Couples can receive counseling, but abortion is not an option in Saudi Arabia; 
strong cultural pressure to marry endogamously still exists, and, until that changes, 
risk factors will remain high. 
 Medicine is an important area for women’s employment. Yet there is a strong 
cultural bias against working in medicine whether as physicians or as nurses (nurs-
ing is less prestigious and less respected). This is due to the cultural, religious, and 
social restrictions on mixing of men and women in the workplace or anywhere else. 
In other Muslim countries, women educators and medical practitioners have been at 
the forefront of social transformation. Working with men has become a norm; they 
have proven their abilities, and they have been accepted by the public in these ﬁ elds. 
In Saudi Arabia, the continued pressures for sex segregation cause the women who 
work in a mixed environment to be regarded with suspicion.  
 HEALTH INDICATORS 
 Saudi Arabia’s health-care system is among the government sectors that had to 
be created from scratch. Whereas many foreign physicians were, and continue 
to be, hired to work in Saudi Arabia, the numbers of Saudi Arabian physicians 
have increased. 
 
 Source: Healthcare Provision Statistics, Ministry of Health, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
2006 (SAMIRAD, 2010). 
 Provision
Number
Hospitals
386
Beds
54,724
Doctors
40,183
Dentists
5,406
Pharmacists
8,546
Nurses
83,868
Assistant health personnel
49,139

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
372 |
 WOMEN AND SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION 
 Women and the degree to which their lives should change, particularly with regard 
to their political rights and driving, are the subject of many contemporary media ar-
ticles and letters to the editor in the Saudi Arabian press. To some degree, the social 
turmoil over women’s status is an acceptable debate, whereas strongly worded politi-
cal criticisms were not, at least prior to the Arab revolutions of 2011. A good deal 
of information has been given about these issues already (see the section on women 
and marriage in Chapter 5); however, the degree of women’s activism may have been 
understated, as well as the nuances of various debates about gender relations and 
the way that employment and economic concerns ﬁ t into them. For instance, large 
numbers of foreign workers are a feature of life in all Gulf countries today, not only 
in Saudi Arabia. Altering this trend requires job creation for Saudi Arabian nation-
als, but some believe this means job creation for men. Conservatives and neosalaﬁ sts 
want women to remain at home or operate in completely segregated work circum-
stances. Various trends in the population are also critical of the large role played by 
domestic servants in childrearing. 
 Also, the divorce rate is climbing in Saudi Arabia, and, in some instances, divorced 
women ﬁ nd themselves in quite diffi  cult and trying economic circumstances since 
there are so many unemployed female college graduates. This describes middle-class 
women, but at the bottom end of the scale, large numbers of children are seen begging 
in the streets, and their mothers often accompany them. These women are quite often 
divorced or without resources, as second wives who have been replaced by a younger 
woman ( Gulf News , April 6, 2007). Thus, poverty, debates over women’s visibility 
and role in society, the rise in women’s educational levels, immigration, family law, 
and Saudization are not separate issues but a set of interacting circumstances. 
 The summarized history of Saudi Arabia presented in this volume is, due to the 
exclusion of women from political power, a very male-dominated history (as in the 
United States prior to the 1970s). If a female history of Saudi Arabia develops, it will 
probably begin with an elite closely connected to powerful men. Princess Iff at’s name 
already arose in connection with the promotion of female education, and she was 
a powerful ﬁ gure in that endeavor. Nora bint ‘Abdulrahman al-Sa‘ud (1875–1950), 
the sister of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, who was known to be a great supporter of her 
brother, and he sought her advice on numerous occasions. She was known as a poet, 
a charismatic personality, and a supporter of progress. There is only space to list a 
few women of the al-Sa‘ud family and other elite women involved in philanthropy: 
Princess Hussah, wife of King ‘Abdullah, was the founder and chief benefactor of the 
National Charitable Institute for Home Health Care; Princess Moodi bint ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz was long involved in projects for women, including arts preservation; Princess 
Loulwa bint Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was involved in directing the Dar al-Hanan 
school and the Eff at College projects, supporting Kuwaiti families in the Gulf War 
School, and supporting the al-Nahda Philanthropic Society; Princess Nouf bint Sul-
tan was a benefactress of the Prince Sultan University; Princess Amira al-Taweel, 
wife of Prince Walid ibn Talal, is vice chairperson of the al-Walid ibn Talal Foun-
dation (Arabian.Business.com, November 1, 2010); and Princess Nouf bint Bandar 

Women and Social Transformation | 373
al-Sa‘ud is a physician and artist who recently promoted an art exhibition for 25 
Saudi Arabian women artists. 
 Some Saudi Arabian women are more outspoken than others in calling for change. 
Certain clerics continue to lambast those women who allow their photographs to 
appear in the newspaper—these include women with considerable achievements in 
the country as well as activists. It is true that a considerable conservative male and 
female audience does not want anything resembling Western feminism to inﬂ uence 
their society. Meanwhile, those in favor of social transformation resort to a discourse 
of universal rights. 
 Princess Sarah bint Talal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz has called for women’s rights in busi-
ness and education and also for equality in divorce and politics. Saudi Arabian 
women have been able to attain positions outside of their homeland but not within 
it. Dr. Thoraya Ahmad has been the executive director of the United Nations Popu-
lation Fund (UNFPA), but Saudi Arabia is represented by men at UN meetings, 
including the 2010-established UN Board on Women, and in all ministries except 
for one deputy minister. Women’s calls for rights typically invoke their claim to 
equality under  shari‘ah ); they do not reject  shari‘ah but rather suggest it has been 
misinterpreted in the present circumstances. 
 Ahmad and many other women I was able to interview pointed out that Saudi 
Arabian women should not be stereotyped. Yet in every conversation about women, 
someone will state that Saudi Arabian women should not emulate other Arab women 
or proceed to modernize at the same pace, as they are unique. This  khususiyya , or cul-
tural speciﬁ city, provides constant excuses for failure to change and reform,  according 
Saudi Arabian women visit an art exhibition of seven Saudi Arabian women artists at the 
French Embassy in Riyadh in 2008. (AP/Wide World Photos)

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
374 |
to the folklorist Sowayan (Sowayan in Craze and Huband, eds., 2009). In 2009, 
Wajiha al-Huwaidar and other women began a campaign against men’s legal guard-
ianship of women in  shari‘ah , using the Internet to their advantage. Al-Huwaidar 
also posted a video of herself driving in 2008 to protest the continuing ban on wom-
en’s driving. Another Saudi Arabian woman decided to do this in 2011, and by 
then the authorities were much more nervous about the wildﬁ re eff ect of YouTube-
mounted videos on the Internet and arrested her. People have been commenting on 
or protesting women’s inability to drive in editorials and through letters to the editor 
in the press for the last decade. 
 MEDIA, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, AND CENSORSHIP 
 Some of the most stringent critiques of Saudi Arabia have come from neoconserva-
tives and Islamophobes in the United States since September 11, 2001. Other stinging 
indictments come from anti–Saudi Arabian or anti-Wahhabi voices in or of the Arab 
world. Some credible arguments are made concerning human rights and tight control 
over the media, even though the critics speak from a history of Saudi Arabia’s sup-
pression of various forces. In recent years, some new challenges have arisen to the 
large number of Saudi Arabian media instruments, chieﬂ y from  al-Jazeera , based 
in Qatar, and from  al-Manar , Hizbullah’s outlet in Lebanon. Typically, the Saudi 
Arabian media or others ﬁ re back, as when Muhammad Hassenein Heikal, journalist 
and conﬁ dante to President Gamal Abd al-Nasser, challenged Saudi Arabia’s nar-
rative of regional politics in a retrospective entitled “Ma‘a Heikal” in  al-Jazeera .  Al-
Arabiyya , a Saudi Arabian television and news outlet, then launched a series called 
“al-Sayyid al-‘Arabi.” Heikal then gave interviews critical of (Ambassador to the 
United States) Prince Bandar ibn Sultan’s policies vis-à-vis Iran and the lightweight 
eff orts to heal the Arab-Israeli conﬂ ict. Turki al-Sudayri, the editor of  al-Riyadh , 
retorted that Heikal was nothing but a hired pen of a hired pen. Other attacks came 
from Mamoun Fandy, an Egyptian critic of Saudi Arabia turned supporter, and 
Lebanese journalist Samir Atallah, in the newspaper  al-Sharq al-Awsat (Hammond 
2007). What was at stake was a particular version of history, something the Saudi 
Arabian government considers crucial to inﬂ uence. Whereas Lebanon and Egypt are 
far from having perfectly free intellectual environments, it is diffi  cult to see how Saudi 
Arabia can develop freedom of speech without allowing for at least an equivalent 
amount of discord and divergence. 
 The political atmosphere has shaped information. Andrew Hammond explains 
that in the wake of the Gulf War, the Middle East Broadcasting Corporation (MBC) 
was set up by Walid al-Ibrahim, a brother-in-law of King Fahd. Also, when Prince 
Khalid ibn Sultan, the former commander in the Gulf War, retreated into life as a 
businessman, he gained control over the London-based newspaper  al-Hayat , the 
largest Arabic daily. Meanwhile, the sons of Prince Salman, governor of Riyadh, 
took over  al-Sharq al-Awsat , previously  al-Hayat ’s competition. 
 Saudi Arabian control of television, entertainment, and news proceeded as well. 
Orbit TV was set up in 1994, and ART (the Arab Radio and Television network) was 

Media, Freedom of Speech, and Censorship | 375
established by Prince al-Walid ibn Talal and Saleh Kamel in 1994 as well (Hammond 
2007). MBC, Orbit, and ART broadcast entertainment—mainly soap operas ( musal-
silat ), Western movies, and talk show formats—throughout the Arab world. These 
formats have increased with satellite expansion in Saudi Arabia and subscriptions 
by Arab viewers in the West, leaving most television devoid of any serious political 
content but for an hour here or there on cable networks and satellite television from 
other Arab countries. Hammond’s point is that the Saudization of television (and the 
media), which incorporated a lot of “soft” entertainment rather than sharp debate or 
news, had paciﬁ ed the public (with bread and circuses rather than calls to mobilize 
à la Nasser (Hammond 2007). 
 As of the spring of 2011, this situation has changed again. The Arabic news chan-
nels remain dominated by Saudi Arabia and Egypt (and to some degree Lebanon). 
 Al-Jazeera proved a powerful counterweight to offi  cial denial of the ongoing revolu-
tions in Tunisia and Egypt on the other channels and news sources. It continued its 
coverage as protests moved to Yemen, Libya, Bahrain, Syria, and even Saudi Arabia, 
opening up the prospect of swift political change to the Arab mass public. The only 
strategy that could be employed in Saudi Arabia was to block some transmissions 
and limit its citizens’ access to Facebook. 
 Telecommunications in Saudi Arabia and offi  cial monitoring and ﬁ ltering of 
the Internet manage to block many types of transmissions from the outside world. 
The main justiﬁ cation is to prevent any access to pornography or illegal mixing 
of men and women, as well as anything relating to homosexuality. Actually, cen-
sorship through ﬁ ltering addresses political, social, and religious content and also 
Producers and technicians oversee the broadcast of “Good Morning Saudi Arabia,” a televi-
sion show hosted by Wafà Younis at Riyadh Television. (Saudi Aramco World/SAWDIA)

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
376 |
selectively blocks presumed terrorist or jihadist content. The ﬁ ltering was accom-
plished by the Internet Services Unit (ISU) of the King ‘Abdulaziz City for Science 
and Technology (KACST), which is the country’s national science agency with its 
national laboratories. The ISU explains that 25 licensed service providers connect 
the users to the national network, and it admits its ﬁ ltering activities, which are 
aided by citizens who call in with information about unﬁ ltered sites that the ISU is 
unaware of. The Communications and Information Technology Commission, pre-
viously called the Saudi Communications Commission, then took over the services 
managed by KACST. Foreign news services are sometimes blocked, for instance, 
the site of the Israeli newspaper  Haaretz , which has an English-language edition. 
Others have been blocked and then were opened, various sites dealing with human 
and political rights among them, such as the Voice of Saudi Women (http://www.
saudiwomen.net) (“Saudi Arabia.” Open Net Initiative, 2009). 
 Some bloggers have been arrested, such as Ahmad Fouad al-Farhan, who was 
imprisoned and whose blog was blocked. Others were able to operate for quite some 
time, providing a window into the country, as in the famous blog known as  Saudi-
girl.blog , whose author eventually revealed himself to be a man. Other blogs protest 
the actions of the  mutawa‘in (religious police) or call for other reforms. In addi-
tion, foreign-based blogs about Saudi Arabia have operated. In November 2010, 
Facebook was blocked. However, people are able to send group e-mails, and they 
continue to blog—despite avid monitoring—and communicate in a variety of ways, 
via cell phones, texting, and other services. Also, quite a number of Saudi Arabians 
reside part of the time (or full-time) outside of the country, for instance, in Bahrain 
or Dubai, where Facebook is not blocked. 
 HUMAN RIGHTS 
 Human rights are a hot-button topic interpreted diff erently by various sources. 
One deep-seated complaint is the presence of poverty and misery in the kingdom, 
despite the Islamic values and great wealth amassed through the petrochemical 
sector. There is a false perception that much, or most, of this poverty is suff ered by 
immigrants and not Saudi Arabians, and this theme continues to some degree in 
reports of the thousands of homeless people. In Jeddah, they live under the cities’ 
many bridges. Some are drug users despite the harsh penalties for drug use; others 
are simply poor, and still others have some work but nowhere to live ( Saudi Gazette , 
November 23, 2010). Children are also homeless, or must beg, or are part of criminal 
rings in the country. The media had mostly focused on foreign children brought 
criminally into the country (see Chapter 5, Society). However, even more are Saudi 
Arabian, according to a 2007 study by ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Al Yousuf of 
the Imam Mohammad Bin Saud Islamic University, which states that some 83,000 
children are homeless. Some were smuggled into the country, some are selling low-
priced goods, and others are the prey of criminal gangs. This study states that, con-
trary to the press’s assumptions that most of these children are Yemeni or of other 
nationalities, some 69 percent are Saudi Arabian, a majority of which are girls. It 

Capital Punishment | 377
conﬁ rms a 2002 International Labor Organization report that many children who 
were begging were girls with disabilities and that their mothers were begging beside 
them ( Gulf News , April 9, 2007). 
 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 
 In Saudi Arabia, 69 persons were put to death in 2009 ( Amnesty , March 30, 2010). 
Capital punishment is opposed by many but not all nations today. What human 
rights observers protest in Saudi Arabia is that habeus corpus is not granted; torture, 
beatings, and other prohibited actions are used; and prisoners may be tried privately 
and then sentenced and executed, as occurred with some of the detainees imprisoned 
in response to violent actions against the government since 2003 (Amnesty Interna-
tional 2009). In early July 2009, the Saudi Arabian government announced that trials 
of 330 persons, which had begun in March, had now ended. Perhaps an eff ort could 
have been made to allow human rights observers, but the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment’s stance is that this a national or internal matter. One defendant was sentenced 
to death, and 323 were given prison sentences of a few months up to 30 years, in ad-
dition to ﬁ nes. In total, more than 1,000 persons have been charged with particular 
crimes, but that means that many others were detained without charge or had not yet 
been charged, and these detentions are lengthy. At the time of this writing, Amnesty 
International has not yet produced additional commentary or a follow-up report. 
What Saudi Arabian offi  cials reported was that they had to take more time than they 
might have liked because it was important to have a fully legitimate process of trial 
and punishment in place and that many of the most violent off enders had already 
been killed by the police. They expected some response and outcry from within the 
 CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 
 Capital punishment is carried out in Saudi Arabia. Executions may involve 
beheading, stoning to death (for adulterers), being shot by a ﬁ ring squad, or 
other means. In May 2009 Ahmed bin ‘Adhaib ibn ‘Askar al-Shamlani al-‘Anzi 
was beheaded and then cruciﬁ ed in Riyadh ( Amnesty International , May 31, 
2009). In addition to its concerns over punishments that constitute torture, Am-
nesty International (AI) and other organizations, such as the United Nations 
Organisation Contre La Torture, oppose the practice of capital punishment in 
Saudi Arabia. AI believes that the secret and summary nature of the procedures 
obstructs justice for those charged and that judges’ discretionary powers are 
excessive. 
 AI notes that whereas executions have declined in all other parts of the world 
(except for China and Iran), they have increased in Saudi Arabia. Despite a 
decrease in incidences after 2001, executions increased again after 2007: In 
2006, 38 persons were executed, but in 2007, 158 persons were executed 
( New York Times , October 14, 2008). In 2009, 69 persons were executed. 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
378 |
AI and other agencies, such as Human Rights Watch, object to the lack of 
information given to the defendants, their families, and the public, the lack of 
clarity regarding the charges, the use of coercion and torture to force confes-
sions, failures in due process, and what appears to be geographic or judicial 
variations in allowing for appeals or acceptance of  dhiyya (blood price) com-
pensation in lieu of  talion (killing or injury to the extent originally committed). 
 AI is concerned by the fact that capital punishment is ordered for those 
who have not committed murder. From 1986 to 2008, 748 persons were 
executed for nonlethal crimes, and 621 had been charged with murder. The 
nonlethal charges included 503 cases that were drug related and 245 charges 
that included witchcraft, assaults, robberies, and sexual offences. In today’s 
international legal environment, it seems wrong to execute persons for sexual 
offenses, claims of witchcraft or sorcery, or mistreatment of the Qur’an as has 
occurred for some charged with these offenses. 
 
0
100
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
200
Offenses
Offenses
300
400
500
Executions
600
700
800
Rates of Executions for Murders and Non-murder Offenses
in Saudi Arabia 1990 to May 2008 (Excluding 2001)
Distribution of Executions in Saudi Arabia by Offense
1990 to May 2008 (Excluding 2001)
Murder
Drugs
Non-Lethal
Murder
Non-murder

Capital Punishment | 379
AI is also disturbed by the high proportion of foreigners who are executed 
as compared to Saudi Arabian nationals, as they should not be subjected to 
lesser standards of justice and to mistreatment or torture by police (Amnesty In-
ternational,  Affront to Justice: Death Penalty in Saudi Arabia  [London: Amnesty 
International, 2008]). Juvenile offenders have been executed because, under 
 shari‘ah , they are considered adults at puberty. As with men, more foreign 
women than Saudi Arabian women have been executed, and a number of them 
were either domestic workers or married to Saudi Arabian citizens. 
Sa‘d al-Faqih, leader of Saudi Arabian opposition group, MIRA in 2011. (Courtesy of 
Mahan Abedin)
kingdom at the time of the trial (Zuhur, Personal interviews, 2008). Responses from 
within the kingdom were largely invisible to the outside world but not to Saudi Ara-
bian security forces. Responses regarding the legality of the proceedings on the basis 
of international law and human rights come from such organizations as Amnesty 
International and Human Rights Watch. 
 Not only are some terrorism suspects dealt with harshly, as in the beatings and 
extreme conditions experienced by one who conducted a hunger strike, but prior 
detainees also met with harsh sentences. These included protestors against the gov-
ernment who had responded to Sa‘d al-Faqih’s call for demonstrations on December 
16, 2004; they were sentenced to months in prison and 100 to 250 strokes in ﬂ oggings. 

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
380 |
Twenty-one persons including two foreign nationals were arrested and charged. In-
ternational human rights agencies and groups oppose the use of torture as punish-
ment (Human Rights Watch, January 16, 2005). In the Qatif Girl case (see Chapter 
6, Culture, section on women), the victim was sentenced to a ﬂ ogging for being alone 
with a man in a vehicle, and that sentence was overturned only by intervention from 
the highest level. 
 The same international human rights organizations oppose  shari‘ah punishments 
for capital crimes because these involve torture and death (see sidebar on capital 
punishment). And they believe that not enough has been done in the last few years 
to address violations of workers’ rights in Saudi Arabia (some measures are men-
tioned in Chapter 4, Economy). The process of raising objections on these issues 
and women’s rights appears in some ways to have beneﬁ ted from the fact that the 
overall political climate tended to favor reform and demonstrate action following 
the terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia since 2003, as described earlier. It’s quite pos-
sible that without Human Rights Watch, intervention and commentaries suggesting 
modern-day slavery of foreign workers, and expression of other concerns by dem-
onstrators and activists, the Saudi Arabian human rights response organizations 
would not have been established. However, these organizations may raise concerns 
but not necessarily address them, and as already seen, the counterterrorist response 
continues to involve legal processes that ignore general standards of justice for 
prisoners. 
In 2011, the King of Saudi Arabia announced a package of reforms, cash and 
loans and other beneﬁ ts for Saudi Arabians in an eff ort to stave off  political discon-
tent of the sort that has been churning through the Arab Middle East. Political dis-
sent and calls for enhanced popular political participation may well continue, just as 
it is likely that Islamist (including the sahwa) voices will oppose policies of the rulers. 
Consequently, it is not unfair to end this book with the hope that justice and human 
rights will be enhanced in Saudi Arabia in the future, and to wish this fascinating 
country and its people well. Peace be with you!
 REFERENCES 
 al-Abdulkareem, A. A., and S. G. Ballal. “Consanguineous Marriages in an Urban Area of 
Saudi Arabia: Rates and Adverse Health Eff ects on the Off spring.”  Journal of Community 
Health 23 (1998), 75–83. 
 Ahmad, Qanta.  In the Land of Invisible Women: A Female Doctor’s Journey in the Saudi King-
dom . Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, 2008. 
 Akeel, Mona. “Female Circumcisions: Weight of Tradition Perpetuates a Dangerous Prac-
tice.”  Arab News , March 20, 2005. 
 Amnesty International. “Amnesty Releases Death Penalty Statistics.” Amnesty International. 
March 30, 2010. http://www.amnesty.org 
 Amnesty International. “Countering Terrorism with Repression.” Amnesty International. 
September 10, 2009. 
 Ansary, Abdullah F. “Combating Extremism: A Brief Overview of Saudi Arabia’s Approach.” 
 Middle East Policy 15, no. 2 (Summer 2008, 111–142). 

| 381
 Ayoob, Mohammed, and Hasan Kosebalaban, eds.  Religion and Politics in Saudi Arabia: 
Wahhabism and the State . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2009. 
 BBC Two. “The Child Slaves of Saudi Arabia.” This World. Directed by Rageh Omaar . BBC . 
March 27, 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/this_world/6431957.stm 
 Bergen, Peter I.  The Osama Bin Laden I Know: An Oral History of al Qa’ida’s Leader . New 
York: Free Press, 2006. 
 Blackwell, Amy Hackney, and Sherifa Zuhur. “Suicide Bombings.” In  The Encyclopedia of 
U.S. Middle East Wars , edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA, and Oxford: ABC-
CLIO, 2010, vol. 3, 1172–1174. 
 Boucek, Christopher. “Jailing Jihadis: Special Terrorist Prisons.”  Terrorism Monitor 6, no. 
2 (January 24, 2008). http://www.jamestown.org/programs/gta/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_
news%5D=4682&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=167&no_cache=1 
 Boucek, Christopher. “Extremist Reeducation and Rehabilitation.” In  Leaving Terrorism Be-
hind: Individual and Collective Disengagement , edited by Tore Bjrøgo and John Horgan. 
New York: Routledge, 2009, 212–224. 
 Bronson, Rachel.  Thicker Than Oil: America’s Uneasy Partnership with Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). “The Middle East Military Balance.” 
2005. 
 Congressional Research Service (CRS) and Library of Congress. “Saudi Arabia: Cur-
rent Issues and U.S. Relations.”  CRS Issue Brief. Alfred B. Prados. Washington, 
DC: Congressional Research Service and Library of Congress. Updated February 
24, 2006. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia Enters the Twenty-First Century: The Political, Foreign 
Policy, Economic, and Energy Dimensions . London: Center for Strategic and International 
Studies; Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003a. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia and the Challenge of Terrorism: Reacting to the “9/11 
Report.” Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2003b. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Nawaf Obaid.  Saudi Internal Security: A Risk Assessment. Ter-
rorism and the Security Services—Challenges and Developments.  Washington, DC: Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, 2004. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Nawaf Obaid.  Saudi National Security: Military and Security 
Services—Challenges and Developments . Full Report. Washington, DC: Center for Strate-
gic and International Studies, Draft, September 29, 2004. 
 Craze, Joshua, and Mark Huband, eds.  The Kingdom: Saudi Arabia and the Challenge of 21st 
Century . New York: Columbia University Press, 2009. 
 Delong-Bas, Natana.  Jihad for Islam: The Struggle for the Future of Saudi Arabia . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2009. 
 Doumato, Eleanor A. “The Ambiguity of Shari’a and the Politics of ‘Rights’ in Saudi Arabia.” 
In  Faith and Freedom: Women’s Human Rights in the Muslim World , edited by Mahnaz 
Afkhami. New York: I. B. Tauris, 1995, 135–160. 
 Fandy, Mamoun.  Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent . New York: St. Martin’s, 1999. 
 Hammond, Andrew. “Saudi Arabia’s Media Empire: Keeping the Masses at Home.”  Arab 
Media and Society , issue 3 (Fall 2007). 
 Hawali, Safar.  Haqa’iq hawla ‘azmat al-khalij . Cairo: Dar Makka al-Mukarama, 1991. 
References

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
382 |
 El-Hazmi, M. A., A. R. al-Swailem, A. S. Warsy, A.M. al-Swailem, R. Sulaimani, and A.A. 
al-Meshari. “Consanguinity among the Saudi Arabian Population.”  Medical Genetics 32 
(1995), 623–626. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas.  Jihad in Saudi Arabia: Violence and Pan-Islamism since 1979 . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas. “Terrorist Recruitment and Radicalization in Saudi Arabia.”  Middle 
East Policy 13, no. 4 (Winter 2006), 39–60. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas, and Stéphane Lacroix. “Rejectionist Islamism in Saudi Arabia: The 
Case of Juhayman al-Utaybi Revisited.”  International Journal of Middle East Studies 39, 
no. 1 (2007), 103–122. 
 Al Hussain, M., and M. Al Bunyan. “Consanguineous Marriages in a Saudi Population and 
the Eff ect of Inbreeding on Perinatal and Postnatal Mortality.”  Annual Tropical Paediat-
rics 17 (1997), 155–160. 
 International Crisis Group. “Can Saudi Arabia Reform Itself?”  ICG Middle East Report, no. 
28, (July 14, 2004). 
 International Crisis Group. “Saudi Arabia Backgrounder: Who Are the Islamists?”  Middle 
East Report , September 21, 2004. 
 Jacquard, Roland. ed.  In the Name of Osama Bin Laden: Global Terrorism and the Bin Laden 
Brotherhood . Durham, NC, and London:: Duke University Press, 2002. 
 Kiely, Robert S. and Sherifa Zuhur. “Saudi Arabia.” In  Encyclopedia of Middle East Wars . 
Santa Barbara, CA, Denver, and Oxford: ABC-Clio, 2010, 1072–1074. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Between Islamists and Liberals: Saudi Arabia’s New ‘Islamo-Liberal’ 
Reformists.”  Middle East Journal 58, no. 3 (Summer 2004). 
 Ma ‘ ahad al-Dirasat al-Diblumasiyyah.  Al-Arshif al-Alaktruniyya li-Isdarat al-Ma‘ahad . 
 1400 – 1424 (1980–2004) . Riyadh: Diplomatic Institute, Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, Saudi 
Arabia, 2005. 
 Matthiesen, Toby. “The Shi‘a of Saudi Arabia at a Crossroads.”  Middle East Report Online , 
May 6, 2009. 
 al-Menaa, Fahad Nasser. “The Causes of Drug Usage, Distribution and Smuggling in Saudi 
Arabia.” PhD diss., Washington State University, 1995. 
 Ministry of Health. Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Statistics. 2006. 
 El Mouzan, M. L., A. A. Al Salloum, A. S. Al Herbish, M. M. Qurachi, and A. A. Al Omar. 
“Consanguinity and Major Genetic Disorders in Saudi Children: A Community-Based 
Cross-sectional study.”  Annual of Saudi Medicine 228 (2008), 69–73. 
 Mufti, Muhammad H.  Health Care Development Strategies in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia . 
New York: Kluwer, 2000. 
 Pierpaoli, Paul G. “King Khalid Military City.” In  The Encyclopedia of Middle East Wars : 
 The United States in the Persian Gulf, Afghanistan, and Iraq Conﬂ icts , edited by Spencer 
Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010, vol. 2, 691–692. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi, ed.  Kingdom without Borders: Saudi Political, Religious and Media 
Frontiers . New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
 Riedel, Bruce, and Bilal Y. Saab. “Al Qa’ida’s Third Front.”  Washington Quarterly  31, no. 2 
(Spring 2008), 33–46. 

| 383
 Rougier, Bernard, ed.  Qu’est-ce Que le Salaﬁ sme?  Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
2008. 
 Rugh, William.  Arab Mass Media: Newspapers, Radio and Television in Arab Politics . West-
port, CT: Praeger, 2004. 
 al-Sahaymi, Abd al-Salam.  The Ideology of Terrorism and Violence in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia: Origins, Causes for Its Spread and the Solution . Cairo: Dar al-Minhaj, 2006. 
 el-Sanabary, Najat. “Women and the Nursing Profession in Saudi Arabia.” In  Arab Women: 
Between Deﬁ ance and Restraint , edited by Suha Sabbagh. New York: Olive Branch, 1996, 
71–83. 
 “Saudi Arabia.”  Open Net Initiative . August 6, 2009. http://opennet.net/research/proﬁ les/
saudi-arabia 
 Scheuer, Michael, Stephen Ulph, and John C.K. Daly.  Saudi Arabian Oil Facilities: The 
Achilles Heel of the Western Economy . Washington, DC: Jamestown Foundation, May 
2006. 
 al-Tayer, Abdullah bin Musa.  Amrika allati qad ta‘ud . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: by the author, 
2005 (1426h.) 
 Teitelbaum, Joshua.  Holier Than Thou: Saudi Arabia’s Islamic Opposition. Washington, DC: 
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 al-Thabit, Abdullah.  al-Irhabi 20 . Damascus: Dar al-Mada, 2006. (Available in translation 
as  Terroriste no. 20 , translated by Françoise Neyrod [Paris: Actes Sud Sindbad, 2010].) 
 Troﬁ mov, Yaroslav.  The Siege of Mecca: The Forgotten Uprising in Islam’s Holiest Shrine and 
the Birth of Al Qa’ida . New York: Random House, 2007. 
 United Nations. Health Data. “Prospects 2005–2010.” 
 U.S. Embassy in Riyadh. Secret (Cable) Riyadh 001134. SIPDIS. To ISN/RA R. Mangiello 
and R. Nephew and NEA/ARP B. Mcgrath. Tuesday, July 22, 2008. Obtained from http://
www.guardian.co.uk/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/162960?intcmp=239 
 U.S. Embassy in Riyadh. Cables. Secret. SIPDIS. White House for OVP, Department for 
NEA/ARP and S/I. Satterﬁ eld. Sunday, April 20, 2008 (sent by Gfoeller). Obtained from 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/150519 
 U.S. Embassy, Tel Aviv. Secret. SIPDIS. 40th Joint Political-Military Group: Execu-
tive. Part 1 of 4. November 18, 2009. Obtained from http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/
us-embassy-cables-documents/235359?intcmp=239 
 Wardak, Ali. “Crime and Social Control in Saudi Arabia.” In  Transnational and Comparative 
Criminology , edited by James Sheptycki and Ali Wardak. London: Glasshouse, 2005, 91–116. 
 Wehry, Frederick, Theodore W. Karasik, Alireza Nader, Jeremy Ghez, Lydia Hansell, and 
Robert A. Guff ey.  Saudi-Iranian Relations since the Fall of Saddam: Rivalry, Cooperation 
and Implications for U.S. Policy . Washington, DC: Rand Corporation (National Security 
Research Division), 2009. 
 Willbanks, James H. “Saudi Arabian, Armed Forces.” In  The Encyclopedia of Middle East 
Wars: The United States in the Persian Gulf, Afghanistan and Iraq Conﬂ icts , edited by 
Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010, vol. 3, 1075–1076. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Muslim Women and Human Rights in Saudi Arabia: Aspirations of a New 
Generation.” In  The Rule of Law in the Middle East and the Islamic World: Human Rights 
and the Judicial Process , edited by Eugene Cotran and Mai Yamani. London: Tauris and 
References

 Chapter 7 Contemporary Issues
384 |
the Centre of Islamic Studies and Middle Eastern Law, School of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London, 2000. 
 Yamani, Mai. “The New Generation in Saudi Arabia: Cultural Change, Political Identity 
and Regime Security.” In  Security in the Persian Gulf: Origins, Obstacles and the Search 
for Consensus , edited by Lawrence G. Potter and Gary G. Sick. New York: Palgrave, 2001, 
189–205. 
 Yamani, Mai. “The Challenge of Globalization in Saudi Arabia.” In  On Shifting Ground: 
Muslim Women in the Global Era , edited by Fereshteh Norahie-Simone. New York: Femi-
nist Press, 2005. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Ideological and Motivational Factors in the Defusing of Radical Islamist Vio-
lence. Carlisle, PA, and Cairo: Institute of Middle Eastern, Islamic, and Strategic Studies, 
2010a. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Sa‘ud, Khalid ibn Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-.” In  The Encyclopedia of U.S. 
Middle East Wars , edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010b, 
1071–1072. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Decreasing Violence in Saudi Arabia and Beyond.” In  Home-Grown Terror-
ism :  Understanding and Addressing the Root Causes of Radicalisation among Groups with an 
Immigrant Heritage in Europe , edited by Thomas M. Pick, Anne Speckhard, and Beatrice 
Jacuch. Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2009a, 74–98. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. Personal interviews, Riyadh, Jeddah, London, Washington D.C. 2005-2008.
Zuhur, Sherifa. “Considerations of Honor Crimes, FGM, Kidnapping/Rape and Early Mar-
riage in Selected Arab Nations.” Paper presented at “Good Practices in Legislation to Ad-
dress Harmful Practices against Women,” United Nations Division for the Advancement 
of Women and UN Economic Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa, May 25–28, 2009b. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Military Perspectives on the U.S.-Saudi Arabian Relationship and Future 
of the Global War on Terror” [in Arabic]. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Institute of Diplomatic 
Studies, Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, 2005a. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Saudi Arabia: Islamism, Political Reform and the Global War on Terror . Car-
lisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2005b. 
 
 

385
 Glossary 
 ‘Abaya  (‘Aba’)  —A black cloak worn by women in Saudi Arabia that covers the entire 
body and the clothing worn underneath. 
 Abu Bakr  —The ﬁ rst caliph who led the Muslim community after the Prophet Mu-
hammad’s death. 
 Abu Sufyan  —Originally an enemy of the Prophet Muhammad in Mecca; killed 
many early Muslims but converted to Islam following the capture of Mecca 
in 630. Abu Sufyan’s descendants would become the Ummayyad dynasty of 
661–750  ce.  
 Adhan  —Call to prayer, intoned publicly ﬁ ve times a day. 
 Ahl —Family; a bilateral kin group. 
 Ahl al-balad —A Hijazi term, literally meaning “people of the country.” Used by 
Hijazis to indicate they are not foreigners, nor recent immigrants, nor from the 
bedouin tribes (although many may originally derive from tribal groups). 
 Ahl al-kitab  —Literally, “Peoples of the Book.” Non-Muslims with a scriptural tradi-
tion recognized by Islam: Jews, Christians, Samaritans, and the Sabeans. 
 Alﬁ yya —A poem in which each set of hemistiches begins with the successive letter 
of the Arabic alphabet. 
 ‘Alim (singular form of ‘ulama)  —A religious scholar. 
 Apostate —Apostasy is the act of denying Islam by a Muslim; and one of the most 
serious crimes according to Islamic law. 

 Glossary
386 |
 ‘Arafat —The wide plain approximately 12 miles east of Mecca, where all pilgrims 
gather on the ninth day of Dhu al Hijah, the 12th month of the Islamic calendar. 
Pilgrims believe that their prayers uttered here will be heard by Allah directly. 
 ‘Ardhah —Ceremonial dance performed by men with swords. Also known as  razif or 
 galata in Saudi Arabia and by other names in other countries, such as  al-‘ayyala 
in the United Arab Emirates. 
 ‘Ardh baydah —Uncultivated land. 
 Arham —Affi  nal relatives married into one’s family or one’s spouse’s family. 
 ‘Asayib —A head circlet, sometimes with tassels, worn by men or women. 
 Ashraf —Those who claim descent from the Prophet (singular,  sharif  ).  Ashraf fami-
lies became a local dynasty ruling the Hijaz in the early 20th century and were the 
custodians of the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina. 
 ‘Ashura  —The day commemorating the death of Husayn ibn ‘Ali at Karbala in the 
early Islamic era. Ritual parades, self-ﬂ agellation, and wounding to the point of 
bloodletting are traditional in the Shi‘a community. 
 Awqaf  —Religious endowments. 
 Ayat  —A verse of the Qur’an. Literally means a sign, symbol, or mirror of God. 
 ‘Ayb —Shame. 
 Badu (singular, badawi)  —Bedouin. 
 Banu Hanifa —One of the major tribes of al-Yamamah in Saudi Arabia. 
 Banu Nadir  —One of three Jewish tribes living in Medina at the time of the Muslim 
emigration there. 
 Banu Qaynuqah  —One of three Jewish tribes living in Medina in the early Muslim era. 
 Banu Qurayza  h (Quraydhah)—One of three Jewish tribes living in Medina in the 
early Muslim era. 
 Bashkat —A group of close friends who meet regularly. 
 Bay‘ah  —The oath of allegiance Muslims make to their rulers; in Saudi Arabia, the 
king receives the  bay‘ah . 
 Bid ‘ah  —An innovation in Muslim practice. Something not indigenous to Islam or 
the Islamic way of life. Such an innovation is regarded negatively. 
 Bint ‘amm marriage  —Marriage to the father’s brother’s daughter, a preferred mar-
riage partner. A form of consanguineous marriage. 
 Bisht  —A cloak or mantle worn by men. 
 Black Stone  —A small stone believed to be from heaven (possibly a meteorite) in the 
southeastern corner of the Ka‘ba. The pilgrims salute the stone as they perform 
the  tawwaf , or circumambulation of the Ka‘ba, and attempt to touch or kiss it. 
 Bukhur  —Frankincense or other incense. 
 Burqa —A mask, sometimes decorated, worn by women over the face. 
 Caliph  —A political offi  ce used to govern urban areas of pre-Islamic Arabia and 
chosen by the consensus of tribal elders. The term  khalifa in Arabic means “suc-
cessor.” The ﬁ rst four caliphs were Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and ‘Ali. 

Glossary | 387
 Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR)  —Group founded in Riyadh 
by six scholars to support the Islamic opposition in Saudi Arabia. Its spokesman 
was Muhammad al-Masari. After arrests, its members left Saudi Arabia and/or 
went underground. Al-Masari and Sa‘ad al-Faqih then set up the CDLR in Lon-
don in 1994. The UK government allowed the opposition group to operate even 
in spite of strong pressure by the Saudi Arabian government. The U.S. govern-
ment did not support the CDLR because of its vocal support of the 1995 and 1996 
bombings in Saudi Arabia. Al-Faqih and al-Masari split in 1996. 
 Communist Party in Saudi Arabia  —Formed by communists from within the Na-
tional Liberation Front in 1975. This party was always illegal (and political parties 
are still currently illegal). Its youth wing was the Union of Democratic Youth of 
Saudi Arabia with an offi  ce in Damascus. The party was renamed the Democratic 
Uniﬁ cation in Saudi Arabia in the early 1990s but disbanded as part of a deal with 
the government whereby political prisoners from this party were released. 
 Dandana  —Singing with the  ‘ud (lute) and  tabla (drum) (Hijaz). 
 Dar al-harb  —Territory that is not controlled by Muslims; literally means “house or 
domain of war.” 
 Dar al-Islam  —Territories or countries governed by Muslims where Islamic law is 
observed. 
 Da‘wah  —The mission to spread Islam in the world and to Islamize, or remake Mus-
lim society in a more authentic manner. 
 Dewinih  —A bedouin genre of poetry and song. 
 Dhiyya  —Blood payment off ered to the kin of one killed or injured according to  ‘urf 
and  shari‘ah. 
 Dhu al-Hija  —The 12th month of the Islamic calendar. The greater pilgrimage, the 
 hajj , must be performed in this month. 
 Dira —A tribe’s normal route of travel through lands where it has grazing and water 
rights. 
 Durra‘ah  —A long dress; term used in Najd and other areas. 
 Fahd  —The spotted and brindled wild cat. Also a man’s name. 
 Fallah (plural, fallalih)  —Farmer or peasant. 
 Fatwa  —A legal opinion or responsa issued by an Islamic jurist that resolves a ques-
tion about the lawfulness of a particular topic or action. In Sunni Islam, jurists 
may draw on the Qur’an, hadith, legal analogy, and consensus to construct a 
 fatawa , while Shi‘i jurists may also use a methodology known as  ijtihad . 
 Fijri  —Pearl-divers’ music, once performed as part of the trade in the Eastern Prov-
ince of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates and now 
as part of their musical legacy. It was performed at night, and the name  ﬁ jri refers 
to the dawn,  fajr . 
 Firman  —An edict of an Ottoman ruler. 
 Fitnah  —Means sedition, or schism between Muslims, and also to mislead and to 
guide in error. 

 Glossary
388 |
 Fouta —A length of fabric wrapped around as a skirt and worn by men. 
 Free Men of al-Qatif (Ahrar al-Qatif )  —A Shi‘a militant group that issued a state-
ment condemning the HAIA’s (the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and 
Prevention of Vice) attacks on Shi‘a in Medina in the events known as the In-
tifadha  of 1430. It released a statement harshly condemning the religious po-
lice and sardonically shortening its name. The group called for demonstrations 
by other Shi‘a in the country and for the support of their “ﬁ ghting people” in 
Najran, Medina, al-Hasa, and al-Qatif. 
 Fusha —(Pronounced  fus-Ha .) The classical Arabic language. 
 Ghadab —Anger. 
 Ghazal —The wild gazelle. 
 Ghazl  —A form of love poetry that developed in Mecca. 
 Ghul —A ghoul, a terrifying supernatural shapeshifting being. 
 Ghumrah  —A pre-marriage party for women when henna is applied to the bride’s 
skin. 
 Ghutra —A man’s headcloth. 
 Hadhar —Settled folk in towns or oases, as opposed to  badiya  or  badu (pastoralists). 
 Hadith —A form of religious literature that recorded the  sunnah , or Way of the 
Prophet. The hadith are short texts about the sayings and actions of the Prophet 
Muhammad or his Companions, preceded by an  isnad , or chain of transmitters. 
Six compilations of hadith are considered to be sound, or reliable, by the ma-
jority of Muslims: Al-Bukhari, Al-Tirmidhi, Muslim, Abu Da’ud, Al-Nisa’i, Al-
Nawawi, and Ibn Majah. 
 Hajj  —The pilgrimage to Mecca. One who has completed the pilgrimage is a  hajji 
(male) or  hajja (female). 
 Halal  —That which is permitted by Allah. A category of permitted substances (in-
cluding food) and actions in Islamic law. 
 Hanbali School  —The legal tradition of the jurist Ahmad ibn Hanbal, which is fol-
lowed in Saudi Arabia. It is often considered the strictest of the four Sunni legal 
schools ( madhdhahib ). 
 Haram —(Pronounced HA-ram.) Sanctuary. Implies safety from violence and tem-
poral control. It also means the space used for prayer, or prayer hall of a mosque, 
and also refers to the entire mosque complex. The dual form,  Haramayn , refers 
to the two Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina, while the Grand Mosque in Mecca 
is al-Masjid al-Haram. 
 Haram —(Pronounced  Ha-RAAM .) Taboo. Not permitted Islamically. 
 Haramayn Brigades  —A cell of the militant group al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Penin-
sula, operative in 2003–2004. 
 Harrah  —(Pronounced  harrat in construction (idhafa) with another deﬁ nite noun.) 
Basaltic lava formations. 
 Hashemite —The descendants of Sharif Husayn of Mecca and Medina, who gov-
erned the holy cities prior to their conquest by ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ibn Sa‘ud. Husayn’s 

Glossary | 389
sons led the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans; his son ‘Abdullah became the 
ruler of Jordan, and his son Faysal became the ruler of Iraq. 
 Hijaz  —The western province of Saudi Arabia. The holy cities of Mecca and Medina 
are located here, and the Hashemite family, formerly the authorities of the holy 
cities, came from the Hijaz. 
 Hijrah —Refers to the migration of Prophet Muhammad and the Muslims from 
Mecca to Medina, escaping the genocide against Muslims in Mecca around 622 
 ce. 
 Hima  —A preserve system of collectively used grazing land allocated solely to people 
of a certain area, or town. Abolished in 1953 and revived in some places in the 
late 1980s. 
 Hinnawa h—A female professional who applies henna designs on women’s feet and 
hands. 
 Hizbullah al-Hijaz  —A militant oppositionist group believed to be sponsored by Iran 
and blamed for attacks in the late 1980s and 1990s, including the Khobar Towers 
bombing of 1996. Most of the group’s members were arrested or ﬂ ed in 1996. The 
group does not believe in accommodation with the Saudi Arabian government 
and still advocates armed struggle. It was most recently vocal following the Inti-
fadhah  of 1430 in Medina. 
 Hudud  —The most severe and ﬁ xed penalties under Islamic law for the most serious 
crimes such as adultery and fornication ( zina ’), brigandry or highway robbery, 
theft, false accusations of  zina ’  ( qadhf  ), apostasy, and wine drinking. Sedition or 
rebellion comes under the  ahkam al-bughat  and is considered a capital crime by 
some jurists but not others. 
 Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad  —A preacher and cleric of the mid-18th century 
who sought to cleanse Islamic practice in Arabia from innovations. His strict 
brand of Islam and mission was adopted by Muhammad Ibn Sa‘ud and his fol-
lowers and is referred to in the West as Wahhabism. 
 Ibn Taymiyyah  —A 13th-century Islamic jurist who called for jihad and  takﬁ r to 
address the un-Islamic practices of the Mongols, who had invaded the area and 
inﬂ uenced local rulers in his era. 
 Ibrahim —(Abraham) The founder of monotheism and father of Isma‘il from his 
slave, Hajar (Hagar). Also the father of Isaac according to the Bible, Ibrahim 
destroyed the idols of the polytheists and rebuilt the Ka‘bah. 
 ‘Id (Eid) al-Adha  —The Greater Feast (in contrast with the Lesser Feast, the ‘Id 
al-Fitr). On this day Muslims everywhere, including the pilgrims in Mina on the 
 hajj , sacriﬁ ce an animal and distribute a portion to the poor. A major holiday in 
Saudi Arabia. 
 ‘Id (Eid) al-Fitr  —The feast following the month of Ramadan. It is a major holiday 
in Saudi Arabia celebrated for at least a few days. 
 Ifta’  —The process of crafting responsa ( fatawa ) to questions of Islamic law or 
practice. 
 Iftar —Breakfast. Eaten after sundown during the month of Ramadan. 

 Glossary
390 |
 Ihram —The state of ritual purity that pilgrims must enter and maintain during the 
 hajj . It also pertains to the clothing worn by the pilgrims: for men, two white seam-
less garments wrapped around their waist and across the torso and, for women, 
modest, loose-ﬁ tting garments. 
 Ihya —Legal acquisition of land through cultivation of barren ﬁ elds. 
 Ijma‘  —Consensus, a principle of Islamic jurisprudence. 
 Ijtihad  —A legal methodology of constructing an independent response to a theologi-
cal issue that can be performed only by a  mujtahid  (a scholar who is trained and 
licensed to issue  ijtihad ; literally, “one who makes  ijtihad ”). The Hanbali  madh-
hab  (tradition or school of Islamic jurisprudence [ ﬁ qh ] deriving from Ahmad ibn 
Hanbal) school  allowed for  ijtihad , but the other Sunni  madhahib (schools) ceased 
doing so. 
 Ikhwan —Brethren, brotherhood. Refers to the Wahhabi warriors, the group who 
fought to expand the authority of the al-Sa‘ud and the reform movement of Ibn 
‘Abd al-Wahhab. (A diff erent group, the Muslim Brotherhood, are also called 
Ikhwan and were established in 1929 in Isma‘iliyya, Egypt.) 
 Imam  —An imam may be (1) a leader of an Islamic entity or the  ummah (community) 
or (2) simply a prayer leader. Some imams may also be  khatib s, preachers who 
deliver the Friday sermon. 
 Imamate  —In Shi‘a Islam, the imamate, or  a’ima , is a chain of Islamic leaders ap-
pointed by God to lead the Muslims; the ﬁ rst  imam  was ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. The 
followers of Sunni  madhahib do not recognize the institution of the  a’ima . 
 Intifadhah  —Uprising, literally means “shaking off .” 
 Iqa‘ Rhythm. 
 Iqal — Pronounced igal. The black cord circlet holding a man’s headcloth ( ghutra 
or  shmagh ) in place. 
 Iqta —A land grant made by a ruler; granted in the former Ottoman territories. 
 Islahiyyun  —Reformers. Liberal reformers in today’s Saudi Arabia. 
 Istiqamah  —Proper social and religious behavior. 
 al-Jama‘ah al-Salaﬁ yyah al-Muhtasibah  —The  salaﬁ yya (salaﬁ st) movement in con-
temporary times. The followers of the movement included Juhayman al-‘Utaybi, 
who led the takeover of the Grand Mosque in Mecca in 1979. 
  Jammal (plural, jamamil, or jammalun)  —One who raised camels and transported 
them for sale. 
 Jarish —Crushed wheat used in cooking. 
 Jihad —Struggle through defensive or off ensive warfare, or struggle for Islam. Mus-
lims distinguish between the greater jihad, the daily struggle to fulﬁ ll the require-
ments and ideals of Islam, and the lesser jihad, ﬁ ghting for the faith. 
 Jizyah  —A tax, similar to the Roman poll tax, levied on the Jews and Christians, who, 
unlike Muslims, are not subject to payment of  zakat (the required portion of a 
Muslim’s income and property given as charity or to support Islam). 

Glossary | 391
 Ka‘bah  —A cube-shaped building in the center of the Grand Mosque in Mecca, con-
sidered Allah’s house on earth. The spiritual center of Islam. 
 Kabsa —A dish cooked with chicken (or lamb) and rice. 
 Kaffi  r  —A polytheist or inﬁ del. Some sources, both Muslim and non-Muslim, use 
 kaffi  r to mean any non-Muslim, but its earliest application was to Meccans and 
their allies, who were polytheists. 
 Khalas (Deliverance) Movement  —A Shi‘a political opposition movement launched 
in 2009. 
 Khaliji  —Of the Arabian Gulf; from Saudi Arabia or the other nations along the Gulf. 
 Khamr —Wine or any form of alcohol. Forbidden to Muslims and in Saudi Arabia 
as a whole. 
 Khariji (plural, Khawarij) — A movement of devout Muslims who seceded from the 
early Muslim state because they feared that Islamic principles were being de-
graded. One of the Khawarij killed an early caliph, ‘Ali, objecting to his assent to 
arbitration with the Ummayyads. 
 Kharuf —Lamb, sheep. 
 Khatib  —Preacher, tribal orator, or spokesman. 
 Khayma (khaymah)  —Tent; also called  bayt al-sha‘r by the bedouin. 
 Khutbah   —Sermon. 
 Kiswa h—A large black cloth embroidered in golden thread with Qur’anic verses that 
is draped over the Ka‘ba. Each year a new  kiswah is presented, and the previous 
year’s is cut into pieces that are given to pilgrims. 
 Kuffi  ya  —Mens’ or boys’ skullcap, also known as a taqiyyah. In Mecca the white 
skullcap is called a kuffi  ya baladi. 
 Kuttab  —School for teaching the Qur’an. 
 Laylat al-hinna  —A nighttime prewedding celebration when the bride’s friends gather 
to decorate her hands and feet with henna, and sometimes their own as well. 
 Laylat al-qadr  —The night of power, during Ramadan, when the Qur’an was ﬁ rst 
revealed to the prophet Muhammad. 
 Laylat al-zaff af  —An all-night party during the wedding celebrations when the bride 
and groom consummate the marriage. 
 Mabkharah —Incense burner. 
 Madhhab  —Refers to a system or tradition of lawmaking or jurisprudence ( ﬁ qh ). 
Often termed a legal school (of thought). 
 Madrasah —An Islamic academy. 
 Mahdi  —A special ﬁ gure, the Guided One, who will restore Islam prior to the Day 
of Judgment. According to tradition, he will descend from the Prophet’s lineage. 
 Mahmal  —A ceremonial gift made of silks, jewels, and usually a Qur’an, carried atop 
a camel and presented by a ruler to the people of Mecca at the outset of the  hajj . 
Certain rulers claimed an exclusive right to present the  mahmal . 

 Glossary
392 |
 Mahr  —A payment made by the groom to his bride upon their marriage. 
 Mahram (plural, maharim)  —A male relative whom a woman cannot marry as she is 
closely related to him. A woman’s guardian,  wali , is from her  maharim . 
 Majlis —A meeting or council. In Saudi Arabia a  majlis is both an occasion (a party 
or seating when guests are entertained) and also the hall in which the  majlis takes 
place. 
 Maqam —Place; may refer to a structure like the Maqam Ibrahim or a musical mode. 
 Maqamat (singular, maqam)  —Musical structures like modes, featuring microtonalities. 
 Marja‘iyya —Scholarly  ‘ulama leadership of the Shi‘a. The Shi‘a take a cleric as a 
source ( marja‘ ) and follow his teachings. 
 Masjid —Mosque; literally, “place of bowing.” 
 Matarih —Hand loom used by bedouin women. 
 Mathal (plural, amthal)  —A short saying or proverb. 
 Mawalid —Children of slaves and nonslaves. 
 Mawlid al-nabi  —The birthday of the Prophet Muhammad, celebrated by the major-
ity group on the 12th day of the month of Rabi‘a al-Awwal. 
 Mecca (Makkah)—The birthplace of the Prophet Muhammad and a city sacred to 
Muslims because it is home to the Ka‘ba, a cubelike structure that is considered 
the ﬁ rst house for monotheistic worship, built by Adam and rebuilt by Ibrahim 
(Abraham) and his son Isma‘il (Ishmael). 
 Medina —The Prophet’s city and the place to which Muhammad and his followers 
migrated to escape religious persecution by the Meccans and to establish an Is-
lamic society. Medina is also where the Prophet Muhammad and the caliphs Abu 
Bakr, and ‘Umar are buried. Medina is the second-holiest site in Islam. 
 Mezzah —Small dish or appetizer. 
 Mina  —The sprawling tent city between Mecca and ‘Arafat, where pilgrims camped 
before and after the Day of Standing, and where they perform the animal sacriﬁ ce 
on the 10th day of Dhu al-Hija. 
 Minaret —A tower of a mosque, from which the call to prayer is chanted. 
 Mizmar —A men’s dance of the western region that simulates combat with canes. 
Also means a musical pipe; the musician utilizes circular breathing to play it. 
 Movement for Islamic Reform (MIRA)  —An opposition group based in the United 
Kingdom and headed by Dr. Sa‘ad al-Faqih since his 1996 break with the Com-
mittee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR). Al-Faqih (b. 1957) was one 
of the organizers of the 1991 Letter of Demands and the 1992 Memorandum of 
Advice presented to King Fahd. Al-Faqih had served as a physician to the  mu-
jahidin  and issued insights on the jihadists from 2003 to 2006. MIRA launched 
a satellite radio station, Sawt al-Islah, and a television program and called for 
demonstrations in Saudi Arabia in 2003 and 2004, requiring police intervention. 
MIRA’s assets were frozen in 2004 after the U.S. Treasury Department had al-
Faqih designated a special terrorist by the United Nations. 

Glossary | 393
 Mu’adhdhan —The person who issues the call to prayer (‘ adhan ) in a strong, pleasing 
voice. 
 Mudandash  —A dress. 
 Mufti  —Issuer of legal opinions ( fatawa ). 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah  —Prophet of Islam who lived from 570 to 632  ce. 
 Muhmal  —The undotted Arabic letters; also, poetry using only the undotted letters. 
 Muhtasib  —A state offi  cial who upheld the Islamic command known as the  hisba , 
commanding the good and forbidding the evil. This offi  cial also ensured fair prices 
and practices in the markets. 
 Mulk hurr  —Freehold landownership obtained by cultivating previously barren or 
unused land. 
 Musalla  —A smaller mosque or prayer room. Literally, “place of prayer.” 
 Mutawa‘in  —Also known in Saudi Arabia as the Organization or Committee for 
the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice,   as the HAIA, or as the religious 
police, who enforce a strict interpretation of religious duties and separation of the 
sexes. The more general Arabic meaning of  mutawa‘a is one who is a very pious or 
conservative person, a “volunteer” to extra duties in Islam, who chooses to per-
form supernumerary prayers, additional fasting, and charity in addition to  zakat. 
 Mutawwif  —An agent specializing in pilgrims. 
 Mutrib/Mutriba  —Male or female singer who leads a musical group. Literally, “one 
who possesses  tarab (the ability to enchant or quality of enchantment).” 
 Muwahhidun —Wahhabis. Literally, means “those who support monotheism 
( tawhid ).” 
 Muzahhid  —A man who sang songs to inspire people to leave their aff airs and go to 
visit the Prophet’s mosque in Medina. 
 Mzayyan  —A song and poetry competition held by nomadic groups at night, often 
at the end of the summer. 
 Nabati  —Nonclassical, colloquial, or vernacular language, especially that of Najd; 
and poetry composed in that language. 
 Nawadir  —Anecdotes, usually humorous. 
 Niqab  —A black mask worn over the face; a face veil. 
 Nuktah  —Joke. 
 Nuwwash  —Swinging of the hair and head while dancing. 
 Panegyrics  —Poetry composed to praise or honor a ruler or another person. 
 Polygyny  —Marriage to more than one woman. 
 Qabilah  —Tribe. 
 Qabyala  —Idea of tribal identity. 
 Qadi  —A judge of Islamic law. 
  al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)  —Known in Arabic as Tanzim al-Qa’ida 
ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah, which means al-Qa’ida on the Arabian Peninsula. It was 

 Glossary
394 |
formed in 2001–2002. Some members of this group merged with two Yemeni ji-
hadist organizations in 2008. AQAP formed in Saudi Arabia under the command 
of Yusuf al-‘Uyayri, who unleashed suicide bombing attacks in May 2003, fol-
lowed by a large-scale attack in Riyadh, killings of individual foreigners, and then 
major attacks in Yanbu and at Khobar. The group attacked the U.S. consulate 
in Jeddah, mounted a failed attack at Abqaiq, and the security forces have foiled 
other attacks. Most of AQAP’s leadership has been killed or imprisoned. Some 
militants ﬂ ed to Yemen, where three diff erent organizations reassembled under 
the name of AQAP. The earlier organization has not been totally eradicated in 
Saudi Arabia. 
 Qahwah —Coff ee. 
 Qasidah  —A form of poetry with double stanzas and a refrain. 
 Qibla h   —Muslims face Mecca when praying. That orientation is called and indicated 
by the  qibla h. 
 Qisas  —The second-most serious level of criminal punishments in Islamic law. These 
pertain to murder, manslaughter, or bodily injury. 
 Qital  —Fighting or killing, and a term for military activity used in the Qur’an. 
 Qiyan (singular, qayna)  —Women entertainers, singers, reciters of poetry, and 
instrumentalists. 
 Qiyas  —Reasoning of a judge using legal analogy. 
 Qur’an  —Islamic book of divine revelation. The Qur’an is divided into 114  surah s, or 
chapters, with 6,219  ayat , or verses. 
 Rababah  —A bowed, upright stringed instrument with a squarish or rectangular 
shape. 
 Ramadan  —The holy month of fasting during the daylight hours. 
 Rami  —Gifts of gold or jewelry given at childbirth. 
 Rawi  —One who recited poetry or texts. 
 Rawshan  —Wooden screens used on buildings in the Hijaz; covered windows and 
balconies so those inside could see out but no one could see in; these may be 
decorative screens like the  mashrabiyya  (screens of hand-turned wood) used in 
Egypt. 
 Ridha —Parental contentment. 
 Sabkha h—Salt ﬂ at; swampy sand formed where the tide meets land. 
 Sadaqah —Charity. 
 Safqa (or tasﬁ q)  —Group hand-clapping that accompanies music, providing part of 
the percussion or counterpercussion. 
 Sahwah Islamiyya  —A religious revival beginning in the 1970s, which Muslims refer 
to as the Islamic awakening. 
 Saj —Rhymed prose. 

Glossary | 395
 Salaﬁ  —An adherent of the  salaﬁ yya movement. This refers to historic and modern 
movements for the puriﬁ cation of Islamic practice by followers of Muhammad ibn 
‘Abd al-Wahhab and other modern  shaykhs (not the  islah movement for Islamic 
reform and modernization of thought led by Muhammad ‘Abduh). 
 Salat  —Prayer in Islam. 
 Saluki  —A hunting dog favored by the bedouin. 
 Samnah  —Clariﬁ ed butter used in cooking. 
 Saqr  —A type of falcon 
 Al-Sa‘ud, King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Rahman  —The founder of the modern state of Saudi 
Arabia and its ﬁ rst king. He was also known as Ibn Sa‘ud. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —King of Saudi Arabia since 2007. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, King Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —King Fahd was debilitated by a stroke; many 
of his state duties were performed by then crown prince ‘Abdullah. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, King Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —A modernizing king who was assassinated 
in 1975 by a nephew. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, Prince Bandar ibn Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —Former ambassador of Saudi 
Arabia to the United States. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, Prince Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —Minister of the interior and second deputy 
prime minister. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz  —Crown prince, ﬁ rst deputy prime minister, 
and minister of defense and aviation. 
 Al-Sa‘ud, Prince Turki al-Faysal  —Previously headed the General Intelligence Direc-
torate until 2001. Ambassador to the United States in 2006–2007. 
 Sawalif  —The prose prefaces to oral poetry. 
 Sawm  —Fasting. Muslims are required to fast during the daylight hours of the month 
of Ramadan. 
 Shahadah  — Statement or testimony of belief in Islam; also means witness. 
 Shahid  —One who is martyred for the cause of Islam. 
 Sha‘ir  —Poet. 
 Shari‘ah  —Islamic law, which is based on the Qur’an, the hadith,  qiyas (analogy), 
and  ijma‘ (consensus). 
 Shayla (Shaylah)—Woman’s black scarf. 
 Shiraziyyin —Political trend of activist Shi‘a claiming authority as leaders in Karbala’, 
Iraq, who taught and inﬂ uenced Saudi Arabian Shi‘a as well as Bahrainis and 
Lutis in Oman. 
 Shirk —Belief in many gods, or “sharing” of God with other entities; idolatrous prac-
tice, associating someone other than Allah with divinity. 
 Shmagh  —Man’s headcloth with a red houndstooth check pattern. 

 Glossary
396 |
 Shuhadah  —Martyrdom. Those who participate in jihad and are not seeking self-
glory may be considered martyrs (shuhada’). 
 Shura —Consultation with the rulers, a principle of Islamic governance. The Sa‘udi 
rulers may consult with their advisers and inner circles or hold open  majlis es 
(councils) to allow for questions, petitions, and grievances. 
 Sirwal —Long, baggy pants or pantaloons traditionally worn under other clothing. 
 Subrah —A lease of land through a contract. 
 Sudqan —Close friends. 
 Suﬁ  —A Muslim mystic, follower of a mystical order. 
 Sunnah —Traditions and practices, both in general and speciﬁ cally the customs and 
practice of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 Suq —Traditional marketplace. 
 Suq al-harim  —Area of the traditional marketplace where women sell goods. 
 Taﬁ sir —Commentary or interpretation of the Qur’an. 
 Takﬁ r —The action of declaring a Muslim, to be an inﬁ del or  kaffi  r  on account of 
their sins. 
 Talbiyyah  —A greeting to Allah that pilgrims chant in unison on the way to Mecca. 
It begins in a low, speaking tone and rises in volume. 
 Tanbura —A lyre, also known as the  simsimiyya . 
 Tanzim al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah  —al-Qa’ida organization on the Arabian 
Peninsula. 
 Taqlid —Blind imitation in matters of religious doctrine. 
 Tar  —A frame drum, or  daff  . 
 Tasﬁ q —Rhythmic clapping performed as a type of percussion and counterrhythm. 
 Tawhid —The absolute oneness and unicity of God. Monotheism in Islam. 
 Tawhid al-asma’ wa al-sifat  —The belief that God’s multiple names or attributes 
(such as the Generous or the Beneﬁ cent) that may be found in the Qur’an apply 
solely to God and no one or nothing else. 
 Tawhid al-‘ibadah  —Unicity, or absolute monotheism in worship or religious practice. 
 Tawhid al-rububiyyah  —Allah’s unique attribute of being the creator of the world and 
holding dominion over it. 
 Tawwaf  —Circumambulation of the Ka‘ba at Mecca. 
 Ta’zir —A penalty for crimes less serious than capital off enses or those punishable 
by  qisas . 
 Thawb (thob)  —A full-length, long-sleeved, high-necked robe worn by men. 
These are usually white in the summer and white or possibly gray or brown 
in the winter months. Certain women’s garments, long robes, may also be 
called a  thawb . 
 Thawb magassab  —A festive or formal decorated dress worn by women. 

Glossary | 397
 Thawb nashal  —A festive gauzy overdress decorated with gold metallic thread and 
sequins, worn by women of the Eastern Province. 
 Tibb  —Medicine. 
 Tibb Nabawi  —Prophetic medicine, based on recitations of Qur’anic verses or drink-
ing the water in which written verses have been soaked. 
 Tufrah  —Literally, “jump”; word used to describe the ﬁ rst oil boom and great inﬂ ux 
of oil income. 
 Turath  —Islamic or Arab legacy or historical precedent; cultural heritage. 
 ‘Ubudiyya  —Slavery ( ‘abd means one slave). 
 Ud  —(Pronounced  ood .) Fragrant resin-infused aloeswood that is burned as incense. 
 ‘Ud  —Musical instrument. A lute with a deep belly and short, back-bent neck. 
 ‘Udhrite love (hubb ‘udhri)  —Unrequited and usually undeclared love. 
 ‘Ulama  —Religious scholars or clerics. May refer to the scholars as a class or force 
in society. 
 ‘Umara  —The princes and princesses of the Sa‘udi royal family. 
 Ummah  —The worldwide community of Muslim believers; transcends national, eth-
nic, racial, or linguistic divisions. 
 ‘Umrah —The lesser pilgrimage, made up of the  tawwaf , circumambulating the 
Ka‘ba at Mecca, and the  sa’y , running seven times between the two hills of al-
Safa and al-Marwa to remember Hajar’s search for water and the discovery of 
Zamzam. 
 ‘Uqayli (plural, ‘uqaylat)  —A long-distance trader, who might have worked also as a 
labor migrant or a mercenary soldier in the past. 
 ‘Urf  —Tribal or customary law. 
 al-‘Utaybi, Juhayman  —The man who led the 1979 attack on the Grand Mosque in 
Mecca. 
 al-‘Utaybi, Sa‘ud ibn Hammud  —A leader of the al-Qa’ida movement in Saudi Arabia 
who was killed by Saudi Arabian forces. 
 Wadi  —A valley or narrow gulf that may ﬂ ood with rainwater. 
 Wafa’  —The pattern of social visits by Saudi Arabian women and mutual support 
and assistance networks. Also refers to the gifts and favors they extend each other. 
 Wahhabism —Refers to the interpretation of Islam developed by Muhammad ibn 
‘Abd al-Wahhab. The Arabic term used (usually) by non–Saudi Arabians is  al-
wahabiyya . However, ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s followers called themselves  muwahhidun 
 (monotheists). 
 Wakil —Deputy or guardian. 
 Waqf (plural, awqaf )  —An endowment made in perpetuity under Islamic law; 
similar to mortmain; a legal status given to land or property by its owner that 
preserves its upkeep and dedicates the income generated to some public or chari-
table purpose. 

 Glossary
398 |
 Wasta  —An intermediary or connection. Sometimes means someone who must be 
contacted to obtain a favor, inﬂ uence an outcome, act as a go-between, or grant 
some request. 
 Wudu‘ —Ablutions, ritual washing prior to Muslim prayers. The hands and fore-
arms, face, ears, head, and feet are washed. 
 Wufyan —Formal friends. Might include foreigners. 
 Wu‘ud —Formal visits by friends made by appointment. 
 Zakat —Charity. A voluntary tax on Muslims that is one of the basic requirements 
of Islam. 
 Zar —An exorcism ceremony, accompanied by music. Also the name of a musical 
genre. 
 Zina’   — The sin of illicit sexual relations; when involving married persons, it means 
adultery. 
 Ziyadah  —An open space adjoining the main area of a mosque that is converted to a 
prayer area if large numbers attend prayer.  

399
  Facts and Figures 
 The following tables present facts and ﬁ gures about contemporary Saudi Arabia. 
These statistics begin with basic facts about the country and continue with the 
country’s demographics (including population, ethnicity, and religion), geography, 
economy, communications and transportation, military, and education. Following 
these basic facts and ﬁ gures, more detailed data of interest are presented as a series 
of tables, charts, and graphs. 
TABLE A.1 Basic Facts and Figures
Country Info
Location
Occupies most of the Arabian Peninsula in Southwest Asia, 
bounded by Jordan, Iraq, and Kuwait to the north; the  Persian 
Gulf, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman to the east 
and south; Yemen to the south; and the Red Sea to the west
Offi  cial Name
al-Mamlakah al-‘Arabiyyah al-Sa‘udiyyah (Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia)
Local Name
al-‘Arabiyyah al-Sa‘udiyyah
Government
Monarchy
Capital
Riyadh
Weights and Measures
Metric system
(continued)

 Facts and Figures
400 |
 DEMOGRAPHICS 
 The following table features information about the people of Saudi Arabia, including 
statistics on population, religion, and language. 
TABLE A.1 Basic Facts and Figures (continued)
Country Info
Time Zone
8 hours ahead of U.S. Eastern Standard
Currency
Saudi riyal
Head of State
King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Head of Government
King ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud
Legislature
Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Council), appointed by the 
king
Major Political Parties
None
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)
 
TABLE A.2 Basic Facts and Figures
Demographics
Population:
29,207,277 (2010 est.)
Population by age
(2010 est.)
 0–14
38%
 15–64
59.50%
 65+ 
2.50%
Median Age
(2010 est.)
 Total
24.9 years
 Males
26 years
 Females
23.4 years 
Population Growth Rate
1.548% (2010 est.)
Population Density
34 people per sq. mile (2010 est.)
Infant Mortality Rate
16.7 deaths per 1,000 live births (2010 est.)
Ethnic Groups
Arab (90%), Afro-Asian (10%)
Religions
Muslim (100%)
Majority Language
Arabic
Other Languages
Urdu, Tagalog, English, Pashto, Bahasa
Life Expectancy (Average)
73.9 years (2010 est.)
Fertility Rate
2.4 children per woman (2010 est.)
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)

Facts and Figures | 401
 GEOGRAPHY 
 The following table provides general facts and ﬁ gures on the geography of Saudi 
Arabia. 
TABLE A.3 Basic Facts and Figures
Geography
Land Area
864,869 sq. miles
Arable Land
2%
Irrigated Land
6,255 sq.miles (2003)
Coastline
1,640 miles
Natural Hazards
sand and dust storms
Environmental Problems
Desertiﬁ cation, water scarcity, coastal pollution from 
oil spills
Major Agricultural Products
Wheat, dates, barley, watermelon, vegetables, sheep, 
goats, poultry
Natural Resources
Oil, natural gas, iron, gold, copper
Land Use
0.1% cropland, 1.7% arable land, 98.2% other
Climate
Arid with extreme temperature variation
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)
 ECONOMY 
 The following table off ers basic economic information for Saudi Arabia, including 
ﬁ nancial, labor, trade, and industrial statistics. 
TABLE A.4 Basic Facts and Figures
Economy
GDP
$434.4 billion (2009 est.)
GDP per capita
$14,873 (2007 est.)
GDP by sector
Agriculture, 2.7%; industry, 61.9%; services, 35.4% 
(2009 est.)
Exchange rate
3.75 riyals = US $ 1 (2010)
Labor force
Agriculture, 6.7%; industry, 21.4%; services, 71.9% 
(2006 est.)
Unemployment
10.8% (2010 est.)
(continued)

 Facts and Figures
402 |
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TRANSPORTATION 
 The following table features facts and ﬁ gures on Saudi Arabia’s communications 
networks and transportation. 
TABLE A.4 Basic Facts and Figures (continued  )
Economy
Major industries
Crude oil extraction, natural gas extraction, petroleum 
 reﬁ ning and processing, petrochemical products, cement, 
ship repair, aircraft repair, construction
Leading companies
Saudi Basic Industries Corporation, Dallah al-Baraka, 
Saudi Arabian Airlines, Saudi Aramco Mobil Reﬁ nery 
Company, Arabian Oil Company, Consolidated 
Contractors International, National Commercial Bank, 
Saudi American Bank, Riyadh Bank, Saudi Consolidated 
Electric Company, Al-Rajhi Banking and Investment 
Group, Al-Faisalia Group
Electricity production
179.1 billion kWh (2007 est.) 
Electricity consumption
165.1 billion kWh (2007 est.) 
Value of exports 
$235.3 billion (2010 est.)
Goods exported
Petroleum, petroleum products
Value of imports
$99.2 billion (2010 est.)
Goods imported
Machinery and equipment, food, chemicals, textiles, 
motor vehicles
Current account balance
$52.0 billion (2010 est.)
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)
TABLE A-5 Basic Facts and Figures
Communications and Transportation
Telephone lines
4.2 million (2009)
Mobile phones
44.9 million (2009)
Internet users
9.77 million (2009)
Roads
137,554 miles (2006)
Railroads
865 miles (2008)
Airports
217 (2010)
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)

Facts and Figures | 403
 MILITARY 
 The following table outlines basic statistics about the Saudi Arabian military. 
TABLE A.6 Basic Facts and Figures
Military
Defense spending 
10% of GDP (2005)
Active armed forces
233,500 (2010)
Manpower ﬁ t for military service
7,560,216 men (2010 est.)
Military service
Voluntary, age 18 or older
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)
 EDUCATION 
 The following table presents basic information about education in Saudi Arabia. 
TABLE A.7 Basic Facts and Figures
Education
School system
Primary education begins at the age of six 
and lasts for six years. Students then attend 
three years of early secondary education, 
followed by three years of either academic 
or technical upper secondary education.
Education expenditures 
5.7% of GDP (2008)
Average years spent in school
13.5 (2008)
Students per teacher, primary school
10.8 (2008)
Students per teacher, secondary school
11 (2008)
Primary school–age children 
enrolled in primary school
3,211,387 (2008)
Secondary school–age children 
enrolled in secondary school
2,788,094 (2008)
Enrollment in tertiary education
666,662 (2008)
Literacy
79.0% (2005)
Sources: ABC-CLIO World Geography database; CIA World Factbook (https://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook)

 Facts and Figures
404 |
TABLE C-1 Urban versus Rural Population
Indicator
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Rural population (thousands)
3,807
3,893
4,193
4,492
4,735
Urban population (thousands)
12,449
14,358
16,614
19,120
21,681
Percentage urban (%)
76.6
78.7
79.8
81.0
82.1
TABLE C-2 Urban versus Rural Population
Indicator
1990–1995
1995–2000
2000–2005
2005–2010
Rural annual 
growth rate (%)
0.45
1.49
1.38
1.05
Urban annual 
growth rate (%)
2.85
2.92
2.81
2.51
CHART B Saudi Arabia’s Urban Annual Growth Rate
0
2
4
6
8
10
Urban annual growth rate (percent)
1975–
1980
1980–
1985
1985–
1990
1990–
1995
1995–
2000
2000–
2005
2005–
2010
2010–
2015
2015–
2020
Population

Facts and Figures | 405
TABLE D Population Growth of Saudi Arabian Cities
Population of capital city (millions) 
Capital city
1995
2005
2007
2010
Al-Riyadh (Riyadh) 
2.576
4.26
4.465
7 (est.)
Populations of other Saudi Arabian cities (thousands) 
City
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Al-Dammam
409
533
639
766
903
Medina
529
669
795
944
1,105
Jeddah
1,742
2,200
2,509
2,860
3,239
Mecca
856
1,033
1,168
1,319
1,486
The population of Riyadh has increased steadily during the last 20 years, as have 
those of the other major cities. 
TABLE E Urbanization 
Urban Population, Agglomerations, and Percentage of Total Urban Population 
Size class
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
1 to 5 million
 Number of agglomerations
2
3
3
3
4
 Population
4,068
6,268
7,244
8,373
10,686
 Percentage of urban population
33
44
44
44
49
500,000 to 1 million
 Number of agglomerations
2
2
2
3
3
 Population
1,385
1,202
1,434
2,239
2,019
 Percentage of urban population
11
8
9
12
9
Fewer than 500,000
 Population
6,996
6,888
7,936
8,508
8,976
 Percentage of urban population
56
48
48
44
41
Saudi Arabia is an increasingly urbanized society, although, outside its borders, it is 
 imagined as an undeveloped land of desert dwellers. In 2008, the urban population 
was 82 percent of the total population of Saudi Arabia (CIA World Factbook, Saudi 
Arabia, 2010). The following table gives an idea of how urbanization has proceeded 
in diff erent  regions of the country.
Saudi Arabia’s society has a signiﬁ cant stratum of poor and near-poor. In addition to 
these data, it should be borne in mind that many cannot aff ord to buy homes because 
of the high price of land and therefore they rent. 

 Facts and Figures
406 |
TABLE F Year-by-Year Economic Data and Some Poverty Indicators
Economic Indicators 
2004
2005
2006
2007
GDP (in millions of $)
250,338.9
315,580
356,630.4
383,586.7
Growth of GDP (%)
5.3
5.6
  3.2
    3.4
Inﬂ ation (CPI) 
0.3
0.7
 2.2
    4.2
Unemployment (%) 
–
–
 6.3
     5.6*
Extreme poverty (%) 
  1.25
Underweight children under 
5 years (%) 
– 
  6.4**
Foreign direct investment 
(% of GDP) 
−0.1
0.1
 0.2
   −2.1
Current account balance 
(millions of $) 
  51,926.0
 90,060.2
  99,066.1
  95,080.2
Government consumption 
23.6
22.2
23.3
   22.4
Government expenditure on 
education (% of GDP)
–  
–
–
–
Government expenditure 
on health (% of GDP)
2.6
2.6
 2.5
Government expenditure 
on military (% of GDP
8.4
8.0
 8.3
    9.2
Sources: Bertelsmann Stiftung, BTI 2010—Saudi Arabia Country Report (Gütersloh, 
 Germany: Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2009) and UNDP Saudi Arabia Data. BTI 2010 is based 
on the World Bank’s World  Development Indicators 2009; the UNESCO Institute for 
 Statistics; the International Labour Organization’s Key Indicators of the Labour Market 
Database; and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)’s Yearbook: 
Armaments, Disarmament and International Security.
*An extremely low estimate as most text and interview sources suggested rates as high as 
20 to 25 percent; also it is not clear if this reflects male unemployment or both female and 
male unemployment. 
**14 percent was estimated based on figures inclusive of 2000–2006 in the UN Human 
 Development Report, 2009. UNDP Human Development Reports 1990–2001. .http://hdr.
undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2009/
TABLE G  Top 10 Oil Producers, 2009–2010 (by Total Oil 
Produced in Barrels per Day) (continued)
Rank
Country
Barrels/Day
 1
Russia 
10,120,000
 2
Saudi Arabia
9,764,000
 3
United States
9,056,000
 4
Iran
4,172,000
 5
China
3,991,000
 6
Canada
3,289,000
Oil Production

Facts and Figures | 407
Other
20%
U.S.
14%
Far East
57%
Europe
4%
Mediterranean
5%
U.S.
3%
Europe
9%
Mediterranean
4%
Mediterranean
4%
Crude Oil Exports (2009)
Refined Product Exports (2009)
Natural Gas Liquids Exports (2009)
Far East
50%
Far East
38%
Other
58%
Other
34%
CHART G Saudi Arabia’s Oil, NGL, and Petroleum Product Exports (2009)
Source: Saudi Aramco, 2009 Annual Review.
 The following pie charts show the percentage of Saudi Arabia’s most important 
exports reaching various global destinations. KSA exported 1 million barrels a day 
to the United States in 2009; it was the fourth-highest oil exporter to the United 
States after Canada, Mexico, and Venezuela. Saudi Arabia exported approximately 
55 percent of its crude oil to Asia.  
TABLE G  Top 10 Oil Producers, 2009–2010 (by Total Oil 
Produced in Barrels per Day) (continued)
Rank
Country
Barrels/Day
 7
Mexico
3,001,000
 8
United Arab Emirates
2,798,000
 9
Brazil
2,572,000
10
Kuwait
2,494,000
Source: CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2173rank.html

 Facts and Figures
408 |
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2009
(Million Barrels per Day)
CHART GA CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION, 1960–2009
Source: http://www.eia.doe.gov/aer/txt/ptb1105.html
TABLE H  Saudi Arabia’s Leading Regional Trading Partners in the Years of the Oil Boom 
(1974 to 1982) 
Exports
Imports
Rank 
Country 
No.  
Rank 
Country 
No. 
 1 
Jordan 
223.5
 1 
Lebanon 
341.2
 2 
Lebanon
203.0
 2 
Kuwait 
304.85
 3 
Morocco
185.0
 3 
Syria
221.8
 4 
Sudan
116.5
 4 
Jordan
110.4
 5 
Syria
112.4
 5 
Sudan
82.57
During the past 50 years, Saudi Arabia’s oil production has gradually risen, to a peak 
of 9.55 million barrels per day in 2009. In 2009, only Russia—at 9.50 million barrels 
per day—produced more oil per day than Saudi Arabia.
In the late 1980s I studied intraregional trade as a predictor of in-region or global 
political relations. Despite calls for regional trade and currency zones, all Arab coun-
tries traded more heavily with nations outside the Arab world than with each other. 
This aff ects the countries’ ability to invest in other areas of their economy because 
their imports often cost more than the value of their exports. Sometimes, intrare-
gional trade helped explain political alliances (like Jordan and Iraq’s). Saudi Arabia 

Facts and Figures | 409
TABLE H  Saudi Arabia’s Leading Regional Trading Partners in the Years of the Oil Boom 
(1974 to 1982) (Continued)
Exports
Imports
Rank
Country
No. 
Rank
Country
No.
 6 
Tunisia
88.0
 6 
Egypt
50.7
 7 
Egypt
79.7
 7 
Morocco
15.5 
 8 
Kuwait 
47.28
 8 
Iraq
4.0
 9 
Libya
16.0
 9 
Libya
.85
10 
Iraq
15.8
10 
Tunisia
.85
11 
Algeria
3.5
11 
Algeria
.45 
Sources: Quarterly Economic Review (various country editions, 1982–1983); Zuhur, “A View 
of Intraregional Trade in the Middle East,” 1986.
was far more important as an exporter or importer to other Arab countries than were 
they to Saudi Arabia itself, however, its economic relationships with other world 
powers are far more signiﬁ cant  to its own economic proﬁ le than any Arab partners. 
The following data show the greater signiﬁ cance of Saudi Arabia’s trade with 
nations outside of the region, even though its trade (and aid) are important to other 
Arab nations.
By 2008, the low rate of intraregional trade had not changed. But the world had, as 
Asian countries have grown in importance. Saudi Arabia’s most important trading 
partners were the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, India, and Germany. 
TABLE I Percentage of Saudi Arabia’s World Trade That Is Intraregional (IR)
Exports 
Imports
Total Value of Trade
IR total =            
9,491 
IR total =           
9,795
IR total =          
19,286
World total =  
533,425
World total = 
181,828
World total =  
715,243
IR portion =      
1.77% 
IR portion =    
5.385% 
IR portion =      
2.69%
Industrial Countries’ Percentage of Total Trade with Saudi Arabia for 1982 
Exports = US$ 64.5 million
Imports = U S$82.4 million
Trade

 Facts and Figures
410 |
TABLE J Saudi Arabia’s Exports and Imports
Saudi Arabia’s Exports: Highest Percentages 
To: United States
17.1%
Japan 
15.2%
South Korea 
10.1%
China 
  9.3%
India 
  7.0%
Saudi Arabia’s Imports: Highest Percentages 
From: United States
12.2%
China 
10.5%
Japan 
  7.7%
Germany 
  7.4%
South Korea
  5.1%

Facts and Figures | 411
TABLE K Selected Arab Countries’ Trade with Saudi Arabia in 2010
Jordan
Syria
Sudan
Lebanon
Yemen
Egypt
Exports 
(% of total)
Imports 
(% of total)
Exports 
(% of total)
Imports 
(% of total)
Imports 
(% of total)
Exports 
(% of total)
Exports 
(% of total)
Imports 
(% of total)
10.56
17.3
5.04
10.1
7.22
7.0
5.8
5.53
Source: CIA World Factbook 2010.

 Facts and Figures
412 |
Employment
The data below show that a signiﬁ cant percentage of the employed population had a sec-
ondary school education or less. Saudization depends on increasing the educational readi-
ness of the labor force and also supplying targeted training. Of the Saudi Arabian women 
who work, many have a university education; here, more and varied jobs are necessary. 
TABLE L Distribution of Employed Saudi Arabians by Educational Level and Gender
Educational 
Level
Male 
(No.) 
Male
(%)
Female
(No.)
Female
(%)
Total
(No.) 
Total 
(%)
Illiterate
131,325
4.01
9,945
2.06
141,270
3.76
Literate
111,058
3.39
3,759
0.78
114,817
3.06
Primary
446,288
13.63
7,613
1.58
453,901
12.08
Intermediate
626,781
19.14
11,761
2.44
638,542
17.00
Secondary or 
equivalent
1,010,102
30.85
54,551
11.31
1,064,653
28.34
Diploma
264,103
8.07
86,327
17.90
350,430
9.33
University
633,777
19.36
298,454
61.88
932,231
24.82
Postgraduate
35,149
1.07
4,323
0.90
39,472
1.05
PhD 
15,773
0.48
5,580
1.16
21,353
0.57
Total
3,274,356
100.00
482,313
100.00
3,756,669
100.00
Source: United Nations Development Program and Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Ministry of 
Economy and Planning, Millennium Development Goals 2009 G./1430 H., p. 34.
TABLE M Youth and Educational Data
Current GDP per capita  
US$14,871
Youth proportion of population (ages 15–24)  
19% 
 
(ages 15–29)  
28% 
Youth unemployment rate (ages 15–24)
Total 
16.3%
Male 
12.2%
Female 
15.8%
Net enrollment rate, primary (2008)
Total 
85%
Male 
85%
Female 
84%
Net enrollment rate, secondary (2007) 
Total (national estimate)  
73%
The rate of enrollment in school indicates that Saudi Arabia will likely meet its mil-
lennium goals of bridging the gender gap in enrollment. However, matriculation 
rates are even more important. 

Facts and Figures | 413
TABLE M  Youth and Educational Data (Continued)
Current GDP per capita  
US$ 14, 871
Male (UIS estimate)   
70%
Female (UIS estimate) 
76%
Gross enrollment rate, tertiary (2006)
Total 
30%
Male 
25%
Female 
36%
Public expenditure on education (2004)
Percentage of GDP 
6.8%
Percentage of total government expenditure 
27.6%
Pupil-teacher ratio (2008)
Primary (national estimate) 
11
 Secondary (national estimate) 
 *11
*If correct, this is very low.
Sources: Brookings Institute, “Taking Stock of the Youth Challenge to the Middle East,” 
2010, http://www.brookings.edu/articles/2010/06_middle_east_youth.aspx?sc_lang=en. 
Country data and UIS, 2009. United Nations (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics (2009).
TABLE N Saudi Arabia’s Reserves, Parks, and Wildlife Sanctuaries
al-Jandaliyya 
 
Mahazat al-Sayd
al-Khunfah 
 
Majami‘ al-Hadb
al-Tubayq 
 
Nafud al-Urayq
al-Taysiyah 
 
Raydah
Farasan Islands  
 
Saja Umm al-Rimth
Harrat al-Harrah  
 
Umm al-Qamari
Ibex Reserve 
 
‘Uruq Bani Ma‘arid
Outdoor Recreation


415
  Major Saudi Arabian Holidays 
 OFFICIAL HOLIDAYS 
 Offi  cial holidays in Saudi Arabia are the ‘Id al-Fitr, the ‘Id al-Adha, and Saudi Na-
tional Day. Ramadan is the month of fasting preceding the ‘Id al-Fitr, and businesses 
and schools typically hold reduced Ramadan hours. The Laylat al-Qadr, the Night of 
Power, is believed to take place during the ﬁ nal 10 days of Ramadan. On this night, 
the Qur’an was ﬁ rst revealed. However, it is not known exactly when the Night of 
Power will fall. 
 The ‘Id al-Fitr and ‘Id al-Adha 
 The ‘Id al-Fitr ends the fast of Ramadan. This ‘Id is celebrated for several days (up 
to a week) in Saudi Arabia. The ‘Id al-Adha, the feast of the sacriﬁ ce, commemorates 
Ibrahim’s sacriﬁ cing of a ram in place of his son Isma‘il, and occurs on the 10th day 
of Dhu al-Hija. 
 The dates given for 2011–2013 might vary by a day or two because the beginning 
of Ramadan depends on the sighting of the moon or a special arrangement if the 
moon cannot be seen. 
 • 1st day of Ramadan: Predicted for August 1, 2011 
• Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Power): Estimated August 26, 2011 
 • ‘Id al-Fitr (end of Ramadan): August 30, 2011 
 • ‘Id al-Adha (10th day of Dhu al-Hija): November 6, 2011 

 Major Saudi Arabian Holidays
416 |
 Saudi National Day 
 Saudi National Day is held on September 23 of the Western calendar every year to 
mark the establishment of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932. 
 OTHER HOLIDAYS 
 Other holidays include the Prophet Muhammad’s birthday, the Islamic New Year, 
and the ‘Ashura holiday. 
 Islamic New Year 
 The Islamic New Year is the ﬁ rst day of the ﬁ rst month, Muharram. It is not an of-
ﬁ cial but rather a religious holiday in Saudi Arabia. 
 1433 AH 
The New Year should occur on November, 26 2011 
 1434 AH 
The New Year should occur on November 15, 2012 
 1435 AH 
The New Year should occur on November 4, 2013 
 Mawlid al-Nabi 
 Similarly, the Prophet’s Birthday, the Mawlid al-Nabi, is not an offi  cial holiday, 
although it is in other Muslim countries. The dates of this holiday diff er. Sunni 
Muslims, the majority group in Saudi Arabia, celebrate it on the 12th day of Rabi‘a 
al-Awwal, a  nd the Shi‘a Muslims, celebrate it on the 17th day of that month to co-
incide with the birthday of Ja‘far al-Sadiq, their sixth imam. 
 
 12th of Rabi‘a al-Awwal 
17th day of Rabi‘a al-Awwal 
 2011 
February 15 
February 20 
 2012 
 February 4 
February 9 
 2013 
January 24 
January 29 
 ‘Ashura 
 ‘Ashura is celebrated by the Saudi Arabian Shi‘a as a day of mourning for Imam 
Husayn. For the majority Sunni group, it is a holiday but not of such magnitude. It 
is held on the 10th day of the month of Muharram, which should arrive on 
 1433 
December 5, 2011 
 1434 
November 24, 2012 
 1435 
November 13, 2013 

Major Saudi Arabian Holidays | 417
 Isra ’
 The Isra’ and the Mi‘raj were two parts of the Prophet Muhammad’s miraculous 
Night Journey and they are commemorated on the Laylat al-Mi‘raj which is esti-
mated to take place on June 28 in 2011 and on June 16 in 2012. 
 Weekly Holiday 
 The day of communal prayer is Friday. Offi  cial businesses are closed on Friday. 
Some are closed on Friday and Saturday; however, others are closed only on Friday 
mornings until the ending of the afternoon prayer.    


419
  Country-Related Organizations 
 BUSINESS AND ECONOMIC RESOURCES 
 Chambers of commerce and industry exist in all of the main cities of Saudi Arabia—
Abha, Al-Ahsa, Arar, Al-Bahah, Bishah, Dammam, Hafr al-Baten, Ha’il, al-Jawf, 
Jeddah, Jizan, al-Majma‘ah, Mecca, Medina, Najran, Qasim, Riyadh, Tabuk, Ta’if, 
and Yanbu. 
 Chambers of Commerce 
 A point of contact is the Council of Chambers: 
 http://www.saudichambers.org.sa/index_en.htm 
 or http://www.saudinf.com/main/p2.htm 
 JEDDAH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 King Khalid St., Ghurfa Bldg. 
 P.O. Box 9549 
 Jeddah 21423 
 Tel: (2) 642-3535/647-1100 
 Fax: (2) 651-7373 
 Website: http://www.jcci.org.sa/jcci/ 

  Country-Related Organizations 
420 |
 RIYADH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 Dhabab St. , al-Murabba’
 P.O. Box 596 
 Riyadh 11421 
 Tel: 966 (1) 404-0044/404-0300/404-2700 
 Fax: 966 (1) 401-1103 
 Website: http://www.riyadhchamber.com/index.php 
 For other addresses, see http://www.saudia-online.com/chamber.htm. 
 The chambers are headed by the Council of Saudi Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry in Riyadh, Chamber of Commerce and Industry Building, P.O. Box 16683, 
Riyadh 11474. Tel. (1) 405-3200/405-7502. Fax: (1) 402-4747. Certain chambers have 
elected women representatives, and three women stood for election to the Riyadh 
chamber in 2010. 
 Kingdom Holding Company 
 P.O. Box 1 
 Riyadh 11321 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966 1 211 1111 
 Fax: +966 1 211 1112 
 E-mail: Investor.relations@kingdom.com.sa 
 Website: http://www.kingdom.com.sa/en/ 
 A public holding company controlled by Prince al-Walid ibn Talal ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz with headquarters in Riyadh. Only 6 percent of the company’s shares are 
public. Its international investments have included Amazon, Citigroup, Fox News 
Channel, PepsiCo, Motorola, Walt Disney Company, the Lebanese Broadcasting 
Corporation International, and the Rotana Group (see Music). 
 Saudi Arabian Market Information Resources (SAMIRAD) 
 For directory entry or book advertising, 
 Postal address: SAMIRAD, Littebrook Estate, Poulner Hill, Ringwood, 
England BH24 3HR 
 Tel: 00 44 (0) 1425 489901 
 Fax: 00 44 (0) 1425 461200 
 E-mail: samirad@saudinf.com 
 Website: http://www.saudinf.com/ 
 Saudi Arabian Market Information Resources (SAMIRAD) is a business- 
oriented governmental organization with a website with information on Saudi 
 Arabia  organized into a country proﬁ le, a current news section, and advertising 
sections for businesses. 

 Country-Related Organizations | 421
 Saudi-U.S. Relations Information Service (SUSRIS) 
 Patrick Ryan, Editor 
 Saudi-US Relations Information Service (SUSRIS) 
 c/o P.O. Box 2931 
 Cookeville, TN 38502-2931 
 Tel: (931) 230-5732 
 Website: http://www.susris.com 
 Saudi-U.S. Relations Information Service (SUSRIS) is a private-sector informa-
tional organization that off ers a wide array of articles, interviews, and information 
on Saudi Arabia and U.S.–Saudi Arabian relations with a website, related blogs, an 
e-newsletter, and links to National Council of U.S.-Arab Relations. 
 U.S.-Saudi Arabian Business Council (USSABC) 
 U.S. Offi  ce 
 8081 Wolftrap Road, Suite 300 
 Vienna, VA 22182 
 Tel: (703) 962-9300 or 888-638-1212 
 Fax: (703) 204-0332 
 E-mail: ussaudi@us-sabc.org 
 Saudi Arabian Offi  ce 
 Al Ahsa Street, Al-Malaz 
 P.O. Box 27582 
 Riyadh 11427 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: 966-1-474-2555/3555 or 966-1-476-7913 
 Fax: 966-1-476-7167/2697 
 E-mail: ussaudibc@us-sabc.org 
 U.S.-Saudi Arabian Business Council (USSABC), formed in 1993, is a bilat-
eral organization of business leaders that aims to promote better mutual un-
derstanding and provide information on business opportunities. It has offices 
in Washington, D.C., and Riyadh. The council is co-chaired by Abdulaziz al-
Quraishi, former governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency and CEO of 
A. Z.  Al-Quraishi & Brothers Co., and Peter Robertson, former vice chairman 
of Chevron Corporation. 
 BUSINESS/GOVERNMENTAL 
 Capital Market Authority 
 Faisaliyyah 
 King Fahad Road, C 

  Country-Related Organizations 
422 |
 Tel: (800) 245-1111 
 E-mail: info@cma.org.sa 
 Website: http://www.cma.org.sa/ 
 Capital Market Authority (CMA) is responsible for regulating Saudi Arabian 
capital markets, developing them, regulating the Saudi Arabian Stock Exchange 
(Tadawul), and creating the necessary regulations. The CMA was formed by royal 
decree in 2004 (although it has existed unoffi  cially since the 1950s) and is headed in 
2010 by a ﬁ ve-person board including Dr. Abdulrahman A. Al-Tuwaijri (chairman), 
Mr. Abdulrahman Al-Rashed (vice chairman), Mr. Mohammed Al- Sumrani (mem-
ber), Mazin A. Al-Rmaih (member), and Abdulrahman M. Al- Arrak (member). 
 Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC) 
 P.O. Box 5101 
 Riyadh 11422 
 Tel: 1-401-2033/1-401-2361 
 Fax: 1-401-3831 
 E-mail: malkusayer@sabic.com 
 Website: http://www.sabic.com/ 
 Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC) is a public company manufacturing 
fertilizers, chemicals, plastics, and metals. 
 CULTURAL/YOUTH 
 General Presidency for Youth Welfare (GPYW) 
 P.O. Box 965 
 Riyadh 11421 
 Tel: 401 4576 
 Fax: 401 0376 
 General Presidency for Youth Welfare (GPYW) sponsored many cultural pro-
grams including classes in folklore, arts and crafts, literary and drama clubs, and also 
science projects. Nine literary clubs arrange lectures and symposiums and try to en-
courage young writers through poetry- and essay-writing competitions. The GPYW 
also sponsors exhibits of calligraphy and visual arts and sponsors Saudi Arabians to 
participate in international arts events. From 2003 on, the Ministry of Culture and 
Information took over many of the activities and centers previously affi  liated with 
the GPYW, including the King Fahd Cultural Center. 
 Mansoojat Foundation 
 London: +44 (0)78 8692 0254 
 Saudi Arabia: +966 5 0667 3765 

 Country-Related Organizations | 423
 E-mail: info@mansoojat.org 
 Website: http://www.mansoojat.org 
 And on Facebook 
 The Mansoojat Foundation is a nonproﬁ t charity registered in the United King-
dom by a group of Saudi Arabian women who want to revive and preserve the tradi-
tional costumes and designs of the diff erent regions of Saudi Arabia. They mounted 
the Arabia 3D exhibit at IMAX London in 2010. 
 Saudi Arabian Boy Scouts Association (SABSA) 
 Website: http://www.scouts.org.sa/a 
 SABSA is the offi  cial national scouting organization of Saudi Arabia and had 
19,269 members in 2010. It was formally established in 1961, but scouting activities 
were available for many years prior to that. Saudi Arabia is a member of the World 
Organization of the Scout Movement. A scout is called a  kashaf in Arabic, and the 
scouting motto “be prepared” translates to  kun musta’idan . 
 Saudi Arabian Society for Culture and Arts 
 The society was formed in 1972 and is affi  liated with the General Presidency for 
Youth Welfare (GPYW; see its entry). It consists of committees for culture, theater, 
music and vocal arts, folklore, arts, information, and publishing. It has been study-
ing and recording Saudi Arabian folk music and dance since the 1980s, and at least 
50 folk groups perform around the country. The society has produced a television 
program called  Folk Arts . It sponsors Saudi Arabian artists and established a library, 
an information center, and a cultural center in Riyadh. 
 World Assembly of Muslim Youth 
 Mail Address: Riyadh 11443 
 or P.O. Box 10845 
 Tel: (966) 1/4641669 
 Fax: (966) 1/4641710 
 E-mail: info@wamy.org 
 Website: http://www.wamy.org 
 Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/pages/
WORLD-ASSEMBLY-OF-MUSLIM-YOUTH-WAMY/79897795475 
 The World Assembly of Muslim Youth was founded in Saudi Arabia in 1972. It is 
an international organization devoted to promoting knowledge of Islam and Islamic 
 da’wah to young adults. Its activities range from organizing soccer (football) tour-
naments to providing youth camps and scholarship programs. It has been accused 

  Country-Related Organizations 
424 |
in Europe of promoting Wahhabism, or the Muslim Brotherhood, and both trends 
have been represented in the organization despite their marked diff erences. 
 EDUCATIONAL/SCHOLARLY 
 British Society for Middle East Studies (BRISMES) 
 BRISMES Administrative Offi  ce 
 Institute for Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies 
 University of Durham 
 Elvet Hill Road 
 Durham DH13TU United Kingdom 
 Tel: 0191 33 45179 
 Fax: 0191 33 45661 
 E-mail: a.l.haysey@dur.ac.uk 
 Website: http://www.brismes.ac.uk/ 
 The British Society for Middle East Studies (BRISMES), founded in 1973, is a 
professional society for professors, students, and those with an interest in the Middle 
East. As for the Middle East Studies Association of North America (MESA; see its 
entry), some members specialize in Saudi Arabia, and the organization holds an an-
nual conference. 
 Gulf2000 Project 
 Email: lgpS@columbia.edu 
 Website: http://gulf2000.columbia.edu/ 
 The Gulf2000 Project was established in 1993 for scholars, offi  cials, journalists, 
businesspersons, and others with a professional interest in the Gulf region or studies 
of that region. The executive director is Gary Sick, and the project is affi  liated with 
Columbia University’s School of International and Public Aff airs, with funding from 
the Ford Foundation, Carnegie Corporation, the Open Society Institute, and Exxon-
Mobil Foundation; it has an electronic library. 
 Institute of Diplomatic Studies (IDS) Ma‘ahad al-Dirasat al-Diblumasiyya 
 Director Amb. Dr. Saad bin Abdelrahman al-Ammar 
 Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, Diplomatic Institute 
 P.O. Box 51988 11553 
 Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966 1 2011184 
 Fax: +966 1 2011194 
 E-mail: alammar1@hotmail.com 

 Country-Related Organizations | 425
 Website: http://www.ids.gov.sa/vEnglish/default.asp 
 or: http://www.ids.gov.sa/en/ 
 The Institute of Diplomatic Studies (IDS) is an educational organization of the 
Saudi Arabian Ministry of Foreign Aff airs headed by a board of directors and re-
porting to the minister. It was established in 1983 in Jeddah and moved to Riyadh in 
1984. In 2007, the IDS was recognized as the main training institute for diplomatic 
and foreign aff airs. It hosts scholars and experts who lecture to the members, pro-
duces publications, and since 2007 has established the Center for Strategic Studies, 
the Center for European Studies, the Center for American Studies, and the Center 
for Asian Studies. 
 Institute for Gulf Affairs 
 1900 L Street N.W., Suite 309 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Tel. (202) 466–9500 
 Website: http://www.gulﬁ nstitute.org/ali_alahmed.htm 
 The Institute for Gulf Aff airs is an American-based organization, formerly called 
the Saudi Institute, that has been highly critical of Saudi Arabia. It was organized 
by ‘Ali al-Ahmed. He has now been joined by ﬁ ve others who specialize in Gulf af-
fairs. Al-Ahmed has mainly focused on religious discrimination in Saudi Arabia. The 
institute’s funding source is not indicated. It is included here in the interest of free 
and open information. 
 International Organization for Quran Memorization 
 International Organization for Quran Memorization is dedicated to the teaching of 
 tahﬁ z (Qur’an memorization). It held an international conference in June 2010. This 
is to be diff erentiated from the national Charitable Society for the Memorization 
of the Holy Quran, which was ordered to ﬁ re all of its non–Saudi Arabian teach-
ers (1,230 teachers) in November 2010, perhaps as part of the Saudization strategy 
( Arab News , November 3, 2010). It has offi  ces in diff erent countries as well as Saudi 
Arabia. It is associated with the website http://www.islam.com. To understand the 
popularity of Qur’an memorization, readers might watch Koran by Heart, directed 
by Greg Barker, to be shown on HBO during Ramadan 2011. The ﬁ lm covers the 
annual contest held in Cairo, following three winners back to their home countries.
 King Abdulaziz Historical Centre 
 King Abdulaziz Historical Centre is a complex in Riyadh encompassing the al- 
Murabba’ Palace, a park with a palm grove, the Darat King Abdulaziz (King 

  Country-Related Organizations 
426 |
 Abdulaziz Centre for Information and Research), the King Abdulaziz Mosque, the 
National Museum, the Department of Antiquities and Museums, the King Abdu-
laziz Public Library, the Lecture Hall, and the Riyadh Water Tower. 
 King Abdulaziz Public Library 
 Tel: 966 14911300 
 Fax: 966 14911949 
 Website: http://www.kapl.org.sa/ 
 The branch of the library in the Murabba’ area of Riyadh within the historical 
centre complex has a men’s, a women’s, and a children’s library. The library has im-
portant holdings in Arabic and Islamic studies, including rare European and Arabic 
books, and acquired the impressive private libraries of George Rentz and Hamza 
Bu Bakr as well as holdings from other sources. It also has a photographic archive 
of more than 5,400 photos, including the collections of Abbas Pasha Hilmi (and dis-
played the photographs of Princess Alice, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria, taken 
during her visit to the kingdom), Humberto da Silveira, Col. Muhammad Sadiq 
Pasha, and the Mirza collection, and also  collections of documents, maps, and coins. 
 King Fahd National Library 
 Website: http://www.kfupm.edu.sa/library/ 
 This library is located in a modernistic building in Riyadh. It is a research facility 
and holds a large collection of rare manuscripts of Arabic and Islamic literature. Its 
holdings of 1,300,000 items and 2,000,000 documents are in at least 10 languages, 
and it has the largest collection of information about Saudi Arabia (Kingdom Infor-
mation Center). It houses the Saudi National Bibliography with an author, subject, 
and title index, an index for Saudi periodicals, and a national archive for historic 
photographs and audiovisual records. Its information center has 3,000 paintings by 
Saudi Arabian artists. Its website includes an online catalog, contacts for librarians, 
and hours for men and women. 
 King Faisal Foundation 
 P.O. Box 352 
 Riyadh 11411 
 Fax: 1-465-6524 
 E-mail: info@kff .com 
 Website: http://www.kff .com/ 
 The King Faisal Foundation is a philanthropic and scholarly organization es-
tablished by his heirs. In 2010, the chairman of the board of trustees was Prince 

 Country-Related Organizations | 427
Muhammad al-Faisal, and the managing director was Prince Khalid al-Faisal. It 
aids the al-Faisal University, the King Faisal School, and Eff at National College, 
and it provides research grants, hosts scholars, off ers a university preparatory pro-
gram, and has certain commercial interests. The foundation awards the King Faisal 
International Prize to individuals who have promoted literature. It operates the King 
Faisal Center for Research and Islamic Studies (KFCRIS, http://www.kfcris.com/). 
The chairman of the board of directors of the KFCRIS in 2010 was Prince Turki 
al-Faisal. KFCRIS publishes the magazine  Islamic Civilization . 
 Middle East Policy Council 
 1730 M Street NW, Suite 512 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Tel: (202) 296-6767 
 Fax: (202) 296-5791 
 E-mail: info@mepc.org 
 Website: http://www.mepc.org 
 Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/pages/
Middle-East-Policy-Council/312133357360 
 The Middle East Policy Council is a nonproﬁ t educational organization located 
in Washington, D.C., whose president and CEO as of 2011 is Frank Anderson. It 
publishes the  Middle East Policy journal and off ers special sessions open to members 
of the U.S. Congress as well as workshops for educators. Its website off ers timely 
information on Saudi Arabia. 
 Middle East Studies Association of North America (MESA) 
 Website: http://www.mesa.arizona.edu 
 The Middle East Studies Association of North America (MESA) is a professional 
scholarly association devoted to the study of the Middle East. It has about 3,000 
members. At MESA’s annual meetings, panels or individual research papers address 
Saudi Arabian topics, and publications are displayed on every aspect of the Middle 
East. MESA publishes two journals, the  International Journal of Middle East Studies 
and the  Review of Middle East Studies , both of which include scholarly publications 
on Saudi Arabia and reviews of books on Saudi Arabia. 
 National Council on U.S. Arab Relations (NCUSAR) 
 1730 M St., NW, Suite 503 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Tel: 1-202-293-6466 
 Fax: 1-202-293-7770 
 Website: http://ncusar.org/ 

  Country-Related Organizations 
428 |
 The National Council on U.S. Arab Relations (NCUSAR) is a U.S. nonproﬁ t 
educational organization that promotes good relations between the United States 
and the Gulf nations, including Saudi Arabia. The organization was founded in 1983, 
and its president and director as of 2011 was Dr. John Duke Anthony. It off ers public 
brieﬁ ngs, an annual conference, internships, resources, and study trips to countries 
of the Arabian Peninsula. 
 Saudi-British Society 
 Mrs. Ionis Thompson 
 Honorary Secretary 
 The Saudi-British Society 
 1 Gough Square 
 London EC4A 3DE United Kingdom 
 Tel: 44 (0) 1372 842788 
 E-mail: secretary@saudibritishsociety.org.uk 
 Website: http://www.saudibritishsociety.org.uk/ 
 The Saudi-British Society was formed in 1986 to promote a greater understand-
ing between the peoples of Saudi Arabia and the United Kingdom. It off ers lectures 
on subjects concerning Saudi Arabia; provides sponsorships, grants, and awards; 
and promotes publications on Saudi Arabia. The president is always the Saudi Ara-
bian ambassador to the United Kingdom, currently Prince Mohammed bin Nawaf 
 al-Sa‘ud, ambassador to the Court of St. James’s. 
 FINANCIAL 
 Islamic Development Bank (ISDB) 
 P.O. Box 5925 
 Jeddah 21432 
 Tel: 2-636-0011/2-636-0054 
 Fax: 2-637-1334 
 Website: http://www.isdb.org/irj/portal/anonymous?guest_user=idb_en 
 The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) is a multinational ﬁ nancial institution with 
headquarters in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. It was founded by the ﬁ nance ministers of 
the Organization of the Islamic Conference in 1973 and began operations in 1975. 
It is not a Saudi Arabian organization, but Saudi Arabia is a member along with 53 
other member states who are shareholders. The largest shareholders in the IDB are 
from Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Kuwait, Libya, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, 
Egypt, Indonesia, and Pakistan. The bank’s purposes are to promote economic and 
social development for its members and for Muslim communities in non-member 

 Country-Related Organizations | 429
countries, to provide interest-free loans for projects including those creating infra-
structure, and to off er technical assistance and training facilities for development 
purposes. 
 Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) 
 Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency 
 Al-Ma’ather Street 
 P.O. Box 2992 
 Riyadh 11169 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966-1-463-3000 
 Fax: +966-1-466-2936/466-2966 
 Cable: MARKAZI 
 E-mail: info@sama.gov.sa 
 Website: http://www.sama.gov.sa/sites/samaen/Pages/Home.aspx 
 The Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA), established in 1952, serves as 
Saudi Arabia’s central bank. It issues the national currency, supervises all commer-
cial banks, helps maintain price stability, operates ﬁ nancial systems, and supervises 
foreign-exchange reserves. SAMA’s governor is Dr. Muhammad al-Jasser, who was 
appointed in 2009. 
 Supreme Economic Council 
 Secretariat General, Supreme Economic Council of Saudi Arabia 
 P.O. Box 94737 
 Riyadh 11614 
 Tel: 4803744 
 Fax: 4834035 
 E-mail: info@sec.gov.sa 
 Website: http://www.sec.gov.sa/Home.aspx 
 The Supreme Economic Council was formed in 1999, chaired then by then-crown 
prince ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. The council aimed to broaden the economic 
 policy–making process, and its goals were to beneﬁ t society, provide jobs, control 
public debt, distribute national income fairly, diversify the economy, increase savings 
and investments, and aid privatization ( SAMIRAD , 2010). In 2009, the council was re-
organized by a royal decree, to include Prince Sa‘ud Al-Faisal (chairman), Prince Mo-
hammed ibn Nayef ibn ‘Abdulaziz, Dr. ‘Abdulaziz ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Khuwaiter, Dr. 
Mutlab ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Naﬁ sah, the minister of commerce and industry, the minister 
of petroleum and mineral resources, the minister of ﬁ nance, the minister of economy 
and planning, the minister of water and electricity, the governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary Agency, and the secretary-general of the Supreme Economic Council. 

  Country-Related Organizations 
430 |
  Tadawul  (Saudi Stock Exchange) 
 NCCI Building, North Tower 
 King Fahd Rd. 
 P.O. Box 60612 
 Riyadh 11555 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel.: +966 1 218-9999 (main number) 
 Tel.: +966 1 218-9090 (customer service) 
 E-mail: webinfo@tadawul.com.sa 
 Website: http://www.tadawul.com.sa/wps/portal/!ut/p/c0/04_
SB8K8xLLM9MSSzPy8xBz9CP0os3g_A-ewIE8TIwP3gDBTA08Tn2C-
j4AAvY_dQA_3gxCL9gmxHRQB0Zc_U/ 
 The Tadawul is the Saudi Arabian Stock Exchange and is supervised by the Saudi 
Arabian Capital Market Authority. The Tadawul All-Share Index’s (TASI) end-of-the-
year value of shares traded for 2010 was 759.18 billion Saudi riyals or US$ 202.45 billion. 
 GOVERNMENTAL 
 Embassy and Consulates 
 ROYAL EMBASSY OF SAUDI ARABIA 
 601 New Hampshire Avenue, NW 
 Washington, DC 20037 
 Tel: (202) 342-3800 
 E-mail: info@saudiembassy.net 
 SAUDI ARABIAN CONSULATE GENERAL—NEW YORK 
 866 Second Ave., 5th Floor 
 New York, NY 10017 
 Tel: (212) 752-2740 
 SAUDI ARABIAN CONSULATE GENERAL—LOS ANGELES 
 2045 Sawtelle Blvd. 
 Los Angeles, CA 90025 
 Tel: (310) 479-6000 
 SAUDI ARABIAN CONSULATE GENERAL—HOUSTON 
 5718 Westheimer, Suite 1500 
 Houston, TX 77057 
 Tel: (713) 785-5577 

 Country-Related Organizations | 431
 Governmental agencies and ministries are listed on the websites of Saudi Arabia’s 
embassies. Only a few are listed here; others are discussed within the book. 
 General Intelligence Directorate (GID) 
 P.O. Box 2933 
 Riyadh 11134 
 Tel: 1-401-1944 
 Fax: 1-403-1185 
 Jeddah offi  ce Tel: 2-687-232 
 Saudi Arabia’s largest intelligence agency is responsible for intelligence collec-
tion and analysis, security, antiterrorism, and foreign liaisons. The General Intel-
ligence Directorate (GID) was charged by certain Americans in the investigation 
of the Khobar bombing; however, foreign agencies (from the United States, United 
Kingdom, and other countries) have also not cooperated with Saudi Arabia’s GID 
with reference to members of opposition groups. Prince Turki al-Faisal resigned as 
director-general of the General Intelligence Presidency (GIP) which heads the GID, 
on August 31, 2001, and was replaced by Prince Nawaf ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, King 
‘Abdullah’s half brother (Cordesman 2002, 263–265), but then Prince Nawaf suf-
fered a stroke. Prince Muqrin ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz has been director-general of the GIP 
since 2005. Cooperation with the United States on counterterrorism has increased 
markedly since 2001. The GID is within the Ministry of the Interior. 
 General Organization for Social Insurance (GOSI) 
 P.O. Box 2963 
 Riyadh 11461 
 Tel: 1-477-7735 
 Fax: 1- 477-9958 
 Website: http://www.gosi.gov.sa/index.php 
 The General Organization for Social Insurance (GOSI) is a governmental agency 
that regulates social insurance regulations, collects employer contributions, and pays 
beneﬁ ts to Saudi Arabian citizens and noncitizens if they are insured in Saudi Arabia. 
It is supervised by a board of 11 directors. 
 HAIA or CPVPV (Committee for the Promotion of Virtue 
and the Prevention of Vice) 
 Tel: 038602687 
 Fax: 038602688 
 E-mail: hisbah@hisbah.gov.sa 
 Website: http://www.hisbah.gov.sa/ (*This website was down in early summer 
of 2011.) 

  Country-Related Organizations 
432 |
 HAIA (the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice) is a 
division of the Saudi Arabian government that employs the  mutawa‘in , or religious po-
lice. They carry out the  hisba , which is the religious command to promote virtue and do 
away with sinful behavior, which they interpret as violations of dress codes, any mixing 
of unrelated men and women, the requirement that businesses close at prayer times, 
and observance of prayers. It has about 3,500 members but also many volunteers. 
Since 2007 the HAIA’s powers and funding have been more restricted than in the past. 
 National Commission for Wildlife Conservation and Development 
 Saudi Wildlife Commission 
 P.O. Box 61681 
 Riyadh 11575 
 Tel: +966 144 18700 
 Website: http://www.ncwcd.gov.sa/ 
 The National Commission for Wildlife Conservation and Development, created 
in 1986, is devoted to the preservation of native species, or their reintroduction, and 
their habitats, and to education about wildlife in Saudi Arabia. 
 National Human Rights Commission 
 King Fahd Road, Building No. 373 
 Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: 014628071/014655317/014628210 
 Fax: 014612061 
 Mailing address: 
 P.O. Box 58889 
 Riyadh 11515 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Website: http://www.haq-ksa.org/ 
 The commission was created in 2005. It off ers a website-based complaint form, 
and Human Rights Watch has written and posted letters of concern to the commis-
sion regarding egregious cases, several involving extreme abuse of women. The com-
mission opened a women’s offi  ce in 2008. It promised to set up a review committee to 
enable the formation of civil society organizations that are not strictly charities, but 
it has not actually done so. It has a Western Region offi  ce in Jeddah and an Eastern 
Region offi  ce in Dammam. 
 Royal Saudi Air Defense Force 
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation (MODA) 
 Airport Road 

 Country-Related Organizations | 433
 Riyadh 11165 
 Tel: 1 478 5900/1 477 7313 
 Jeddah tel: 2 665 2400 
 Website: http://www.moda.gov.sa/detail.asp?InServiceID=214&intemplatekey=
MainPage 
 The Royal Saudi Air Defense Force is the fourth branch of the Saudi Arabian 
armed forces. It was part of the Royal Saudi Land Forces until 1981. It is headquar-
tered in Riyadh and has an extensive underground command facility that monitors 
Saudi Arabia’s radar and air defense system, known as the Peace Shield. 
 Royal Saudi Air Force 
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation (MODA) 
 Airport Road 
 Riyadh 11165 
 Tel: 1 478 5900/1 477 7313 
 Jeddah tel: 2 665 2400 
 Websites: http://www.moda.gov.sa/detail.asp?InServiceID=214&intemplatekey=M
ainPage http://www.moda.gov.sa/Detail.asp?InSectionID=86&InNewsItemID=145 
 Royal Saudi Air Force ( al-Quwwat al-jawiyyah al-malakiyyya al-sa ‘ udiyya ) is the 
main air force of the Saudi Arabian military. It possesses an off ensive capability with 
a ﬂ eet of F-15 and Tornado aircraft. The minister of defense and aviation is Crown 
Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. 
 Royal Saudi Land Forces (RSLF, or Saudi Arabian Army) 
 Tel: +966 (1) 4777777, ext. 7862 
 Fax: +966 (1) 4777777, ext. 6380 
 Website: http://WWW.RSLF.GOV.SA/English/pages/default.aspx 
 Or contact via the Ministry of Defense and Aviation (MODA) as listed in the 
preceding entry 
 The Royal Saudi Land Forces (RSLF), estimated at 150,000 troops and headed in 
2010 by chief of the general staff , Field Marshal Saleh al-Muhaya. The army of ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud was a force of 63 men at the time of the conquest of Riyadh. The army 
has been expanded and modernized in various stages, and it played an important role 
in the Gulf War (1990–1991). The RSLF publishes a quarterly magazine,  al-Bariyyah . 
 Royal Saudi Naval Forces (RSNF) 
 Contact via Ministry of Defense and Aviation (MODA) as described in preced-
ing entries 

  Country-Related Organizations 
434 |
 The Royal Saudi Naval Forces (RSNF, or the Royal Saudi Navy) is the naval 
force of the Saudi Arabian military, founded in 1960. The RSNF has about 15,000 
members, including 3,000 marines. Its headquarters are in Riyadh. The Western ﬂ eet 
is located in the Red Sea with a base at Jeddah, and the Eastern ﬂ eet is in the Arabian 
Gulf with its base at Jubail. Additional bases are located in Yanbu, Ras al-Mishab, 
and Dammam. 
 Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority (SAGIA) 
 Riyadh SAGIA Headquarters 
 Imam Saud Bin Abdulaziz Road (University Road) 
 P.O. Box 5927 
 Riyadh 11432 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966 1 203 5555 
 Fax: +966 1 263 2894 
 (SAGIA has eight other offi  ces in other cities of Saudi Arabia) 
 E-mail: Info@sagia.gov.sa 
 Website: http://www.sagia.gov.sa/ 
 The Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority (SAGIA) was established April 
10, 2000, as part of Saudi Arabia’s process of development, growth, and liberaliza-
tion. It is intended to promote investment in energy, ICT,  transportation and other 
industries. Its 10 x 10 plan aimed to make Saudi Arabia one of the top 10 countries 
in the world by 2010. It is headed by a governor and chairman, Amr al-Dabbagh, 
who has the rank of minister. 
 Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG) 
 National Guard 
 P.O. Box 9799 
 Riyadh 11423 
 Tel: 1-491-2400 
 Fax: 1-491-2824 
 Website: http://www.sang.gov.sa 
 The Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG) is an active-duty armed force of 
260,000 that was headed for many decades (1962–2010) by King ‘Abdullah ibn 
‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud. It is now commanded by his son, Prince Mitab. SANG was 
involved in the liberation of Kuwait during the Gulf War. American Vietnam vet-
erans and others conducted a training mission called OPM-SANG by the Vinnell 
Corporation, and SANG has been undergoing a large-scale modernization process 
in recent years. 

 Country-Related Organizations | 435
 Saudi Arabian Standards Organization (SASO) 
 P.O. Box 3437 
 Riyadh 11471 
 Tel: 1-479-3332 
 Fax: 1-479-3063 
 E-mail: sasoinfo@saso.org.sa 
 Website: http://www.saso.org.sa 
 The Saudi Arabian Standards Organization (SASO) was established in 1972 and 
is responsible for creating and enforcing standards for service, products, and utilities. 
 Saudi Aramco 
 Media Relations Contact Information 
 Public Relations Department R-2212 
 East Administration Building 
 P.O. Box 5000 
 Dhahran 31311Saudi Arabia 
 Fax: 966-3-873-8490 
 E-mail: international.media@aramco.com 
 General Inquiries 
 Saudi Aramco New Business Development 
 North Park 2, Bldg. 3301 
 Dhahran 31311 
 Tel: +966 3872 0115 
 Fax: +966 3874 1737 
 Website: http://www.saudiaramco.com/irj/portal/anonymous 
 Saudi Aramco is the national oil company of Saudi Arabia and is the largest oil 
corporation in the world, with headquarters in Dhahran. It also operates the Master 
Gas System. It was known as Aramco (Arabian American Oil Company) from 1933 
to 1988. It owns 12 subsidiaries or associated companies, including Aramco Services 
Company in Houston, Texas, which publishes the bimonthly  Saudi-Aramco World 
in English. (See chapter 4) 
 The Saudi Geological Survey (SGS) 
 Saudi Geological Survey 
 P.O. Box 54141 
 Jeddah 21514 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966 261 9 5000 

  Country-Related Organizations 
436 |
 Fax: +966 2 619 6000 
 E-mail: sgs@sgs.org.sa 
 Website: http://www.sgs.orgs.sa 
 The Saudi Geological Survey (SGS) is the national geologic survey organiza-
tion of Saudi Arabia. It is attached to the Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral 
Resources but is independent. It evolved from the Directorate General for Mineral 
Resources, the U.S. Geological Survey mission from 1963 to 1999, and the Bureau 
de Recherche et Geologique mission that was carried out from 1972 to 1999. SGS 
is based in Jeddah, and it also has a branch offi  ce in Riyadh. It is responsible for 
hydrogeology, mining exploration and development, geological (and topographi-
cal) mapping, environmental geology, and the determination of environmental 
geohazards. 
 Saudi Press Agency 
 E-mail: wass@spa.gov.sa 
 Website: http://www.spa.gov.sa or http://www.spa.gov.sa/english/ 
 The Saudi Press Agency, the national news agency, was set up in 1971. Today, it 
also operates a website with news of the kingdom in Arabic and English. It can be 
contacted in the United States at the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Information, 601 
New Hampshire Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20037-2405 (at the embassy); tel: (202) 
944-3890. 
 Saudi Railway Authority 
 Dhahran Airport Street 
 P.O. Box 92 
 Dammam 31411 
 Tel: 3-871-4113 
 Website: http://www.saudirailways.org 
 The Saudi Railway Authority, now referred to as the Saudi Railways Organiza-
tion, was set up to manage the nation’s railways. The ﬁ rst line was developed in the 
1960s between Riyadh and Dammam. The Meshair railway system opened in 2010 to 
help reduce overcrowding during the  hajj and goes to Mina, Muzdalifa, and Arafat. 
A week  hajj ticket costs a little less than $70 and was available only to Saudi Arabians 
and other Gulf nationals in the ﬁ rst season. 
 Saudi Telecom Company (STC) 
 E-mail: Contactus@stc.com.sa 
 Website: http://www.stc.com.sa 

 Country-Related Organizations | 437
 Saudi Telecom Company (STC) was initially the sole provider of telecom services 
until 2002 when that sector was opened to competition. STC began installing IP-
VPN service at diff erent speeds and also a home ﬁ ber-optic service providing fast 
Internet service. An advanced system ﬁ lters sites; the usual claim is that this protects 
citizens from the mixing of men and women or pornography. The process has been 
carried out through the Internet Services Unit of the King Abdulaziz City for Science 
and Technology, and then through the Communications and Information Technol-
ogy Commission. Blockage of sites like Human Rights Watch is due to its criticism 
of the kingdom, and given legal arguments put forth by the National Committee on 
Human Rights, this information may be releasable. 
 HUMANITARIAN AND DEVELOPMENTAL 
 Arab Gulf Program for United Nations Development Organizations 
(AGFUND) 
 E-mail: info@agfund.org 
 Website: http://www.agfund.org/ 
 The Arab Gulf Program for United Nations Development Organizations (AG-
FUND) is an organization established in 1981 to support United Nations develop-
ment and humanitarian programs. Saudi Arabia contributes about 78 percent of 
this program’s resources. The program gives about 40 percent of its total resources 
to UNICEF and also beneﬁ ts the World Food and Agriculture Organization, the 
World Health Organization, the World Labor Organization, UNESCO, the World 
Food Program and its ﬂ agship programs, the Arab Open University, Banks for the 
Poor, and Early Childhood Development. The president is Prince Talal ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz. 
 Ibn Baz Foundation (Mu’assasat ‘Abd al-‘Aziz bin Baz) 
 Website: http://www.binbazfoundation.org/ 
 The Ibn Baz foundation is a charitable organization that off ers social and humani-
tarian aid in Saudi Arabia. 
 Disabled Children’s Association 
 Tel: 01 454 3913 or (toll free) 1800 124 1118 
 Website: http://www.dca.org.sa/ 
 The Disabled Children’s Association operates centers in diff erent Saudi Arabian 
cities for disabled children (but not the blind or deaf) and the Prince Salman Dis-
ability Research Center. 

  Country-Related Organizations 
438 |
 Ensan (Insan) 
 Website: http://www.ensan.org.sa/home/ 
 Ensan is a charitable group off ering aid to orphans in Saudi Arabia. 
 Gulf Kids Foundation (Atfal al-Khalij) 
 Website: http://www.gulfkids.com 
 The Gulf Kids Foundation is a charitable organization to help children of the 
Gulf region. 
 Al-Haramayn Islamic Foundation 
 A charity and  da ‘ wah organization based in Saudi Arabia that has had branches 
or derivatives in Afghanistan, Albania, Bangladesh, Bosnia, Comoros, Ethiopia, 
Indonesia, Kenya, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Somalia, Tanzania, and the 
United States. Overseas branches were accused of being a terrorist organization by 
the U.S. Department of the Treasury in 2004 for allegedly having direct connections 
to Osama bin Laden and his organization, and the foundation was banned by the 
United Nations Security Council Committee. For instance, the Comoros branch was 
accused of sending funds to rebels in Chechnya. The Saudi government and the U.S. 
Treasury Department blocked the accounts of the Bosnian and Somali branches of 
the charity in 2002, and the Saudi Arabian government established a high commis-
sion for oversight of all charities, contributions, and donations. 
 Human Rights First Saudi Arabia 
 Human Rights First Society 
 P.O. Box 3508 
 al-Khobar 31952 
 E-mail: HRFSUS@gmail.com 
 Human Rights First Society 
 P.O. Box 3734 
 Minneapolis, MN 55403-9998 
 United States 
 Website: http://hrfssaudiarabia.org/ 
 Human Rights First Saudi Arabia is a nongovernmental organization critical 
of the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia. It is not legal; only the semigovern-
mental National Society for Human Rights (NSHR; see its entry in the following) 
has been granted permission to register. It was founded by Ibrahim al-Mugaiteeb, 
who, in 2005, faced harassment, interrogation, and threats for his human rights 

 Country-Related Organizations | 439
activities and was forced to pledge that he would not contact foreign diplomats 
or the media and would cease his activities. Authorities have also harassed and 
 interrogated his son. 
 National Society for Human Rights (NSHR) 
 E-mail: info@nshr.org.sa 
 Website: http://nshr.org.sa/english/adefault.aspx 
 The National Society for Human Rights (NSHR; sometimes appearing as the Na-
tional Human Rights Association) was organized in 2003, with 41 members. It claims 
to be a nongovernmental organization but is in fact semigovernmental. It is supposed 
to respond to international human rights organizations, issue periodic reports, help 
implement human rights charters signed by Saudi Arabia, and monitor violations 
of women’s rights. The group has countered U.S. reports on abuse of labor ( Sharq 
al-Awsat , June 17, 2007), claiming these are politically motivated. The website has a 
contact and complaint submission form. 
 Prince Sultan bin Abdul Aziz Foundation 
 P.O. Box 64400 
 Riyadh 11536 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966-1-482-7663 
 E-mail: question@sultanfoundation.org 
 Website: http://www.sultanfoundation.com 
 This foundation is headed by Prince Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and supports edu-
cational, scientiﬁ c, and charitable endeavors, including programs at the University 
of California, Berkeley; the Arabian Gulf University; and the University of Bologna, 
Italy, as well as comprehensive national research on Alzheimer’s disease in Saudi 
Arabia, the Sultan bin Abdul Aziz Humanitarian City (with a hospital, medical 
center, and various projects), the Foundation for Charitable Housing, MEDUNET, 
and the Science and Technology Center. 
 Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz Fund 
 The fund was begun in 2007 and is based in Dammam. It helps establish women’s 
small businesses. It is currently headed by Hana al-Zuhair. 
 Saudi Red Crescent Authority 
 These contacts were provided per international recruitment and may or may not 
be accurate: 
 Assma Altuwajri: atuwajri@srca.com.sa 

  Country-Related Organizations 
440 |
 Sara Alhumaid: salhumaid@srca.com.sa 
 Rasha Alaftan: ralaftan@srca.com.sa 
 Fahd Aljuraid: faljuraid@srca.com.sa 
 Website: http://www.srcs.org.sa/ 
 The Saudi Red Crescent Authority provides medical services to those in need and 
collects donations. Within Saudi Arabia, it is equivalent to the Red Cross. 
 Saudi Society for Labor 
 The Saudi Society for Labor is an illegal society that has sought registration from the 
Ministry of Labor since 2007 and from the National Committee for Human Rights 
(NCHR), which has taken no action to enable the formation of civil society organiza-
tions that are not charities. It represents workers, has a membership of about 4,000, 
and was headed by Anice Alansari. 
 INTERNATIONAL 
 Gulf Cooperation Council (Cooperation Council for the Arab States 
of the Gulf ) 
 Website: http://www.gcc-sg.org/eng/ 
 The council is a political and economic union of six Arab Gulf states: Bahrain, 
Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. It holds con-
siderable political weight in the region, and was designed to further the interests of 
its member states. 
 Muslim World League (MWL) 
 Website: http://www.muslimworldleague.org/mwlwbsite_eng/index.htm 
 The Muslim World League (MWL) was founded in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, in 1962. 
It aims to enhance Muslim solidarity and to promote Islamic  da’wah  by issuing pub-
lications and promoting preachers, Arabic language programs, and Islamic centers. 
The MWL has been accused by opponents of Saudi Arabia of promoting the Wah-
habist current, but the Muslim Brotherhood (who are not Wahhabists) and many 
other types of Muslim representatives have also been involved in the organization. 
 Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) 
 Website: http://www.oapecorg.org/ 

 Country-Related Organizations | 441
 The Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) is an orga-
nization that coordinates energy policies among Arab countries that derive income 
from petroleum. Its headquarters are in Kuwait. Kuwait, Libya, and Saudi Arabia 
agreed to establish OAPEC in 1968. The members of OAPEC are Algeria, Bahrain, 
Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, and the United 
Arab Emirates. The organization issues statistics and various publications. 
 Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) 
 P.O. Box 178 
 Jeddah 21411 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +966 2 65 15 222 
 Fax: +966 2 651 22 88 
 Website: http://www.oic-oci.org/ 
 The Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) is an intergovernmental orga-
nization of Muslim nations established after the Islamic Summit in Rabat in 1969. 
The precipitant cause was the arson of the al-Aqsa mosque. The OIC deals with pan- 
Islamic issues and acts to promote Muslim solidarity. With a membership of 57 nations, 
it is the second-largest international organization following the United Nations. Its 
10-year program that started in 2008 aims to promote moderation and modernization. 
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) 
 Website: http://www.opec.org/opec_web/en/ 
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) is a bloc or cartel of 
oil-producing developing countries including Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Iran, Iraq, 
Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Ven-
ezuela. OPEC’s secretariat was originally in Geneva and was then moved to Vienna, 
Austria. OPEC tries to stabilize prices and protect the interests of the member na-
tions. Prior to the establishment of OPEC, oil-producing developing nations had 
very little control over the prices or policies of the large oil companies. 
 PROFESSIONAL 
 Association of Language Teachers of Saudi Arabia 
 Website: http://www.saudiarabianksaalt.org/ 
 Unions are not legal in Saudi Arabia; however, a wide variety of professional 
 associations and groups exist, a few of which have been mentioned in this book. The 

  Country-Related Organizations 
442 |
members of the Association of Language Teachers are primarily teachers of English; 
the organization mounts an annual conference. 
 Saudi Arabian Chefs Society (SARCA) 
 E-mail: saudichefs@gmail.com 
 Website: http://www.sarca.surge8.com/ 
 The society is a member of the World Association of Chefs’ Societies. 
 Saudi Ophthalmological Society 
 Website: http://213.230.15.195/sosnew/english/ 
 The society promotes scientiﬁ c thinking in ophthalmology in Saudi Arabia. 
 Saudi Organization for Certiﬁ ed Public Accountants (SOCPA) 
 Website: http://www.socpa.org.sa/ 
 Saudi Pediatric Society 
 Faculty of Medicine 
( P.O. Box 80205 
 Jeddah 21589 
 Bldg (1) First ﬂ oor 
 Mr. Hisham Hamdi 
 Tel: 640 1000, ext. 21221 
 Fax: 6408347 )
 The Saudi Pediatric Society was a professional society for pediatricians. The Saudi 
Pediatric Surgery Society now exists at King Abdulaziz University and also links to 
this name at http://sps.kau.edu.sa/Default.aspx?Site_ID=75706&lng=EN. Another 
group is the Saudi Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition 
http://www.saspghan.org/english/index.php. 
 SPORTS 
 Arab Sports Federation 
 P.O. Box 6040 
 Riyadh 

 Country-Related Organizations | 443
 The Arab Sports Federation was established in 1976 to encourage and develop 
regional events and ties in various sports. It is based in Riyadh. 
 The Equestrian Club 
 P.O. Box 26323 
 Riyadh 11486 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: +9661 25 40 222 
 The Equestrian Club is a private equestrian organization that organizes events 
and promotes the sport. 
 Islamic Solidarity Games Federation 
 The federation includes the 57 nations of the Organization of the Islamic Confer-
ence, and it organizes multisports competitions in various age categories, which are 
hosted by diff erent member countries. The 2013 games will be held in Indonesia. 
A website is constructed for the speciﬁ c meetings. 
 Saudi Arabian Equestrian Foundation 
 P.O. Box 60602 
 Al Maathar Olympic Complex 11555 
 Riyadh 11555 
 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 Tel: (966 1) 482 38 37 
 Website: http://saef.gov.sa/english/adefault.aspx 
 The Saudi Arabian Equestrian Foundation is a national organization intended 
to promote equestrian sports and Saudi Arabian representation in international 
equestrian events. (See Chapter 6, section on sports.) Horses require passports 
to come to Saudi Arabia, and the application form is available through the 
foundation. 
 Saudi Arabian Football Federation 
 Al-Mather Quarter 
 Prince Sultan bin Fahd Street 
 P.O. Box 5844 
 Riyadh 
 Tel: +966-1/482 2240 
 Fax: +966-1/482 1215 
 The federation is presided over by Prince Sultan ibn Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. 

  Country-Related Organizations 
444 |
 REFERENCES 
 Cordesmann, Anthony.  Saudi Arabia Enters the Twenty-First Century: The Military and In-
ternational Security Dimensions . Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 Matthiesen, Toby. “The Shi’a of Saudi Arabia at a Crossroads.”  Middle East Report On-
line , May 6, 2009. http://www.middleeastdesk.org/article.php?id=2765    Country-Related 
Organizations. 

445
 Annotated Bibliography 
 Aarts, Paul, and Gerd Nonneman, eds.  Saudi Arabia in the Balance: Political Economy, So-
ciety, Foreign Aff airs . New York: New York University Press, 2006. 
 A post-9/11 consideration of Saudi Arabia’s development, capacity for reform, and rela-
tionship with extremist Islam. 
 Abbas, B., A. A. al-Qarawy, and A. al-Hawas. “The Ethnoveterinary Knowledge of Tradi-
tional Healers in Qassim Region, Saudi Arabia.”  Journal of Arid Environments 50 (2002), 
367–379. 
 This article describes the treatment of animals in the Qasim region and the healers’ own 
assessments of the effi  cacy of such traditional procedures as cautery. 
 ‘Abd al-Hakim , Tariq.  Masahhir al-musiqiyin al-’arab [Famous Arab musicians]. n.d. [ca. 1965]. 
 A work on the great Arab musicians by one of the greatest of Saudi Arabia’s musicians 
and composers, known as the Father of Saudi Arabian music, who focused on the formal 
teaching of Arabic music. 
 ‘Abd al-Hakim, Tariq.  Ashhar al-fulklurat al-sha‘abiyah [The most famous forms of 
folkore]. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: al-Jam‘iyyah al-‘Arabiyyah al-Sa‘udiyyah lil-Thaqafah 
wa-l-Funun, n.d. [ca. 1980]. 
 Explains the speciﬁ c forms or genres of popular music in Saudi Arabia. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Kaba’ir.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 1. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Mu-
hammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. 
An elaboration of the major sins in Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s view, which degrade monothe-
ism, as well as behaviors that governments should avoid.

 Annotated Bibliography
446 |
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Jihad.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab :  al-Fiqh . Vol. 2. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. (equivalent to 1977 or 1978). 
 An essay on jihad as interpreted by the reformist scholar whose ideas were taken up by the 
al-Sa‘ud and their forces. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Nikah.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 2. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Mu-
hammad ibn Sa‘ud Islamiyyah, 1398h. 
 An essay on the importance of marriage, the rights and responsibilities of women and 
men, and interpretations of  shari‘ah  as it applies to women and matters of personal status. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Tawhid.” In  Mu’allafat al-Shaykh al-Imam 
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab . Vol. 1. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Jami‘at al-Imam Mu-
hammad bin Sa’ud Islamiyyah, 1977 (1398h.). 
 An essay on monotheism or absolute unicity in Islam. 
 ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn. “Kitab al-Tawhid.” Translated by Ismail al-Faruqi. Ku-
wait City: al-Faisal, 1986. 
 The same essay as in the preceding entry, translated by a leading scholar who promoted 
 da’wah in the West. 
 Abdul Ghafour, P. K. “Mishaal Named Allegiance Commission Chairman.”  Arab News , 
December 11, 2007. 
 Article provides the initial membership of the Allegiance (Bay‘ah) Commission and ex-
plains its role. 
 al-Abdulkareem, A. A., and S. G. Ballal. “Consanguineous Marriages in an Urban Area of 
Saudi Arabia: Rates and Adverse Health Eff ects on the Off spring.”  Journal of Commu-
nity Health 23 (1998), 75–83. 
 A scientiﬁ c study of close relatives’ marriages and accompanying health problems. 
 Abodehman, Ahmed.  La Ceinture . Paris: Gallimard, 2000. 
 The ﬁ rst novel written in French by a Saudi Arabian author. 
 Abou El Fadl, Khalid.  Speaking in God’s Name: Islamic Law, Authority and Women . Ox-
ford, UK: Oneworld, 2001. 
 A detailed study of the  ‘ulama ’s acquisition of false authority in Islam and  fatawa (legal 
response or responses) that are misogynistic or limit women’s rights as issued by the CRLO 
of Saudi Arabia. 
 Aboul-Enein, Youssef, and Sherifa Zuhur.  Islamic Rulings on Warfare . Carlisle, PA: Strate-
gic Studies Institute, 2004. 
 A study of Qur’anic, hadith, and  siyar (the laws of nations, or a form of international law in 
Islam) literature on jihad showing that unlawful treatment of prisoners was not permitted 
and explaining divergences in interpretations of jihad. 
 Abu ‘Aliyya, Abulfatah.  al-Mamlakah al- ‘ Arabiyyah al-Sa ‘ udiyyah wa Qadiyat Filistin . Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia: al-Dara (King Abdulaziz Foundation for Research and Archives), 1999. 
 The history of Saudi Arabia’s involvement with the Palestinian cause from an offi  cial 
perspective. 

Annotated Bibliography | 447
 Abu Khalid, Fawziyya.  Qira’a sirriyya ﬁ  tarikh al-sumt al- ‘ arabi . Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-
Adab, 1985. 
 The title translates as “Secret Reading of the History of the Arab Silence.” This is a poetry 
collection by one of the most prominent women poets and essayists. 
 AbuKhalil, As‘ad.  The Battle for Saudi Arabia: Royalty, Fundamentalism and Global Power . 
New York: Seven Stories, 2004. 
 A book that is highly critical of the Saudi Arabian government and its role in Middle 
Eastern politics. It explores the Sa‘udi royal family’s inﬂ uence via religious institutions as 
well as via their publishing domain. 
 Adams, Michael, ed.  The Middle East . New York: Facts on File, 1988. 
 A survey of the Middle East, its politics, and its economics to the mid-1980s. 
 Adra, Najwa. “Dance in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World Music , 
edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds,. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2002, vol. 6, 703–712. 
 An excellent overview of popular or folk dance in Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and the Gulf states. 
 Ahmad, Qanta.  In the Land of Invisible Women: A Female Doctor’s Journey in the Saudi 
Kingdom . Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks, 2008. 
 A rather negative view of the kingdom and its citizens focused on women’s issues and writ-
ten by a Pakistani-British physician. 
 Akeel, Maha. “Old Songs in Old Nights.”  Arab News , December 25, 2004. http://www.arab-
news.com/?page=December 25, 2004. http://www.arabnews.com/? 
 Information about the Saudi Arabian singer Tuha. 
 Akeel, Mona. “Female Circumcisions: Weight of Tradition Perpetuates a Dangerous Prac-
tice.”  Arab News , March 20, 2005. 
 One of the ﬁ rst news articles concerning circumcision of women in the kingdom. 
 ‘Alim, Raja‘.  al-Mawt al-akhir li-l-mumaththal [The ﬁ nal death of the actor]. Beirut, Leba-
non: Dar al-Adab, 1987a. 
 A play by a noted playwright and novelist. 
 ‘Alim, Raja‘.  Arba ‘ a/Sifr (4/0) . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-Nadi al-Thaqaﬁ  al-Adabi, 1987b. 
 Another play in a unique, symbolic style. 
 ‘Alim, Raja.  Thuqub ﬁ  al-Dhahr [Hole in the back]. Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Adab, 1987c. 
 Another of ‘Alim’s plays in her challenging style. All three were meant to be read as well 
as performed. 
 Alsanea, Rajaa.  Girls of Riyadh . Translated by Marilyn Booth. New York: Penguin, 2008. 
 A chronicle of a young Saudi American woman and her friends. 
 Altorki, Soraya. “Sisterhood and Stewardship in Sister-Brother Relations in Saudi Arabia.” 
In Nicholas Hopkins, ed., “The New Arab Family.” Special issue,  Cairo Papers in Social 
Science 24, nos. 1–2 (2003), 180–200. 
 This paper focuses on the dyadic sibling relationship. It challenges some stereotypes and 
may idealize the brother’s role. 

 Annotated Bibliography
448 |
 Altorki, Soraya. “The Concept and Practice of Citizenship in Saudi Arabia.” In  Gender and 
Citizenship in the Middle East , edited by Suad Joseph. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse Univer-
sity Press, 2000, 215–236. 
 This essay proposes that the universal concept of citizenship is actually Western and does 
not ﬁ t Saudi Arabia, where preservation/retention of the family is the central social concept. 
 Altorki, Soraya. “At Home in the Field.” In  Arab Women in the Field: Studying Your Own 
Society , edited by Soraya Altorki and Camillia Fawzi El-Solh. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press, 1988, 49–68. 
 As part of a volume that examines the role of the researcher in the context of anthroplogy’s 
debate about the emic-etic dynamic, Altorki reﬂ ects on her experience studying women 
in Jeddah. She is both an insider and an outsider due to long years of residence abroad. 
 Altorki, Soraya.  Women in Saudi Arabia: Ideology and Behavior among the Elite . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 An ethnographic study of three generations of elite Jeddah families conducted in the early 
to mid-1970s. It highlights aspects of continuity or change in social relations and challenges 
the then-dominant feminist interpretations. 
 Altorki, Soraya, and Donald P. Cole.  Arabian Oasis City: The Transformation of ‘Unayzah . 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. 
 An ethnographic study of ‘Unayzah and its social life during its development from an ag-
ricultural and market center in the ﬁ rst oil boom. It also draws on historical descriptions. 
 al-Ansary, A. R.  Qaryat al-Fau: A Portrait of Pre-Islamic Civilization in Saudi Arabia . Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia, 1982. 
 This book concerns the excavations at Qaryat al-Fau, an oasis in central Saudi Arabia, 
which the author believes to be the ancient site of Gerrha as mentioned by Pliny. 
 Ansary, Abdullah F. “Combating Extremism: A Brief Overview of Saudi Arabia’s Ap-
proach.”  Middle East Policy 15, no. 2 (Summer 2008), 111–143. 
 This overview describes the Saudi Arabian government’s prison-based counseling program 
and releasable information concerning the detainees/prisoners charged with terrorism. 
 Anscombe, Frederick.  The Ottoman Gulf: The Creation of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 This book examines the Ottoman Empire’s lost opportunities to eff ectively govern Arabia, 
due in part to their fears that Great Britain had a larger inﬂ uence than it truly possessed. 
 Arab Urban Development Institute.  Riyadh: City of the Future . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: al-
Ma‘ahad al-‘arabi li-inma al-mudun, 1984. 
 Information about Riyadh as it was expanding in the period after the ﬁ rst oil boom. 
 Arberry, A. J.  Aspects of Islamic Civilization: As Depicted in the Original Texts . Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1978. 
 An important analysis of original texts in translation that provide insight into cultural 
values. 
 Arebi, Saddeka.  Women and Words in Saudi Arabia: The Politics of Literary Discourse . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 

Annotated Bibliography | 449
 A study of Saudi Arabian women writers of various types of literature and diff ering social 
views. The author discusses these writers’ social role in examining and questioning ideas of 
gender and women’s issues, although their writing is creative as well as expository. 
 Armstrong, H. C.  Lord of Arabia . London: Arthur Barker, 1934. 
 A biography of Ibn Sa‘ud, the founder of modern Saudi Arabia, and his career. 
 Al-Ashban, R. M., M. Aslam, and A. H. Shah. “Kohl (Surma): A Toxic Traditional Eye 
Cosmetic Study in Saudi Arabia.”  Public Health 188, no. 4 (June 2004), 292–298. 
 The cosmetic use of  kohl (antimony) to beautify the eyes has health risks because of its 
lead content. 
 al-Askar, Abdullah.  Al-Yamama in the Early Islamic Era . Reading, UK: Ithaca, in associa-
tion with the King ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Foundation for Research and Archives, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia, 2002. 
 A detailed study of the region of al-Yamamah. The sedentary Banu Hanifa and the no-
madic Banu Tamim tribes are discussed in tandem with their political allegiances before 
and after the establishment of Islam. 
 al-Attas, Syed Naguib.  Aims and Objectives of Islamic Education . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 
1979. 
 Findings of the First World Conference on Muslim Education, held in 1977. 
 al-Awamy, Dr. Baker H., Dr. Fakhry, and Department of Pediatrics, al-Muhawis Hospital, 
Dammam. “Evaluation of Commonly Used Tribal and Traditional Remedies in Saudi 
Arabia.”  Saudi Medical Journal 12, no. 22 (December 2001), 1065–1068. 
 A useful summary of remedies from herbal medicines to cautery. 
 Ayoob, Mohammed, and Hasan Kosebalaban, eds.  Religion and Politics in Saudi Arabia: 
Wahhabism and the State . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2009. 
 A collection of essays on Wahhabism, Saudi Arabia, and U.S.–Saudi Arabian relations 
that outlines broad themes and contrasting positions, mostly critical of the Saudi Arabian 
government or the royal family, and responding to post-9/11 literature. 
 Al-Baadi, Hamad Muhammad. “Social Change, Education, and the Roles of Women in 
Arabia.” PhD diss., Stanford University, 1982. 
 A consideration of women’s changing roles, particularly with the advent of education. 
 Badeeb, Saeed M.  The Saudi-Egyptian Conﬂ ict over North Yemen, 1962–1970 . Boulder, CO: 
Westview, 1986. 
 A study of the conﬂ ict or proxy war fought in Yemen. 
 al-Badi, Awadh. “Institutionalizing Hereditary Succession in Saudi Arabia’s Political Gov-
ernance System: The Allegiance Commission.”  Arab Reform Initiative , February 14, 
2008. 
 A study that gives details of the new Allegiance ( Bay‘ah ) Commission. 
 Baeshen, Lamia.  Youssef et le palais des chagrins: Contes d’Arabie saoudite . Translated by 
Kadria Awad. Paris: L’Harmattan, 2010. (Originally published as  al-Tabat wa al-Nabat 
in 1997.) 
 Folktales as they were told to children in the Hijazi dialect in the past. 

 Annotated Bibliography
450 |
 Bagader, Abu Bakr A., and Ava Molnar Heinrichsdorff , eds. and trans.  Assassination of 
Light: Modern Saudi Short Stories . Washington, DC: Three Continents, 1990. 
 A collection of short stories by well-known Saudi Arabian writers addressing social issues 
and problems of modernization. 
 Bagader, Abu Bakr, Ava M. Heinrichsdorff , and Deborah S. Akers.  Voices of Change: 
Short Stories by Saudi Arabian Women Writers . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1998. 
 A collection of short stories by noted Saudi Arabian women writers. 
 Bagader, Abou Baker A., and Deborah S. Akers, eds. and trans.  Histoires D’Arabie 
Saoudite . Beirut, Lebanon: Centre International pour les Services Culturels, 2007. 
 A collection of short stories of Saudi Arabia. 
 Ba Ghaff ar, Hind.  Al-aghani al-sha ‘ biyya ﬁ -l-Mamlakah al- ‘ Arabiyyah al-Sa ‘ udiyyah [Folk 
songs in the Saudi Arabian kingdom]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Qadsiyya li-l-tawzi‘ 
wa-l-nashr, 1994. 
 Explanations of popular lyrics in verse from Saudi Arabia. 
 Bahgat, Gawdat. “Foreign Investment in Saudi Arabia’s Energy Sector.”  Middle East Eco-
nomic Survey 47, no. 34 (2004). 
 Explains Saudi Arabia’s interest in international investment in its energy sector in the 
context of Saudi Arabian economic reform. 
 Baker, Razan. “Tales of Old Jeddah.”  Arab News , January 25, 2007. 
 Introduces the tradition of storytelling in Jeddah and Lamia Baeshan’s project to preserve 
folktales in the original Jeddawi dialect. 
 al-Baz, Rania.  Disﬁ gured: A Saudi Woman’s Story of Triumph over Violence . Translated by 
Catherine Spencer. Northampton, MA: Interlink, 2008. 
 The true story of a Saudi Arabian television journalist who was battered by her husband. 
 BBC Two. “The Child Slaves of Saudi Arabia.” This World. Directed by Rageh Omaar . BBC . 
March 27, 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/this_world/6431957.stm 
 Investigative report and program looking into the reasons children come illegally into 
Saudi Arabia and are forced to beg, remitting money to adults. 
 al-Bedah, Abdullah M. N. “Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.” In  World Health Organization 
Global Atlas of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicine , edited by G. Bode-
ker, C. K. Ong, C. Grundy, and K. Shein. Kobe, Japan: World Health Organization, 
Centre for Health Development, 2005, vol. 1, 171–174. 
 A review of the traditional healing practices as well as the entry of external alternative 
medical treatments into Saudi Arabia. 
 Beling, William A., ed.  King Faisal and the Modernization of Saudi Arabia . Boulder, CO: 
Westview, 1980. 
 An edited collection on King Faysal’s rule and many aspects of modernization, develop-
ment, oil policy, foreign policy, treatment of the law, and the media at that time. 
 Bell, Gertrude.  The Arabian Diaries, 1913–1914 . Edited by Rosemary O’Brien. Syracuse, 
NY: Syracuse University Press, 2000. 
 Bell, an archaeologist, and later an important political ﬁ gure in Britain’s Middle East 
foreign policy, set out at age 45 across the Arabian Desert intending to meet the Amir 

Annotated Bibliography | 451
Rashid and Ibn Sa‘ud and move on to Baghdad, recording her impressions in her diaries 
and photographs. 
 Benoist-Méchin, Jacque.  Fayçal, roi d’Arabie: L’homme, le souverain, sa place dans le monde 
1906–1975 . Paris, 1975. 
 An insider’s view of King Faysal and his importance to Saudi Arabia. 
 Bergen, Peter I.  The Osama bin Laden I Know: An Oral History of al Qa’ida’s Leader . New 
York: Free Press, 2006. 
 A journalist’s version of Osama bin Laden’s life and goals told through interviews and 
direct quotations from various sources close to bin Laden. 
 Bianchi, Robert.  Guests of God: Pilgrimage and Politics in the Islamic World . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 A study of the  hajj, its institutions and its impact, not only on Saudi Arabia but also on 
selected countries that send large numbers of pilgrims, such as Malaysia, Pakistan, Indo-
nesia, Nigeria, and Turkey. 
 Bin Laden, Carmen . Inside the Kingdom: My Life in Saudi Arabia . New York: Warner 
Books, 2004. 
 This title chronicles Carmen bin Laden’s marriage to a brother of Osama bin Laden and 
the diffi  culties she experienced in the kingdom and in her marriage. 
 Bird, Jerine. “Revolution for Children in Saudi Arabia.” In  Children in the Muslim Middle 
East , edited by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1995, 
290–294. 
 A summary of the great changes in children’s education in Saudi Arabia. 
 Birks, J. S., and C. A. Sinclair.  Saudi Arabia into the 90s . Durham, UK: Mountjoy Research 
Center, University of Durham, 1988. 
 A book about social and political change in Saudi Arabia through the 1990s. 
 Bjurstrom, Eric. “Dreaming of Farasan.”  Aramco World 51, no. 1 (January/February 2000), 
18–26. 
 An illustrated article of the reefs surrounding the Farasan Islands in the Red Sea. 
 Bjurstrom, Eric. “Diving in the Desert.”  Aramco World , July/August 1997. 
 Exploration and photographs of limestone sinkholes forming caverns with pools at Dahl 
al-Hit near Ma’qalah. 
 Bligh, Alexander.  From Prince to King: Royal Succession in the House of Saud in the Twenti-
eth Century . New York: New York University Press, 1984. 
 A study of the royal family’s politics, written about the same time as Gary Samore’s Har-
vard University doctoral dissertation (1983) on the topic; it has been updated by Joseph 
Kechichian’s 2001 book on the same topic. 
 Blunt, Anne Noel.  A Pilgrimage to Nejd, the Cradle of the Arab Race, a Visit to the Court of 
the Emir and “Our” Persian Campaign . London: Century, 1985. (Originally published in 
1881.) 
 Lady Annabella King-Noel Blunt traveled through the Middle East with her husband, 
Wilfred, from 1875 to 1882. Her diaries, ﬁ eld notes, and writing are the basis of the books 
they coauthored. 

 Annotated Bibliography
452 |
 al-Bogari, Naima, Geoff  Crowther, and Norman Marr. “Motivation for Domestic Tourism: 
A Case Study of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.” In  Consumer Psychology of Tourism, 
Hospitality and Leisure , edited by Arch G. Woodside. Wallingford, Oxfordshire, UK: 
CABI, 2004, 51–64. 
 The motivations for travel in one’s own country diff er culturally and are important in 
understanding consumer patterns. 
 Bogary, Hamza.  The Sheltered Quarter: A Tale of a Boyhood in Mecca . Translated by Olive 
Kenney and Jeremy Reed. Austin: Center for Middle Eastern Studies, University of 
Texas, 1991. 
 An autographical novel about a young student who becomes a teacher; it includes a vi-
brant, detailed description of Mecca and its customs during his lifetime. 
 Boucek, Chris. “Counter-Radicalization and Extremism Disengagement in Saudi Arabia.” 
In  Protecting the Homeland from International and Domestic Terrorism Threats: Multi-
Disciplinary Perspectives on Root Causes, the Role of Ideology, and Programs for Counter-
radicalization and Disengagement , edited by Laurie Fenstermacher, Larry Kuznar, Tom 
Rieger, and Anne Speckhard. Multi-Agency and U.S. Air Research Laboratory, January 
2010. 
 This essay is on the prison-based program in Saudi Arabia that corrects extremist views 
held by those accused of association with al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah or similar 
cells. 
 Bouzigard, Aimee. “Archaeological Evidence for the Consumption of Tobacco and Coff ee 
in Ottoman Arabia.” Master’s thesis, East Carolina University, 2010. 
 A study of material objects and their provenance and similarity to other objects (such as 
coff ee cups produced elsewhere). Provides proof of substance use in the Ottoman period. 
 Bowersock, G. W. “The Arabs before Islam.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of 
Renaissance , edited by John Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 17–24. 
 A summary of scholarship about the pre-Islamic Arabs of the peninsula. 
 Brand, Laurie A.  Jordan’s Inter-Arab Relations: The Political Economy of Alliance-Making . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 
 This book includes important information about Jordanian–Saudi Arabian relations. 
 Brock, Paul. “Al-Hurr: Noble One.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 1973, 2–5. 
 An article on the prized falcon of Saudi Arabia. 
 Brockelman, C. “Mathal.” In  Encyclopaedia of Islam , edited by Martijn Theodoor Houtsma. 
Vol. 3, edited by M. Th. Houtsma, A. J. Wensinck, and E. Levi-Provençal. 1st ed. Leiden, 
the Netherlands: E. J. Brill and Luzac, 1913–1938 (vol. 3, 1934), 407–410. 
 A deﬁ nitive entry in the most detailed English-language reference that typiﬁ es and provides 
citations to medieval collections of proverbs. 
 Bronson, Rachel.  Thicker Than Oil: America’s Uneasy Partnership with Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 A retelling of American–Saudi Arabian relations following the crisis of September 11, 2001. 
 Brown, Anthony Cave.  Oil, God, and Gold: The Story of Aramco and the Saudi Kings . New 
York: Houghton-Miffl  in, 1999. 

Annotated Bibliography | 453
 A detailed history of the oil companies’ early days in Saudi Arabia, Aramco’s expansion, 
and the changes in the industry. 
 Bunt, Gary . iMuslims: Rewiring the House of Islam . Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
lina Press, 2009. 
 An exploration of Islamic websites and uses of the Internet, including institutions and op-
positionists in Saudi Arabia. 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis.  Travels in Arabia Comprehending an Account of Those Territories 
in Hedjaz Which the Mohammedans Regard as Sacred . Beirut, Lebanon: Librairie du 
Liban, 1972. (Originally published in 1829.) 
 The earlier travels of the adventurer Burckhardt. 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis.  Notes on the Bedouin and the Wahabys . London: Henry Coburn 
and Richard Bentley, 1831. 
 The observations of a noted European traveler on the tribes, their lifestyles, the Wahhabi-
Turkish hostilities, and Islamic and Arabian customs of the time. 
 Burdett, A. L. P., ed.  King Abdul Aziz: Diplomacy and Statecraft 1902–1953 . 4 vols. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Primary documents from offi  cial British sources detailing the rise of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 
Saudi Arabian domestic issues, and the country’s relations with other Arab states and 
foreign nations, including the United Kingdom. 
 Campagna, Joe. “Saudi Arabia Report: Princes, Clerics, and Censors.” Committee to Pro-
tect Journalists, May 8, 2006. http://cpj.org/reports/2006/05/saudi-06.php 
 Saudi Arabian journalists, professors, and activists are censored, or, worse, brought to 
court, for writing critically about issues in the country, especially when international at-
tention centers on their reports. A few key cases are described here. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “A Caravan of Brides.” Unpublished manuscript. 
 A ﬁ ctional treatment of the life of Princess Eff at of Saudi Arabia, the wife of King Faysal. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Saudi Folk Music: Alive and Well.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/
April 2007. 
 A detailed, brief, illustrated description of Saudi Arabian folk music from various parts 
of the kingdom. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Eff at’s New Roses.”  Saudi Aramco World , January/February 2007. 
 A description of Eff at College and Princess Eff at herself. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Days of Song and Dance.”  Aramco World 50, no. 1 (1999): 78–87. 
 Description of Saudi Arabian music as played in wedding celebrations. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Folk Music and Dance in the Arabian Gulf and Saudi Arabia.” In 
 Images of Enchantment , edited by Sherifa Zuhur. Cairo: American University in Cairo 
Press, 1998, 57–70. 
 A description of women’s folk music and dance events in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States. 
 Campbell, Kay Hardy. “Recent Recordings of Traditional Music from the Arabian Gulf 
and Saudi Arabia.”  Middle East Studies Association Bulletin  30, no. 1 (July 1996), 
37–40. 

 Annotated Bibliography
454 |
 Descriptions of traditional, or folkloric (as opposed to pop), recordings of voice and 
ensemble. 
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Fundacion par las Relaciones Internacio-
nales y el Dialogio Exterior (FRIDE).  Arab Political Systems: Baseline Information and 
Reforms—Saudi Arabia . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and FRIDE, n.d. 
[ca. 2007]. 
 Comprehensive information about the Saudi Arabian political system apparently drawn 
from Hooglund (in Metz, ed., 1993, which is not copyrighted and is thus replicated in other 
sources), updated with more recent offi  cial and media reports. 
 Carter, Robert. “The History and Prehistory of Pearling in the Persian Gulf.”  Journal of the 
Economic and Social History of the Orient 48, no. 2 (2005), 139–209 . 
This article provides a history of the pearl-diving industry in the Persian Gulf region from 
earliest times to the middle of the 20th century as well as archaelogical data from the 
6th millenium BCE.
 Chatty, Dawn.  Nomadic Societies in the Middle East and North Africa: Entering the 21st 
Century . Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2006. 
 This title includes chapters on Saudi Arabian bedouin and on other nomadic groups, il-
lustrating some of their shared practices and concerns. 
 Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz.  The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the Middle East . 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997. 
 This title examines the Saudi Arabian oil boom period of the 1970s and the development 
of the Saudi Arabian and Yemeni economies. 
 Childs, J. Rives.  Foreign Service Farewell: My Years in the Near East . Charlottesville: Uni-
versity of Virginia, 1969. 
 The memoirs of the ﬁ rst U.S. ambassador to Saudi Arabia. 
 Chubin, Shahram, and Charles Tripp.  Iran-Saudi Arabia Relations and Regional Order . 
Adelphi Paper 304. First published by International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1996. 
Reprinted New York: Routledge, 2005. 
 A paper by one of the leading experts on Iran’s strategic aims together with an expert on the 
Arab world. The republication and revision of the study reﬂ ected the diplomatic impasse 
in Europe toward Iran at that time. 
 Ciorciari, John D. “Saudi-U.S. Alignment after the Six Day War.”  Middle East Review 
of International Aff airs 9, no. 2 (June 2005). http://meria.idc.ac.il/journal/2005/issue2/
jv9no2a1.html 
 Saudi Arabia’s regional and international uncertainties after the Six-Day War served to 
preserve the Saudi Arabian–U.S. alliance, strained though it was by the 1967 war. 
 Citino, Nathan J.  From Arab Nationalism to OPEC: Eisenhower, King Sa’ud, and the Mak-
ing of U.S.-Saudi Relations . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2002. 
 U.S. offi  cials planned to preserve Britain’s access to “sterling oil” in order to safeguard 
British economic prospects in the postwar era. Eisenhower’s government also acted to 
contain Arab nationalism. 

Annotated Bibliography | 455
 Clark, Arthur. “Samphire: From Sea to Shining Seed.”  Aramco World 45, no. 6 (November/
December 1994), 29. 
 This article describes the agricultural project at Ras Zawr to grow samphire, which can be 
used as a a salad green, an oil, and a source of animal feed and is irrigated with seawater. 
 Clark, Arthur C., ed.  Saudi Aramco and Its World: Arabia and the Middle East . Rev. ed. 
Houston, TX: Aramco Services, 1995. 
 A history and account of Saudi Aramco’s origins and role in Saudi Arabia and coverage 
of Arabia. Predates the 2006 version. 
 Clark, Arthur C., and Muhammad Tahlawy, eds.  A Land Transformed: The Arabian Penin-
sula, Saudi Arabia and Saudi Aramco.  Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, and Houston, TX: Aramco 
Services, 2006. 
 This is a very large volume with encyclopedia-type coverage of many subjects concerning 
the Arabian Peninsula as well as Aramco’s role in the life of Saudi Arabia. 
 Cole, Donald P. “Pastoral Nomads in a Rapidly Changing Economy: The Case of Saudi 
Arabia.” In  Social and Economic Development in the Arab Gulf , edited by Tim Niblock. 
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1980, 106–121. 
 An analysis of the al-Murrah bedouin as their lifestyle changed after the oil boom. 
 Cole, Donald P.  Nomads of the Nomads: The Al Murrah Bedouin of the Empty Quarter . Chi-
cago: Aldine, 1975. 
 A full study of the al-Murrah bedouin based on Cole’s ﬁ eldwork in 1968 and 1969. 
 Cole, Donald P. “Al Murrah Bedouins: The Pure Ones Roam Arabia’s Sands.” In  Nomads 
of the World . Washington, DC: National Geographic Society, 1971, 52–71. 
 A chapter-length description of the al-Murrah lifestyle in 1968–1969. 
 Colyer Ross, H eather.  The Art of Arabian Costume: A Saudi Arabian Proﬁ le . Fribourg, 
Switzerland: Arabesque Commercial, 1981. 
 A detailed illustrated presentation of contemporary and historic women’s and men’s tra-
ditional garments and jewelry, arts, and crafts of the Arabian Peninsula. These provide 
some of the best examples of the historic costumes that are described in this book in the 
segment on popular dress. 
 Colyer Ross, Heather.  Bedouin Jewellery in Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey International, 1978. 
 An illustrated work on the handcrafted jewelry of the bedouin in various styles. 
 Commins, David Dean.  The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 A study of the initial Wahhabi reform movement as a challenge  by second-strata ‘ ulama 
who subsequently were challenged by other clerics. It is essentially critical of Muhammad 
ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s intellectual import and legitimacy, at least as expanded on by his 
students. 
 Congressional Research Service (CRS) and Library of Congress. “Saudi Arabia: Current 
Issues and U.S. Relations.”  CRS Issue Brief Alfred B. Prados. February 24, 2006. http://
www.fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/IB93113.pdf 
 A useful and important review of matters in Saudi Arabia deemed crucial by the members 
of the U.S. Congress or their staff  members from a U.S.-centered policy perspective. 

 Annotated Bibliography
456 |
 Cook, Michael. “The Expansion of the First Saudi State: The Case of Washm.” In  The Is-
lamic World from Classical to Modern Times: Essays in Honor of Bernard Lewis , edited 
by C. E. Bosworth, Charles Issawi, Roger Savory, and A. L. Udovitch. Princeton, NJ: 
Darwin, 1989, 661–699. 
 Islamic studies scholar Michael Cook looks at the ideas in the expansion of the ﬁ rst Sa’udi 
state. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia Enters the Twenty-First Century: The Political, For-
eign Policy, Economic, and Energy Dimensions . London: Center for Strategic and Inter-
national Studies; Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 A security-oriented study of Saudi Arabia and its government, oil industry, and strategic 
interests. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H.  Saudi Arabia and the Challenge of Terrorism: Reacting to the “9/11 
Report.” Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2003. 
 A study of Saudi Arabia’s responses to the terrorist threats in and from the kingdom. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Nawaf Obaid.  Saudi National Security: Military and Security 
Services—Challenges and Developments . Full Report. Washington, DC: Center for Stra-
tegic and International Studies, Draft, September 29, 2004. 
 This piece is a military balance survey considering transformation as well as capacity. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Nawaf Obaid.  Saudi Internal Security: A Risk Assessment. 
Terrorism and the Security Services—Challenges and Developments . Washington, DC: 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 30, 2004. 
 This piece updates the main author’s assessment following a year of terrorist and counter-
terrorist activities in the kingdom. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Khalid R. Al-Rodhan.  The Changing Dynamics of Energy in 
the Middle East . 2 vols. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International, 2006. 
 This book includes a useful chapter on Saudi Arabia and reﬂ ects the lead author’s interests 
in security dynamics. 
 Cordesman, Anthony H., and Abraham R. Wagner.  The Lessons of Modern War . Vol. 4, 
 The Gulf War . Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996. 
 This title considers the Gulf War, the underlying military balance, the strategies employed 
in the war, and its outcomes. 
 Craze, Joshua, and Mark Huband, eds.  The Kingdom: Saudi Arabia and the Challenge of 
21st Century . New York: Columbia University Press, 2009. 
 This title is compiled from articles posted at SaudiDebate.com from April 2006 to June 
2007; some are reprinted, and all promote an agenda of change. The writers include some 
of Saudi Arabia’s better-known liberal ﬁ gures. 
 Crone, Patricia.  Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam . Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias, 2004. 
 A classic study of the rise of trade that beneﬁ ted Mecca and was directly related to spread 
of Islam. The author’s controversial thesis about Hagarism has divided historians of the 
early Islamic period. 
 Cuddihy, Kathy.  Saudi Customs and Etiquette . London: Stacey International, 2002. 

Annotated Bibliography | 457
 This is a guide to Saudi Arabian manners and customs chieﬂ y for a foreigner doing busi-
ness in Saudi Arabia. 
 al-Dakhil, Khalid.  Social Origins of the Wahhabi Movement . Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1998. 
 A view of Saudi Arabian society at the time of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s reform 
movement. Counters the standard characterization of the movement as a reactive rather 
than expansionist one. 
 de Corancez, Louis Alexandre Olivier.  The History of the Wahabis from Their Origin until 
the End of 1809 . Translated by Eric Tabet. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1995. 
 Translated from the French, this ﬁ rsthand account relates the Wahhabi campaigns 
against the Egyptian forces and their negotiations, and it tells of piracy against English 
ships. 
 De Gaury, Gerald.  Faisal: Biography of a King . New York: Praeger, 1967. 
 A biography of King Faysal. 
 Delong-Bas, Natana.  Jihad for Islam: The Struggle for the Future of Saudi Arabia . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2009. 
 This title postulates that reform and reclamation of Wahhabist principles will save Saudi 
Arabia from its Islamic opposition. 
 DeLong-Bas, Natana.  Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad . Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 A thorough study of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s theological and juridical ideas 
that debunks various claims of his extremism and tells his personal history. 
 Deputy Ministry of Antiquities and Museums, Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.  al-Musmak Museum Guide . Deputy Ministry of Antiquities and Museums, Min-
istry of Education, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 1999. 
 This guide provides information on the photographs and exhibits contained within the 
al-Musmak fort in Riyadh. 
 Dickson, H R. P.  The Arab of the Desert: Bedouin Life in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia . London: 
Allen and Unwin, 1949. 
 A classic description of bedouin life and customs. 
 Dohaish, Abdullatif Abdullah. “A Critical and Comparative Study of the History of Educa-
tion in the Hijaz during the periods of Ottoman and Shariﬁ an Rule, 1869–1925.” PhD 
diss., University of Leeds, 1974. 
 A study of the various forms of education in the Hijaz from 1869 up to 1925. 
 Dohaish, Abdullatif Abdullah.  History of Education in the Hijaz up to 1925: Comparative 
and Critical Study. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-Arabi, 1978. 
 This title describes education in the Hijaz prior to its annexation to Saudi Arabia. 
 Doran, Michael Scott. “The Saudi Paradox.”  Foreign Aff airs , January/February 2004, 
35–51. 
 This essay relates the Wahhabi concept of  tawhid  (absolute monotheism) to a traditionalist 
battle for uniformity and claims this principle is ever-present in the kingdom, personiﬁ ed 
in Prince Nayif as opposed to the reform-minded ‘Abdullah. 

 Annotated Bibliography
458 |
 al-Dosary, Adel S., and Syed M. Rahman. “Saudization—Localization: A Critical Review.” 
 Human Resource Development International 8, no. 4 (2005), 495–502. 
 This piece discusses and critiques the fact that Saudization targets have not been reached. 
 Doughty, Charles M.  Travels in Arabia Deserta . Abridged by Edward Garnett. Gloucester, 
MA: Peter Smith, 1931 and 1968. 
 This is based on the author’s 1888 work (published by Clarendon in Cambridge), which 
has been reprinted in two volumes by Philip Lee Warner for Medici Society Limited and 
London and Boston: Jonathan Cape, 1921. It was also published in one volume by Ran-
dom House in New York in 1926; and in two volumes by Dover Press in 1979. The Garnett 
abridgement includes the author’s travels to visit Ha’il, his sojourn with the bedouin, and 
his time on the  hajj caravan, the Syrian Darb al-Hajj, from Damascus. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella. “Saudi Arabia: From Wahhabi Roots to Contemporary Re-
visionism.” In  Islam and Textbooks in the Middle East , edited by Eleanor A. Doumato 
and Gregory Starrett. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 2008, 153–176. (Also 
published under the title  Teaching Islam: Textbooks and Religion in the Middle East . 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2007.) 
 An assessment and analysis of changes made to certain textbooks used in the Saudi Ara-
bian national curriculum. The authors of the book believe these changes illustrate greater 
tolerance, attention to civic identity, and a less extreme attitude. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella.  Getting God’s Ear: Women, Islam and Healing in Saudi Arabia 
and the Gulf . New York: Columbia University Press, 2000. 
 Uses travelers’ documents and missionary accounts of life in Arabia to explore women’s 
status before and outside of the Wahhabi realm of inﬂ uence. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella. “The Ambiguity of Shari’a and the Politics of ‘Rights’ in Saudi 
Arabia.” In  Faith and Freedom: Women’s Human Rights in the Muslim World , edited by 
Mahnaz Afkhami. New York: I. B. Tauris, 1995, 135–160. 
 The ﬂ exibility of  shari‘ah  could help women’s rights but is not doing so, because the liberal 
and Shi‘a opposition pursue their own interests ﬁ rst, deeming the diffi  cult women’s issue 
as cultural. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella “Arabian Women: Religion, Work and Cultural Ideology in the 
Arabian Peninsula from the 19th Century through the Age of Abd al-Aziz.” PhD diss., 
Columbia University, 1989. 
 This dissertation explores views and activities of Arabian women based on the documents 
and correspondence of the Arabian mission of the Reformed Church in America and other 
Western travel accounts of life, mostly at the beginning of the 20th century. 
 ExxonMobil Corporation.  2007 Summary Annual Report . Irving, TX: ExxonMobil Corpo-
ration, 2008. 
The company’s annual report for 2007.
 Fabietti, Ugo. “State Policies and Bedouin Adaptations in Saudi Arabia, 1900–1980.” In 
 The Transformation of Nomad Society in the Arab East , edited by Martha Mundy and 
Basim Musallam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000, 82–89. 
 This is an account of the social adaptations made to governmental development policies 
that focused on sedentarization and detribalization of the bedouin. 
 Eyre, Banning. Interview of Joseph Braude in the program “African Slaves in Islamic 
Lands,” May 2006, and “African Slaves in Islamic Lands,” February 2007, both cited in 

Annotated Bibliography | 459
“Africans in the Arabian Peninsula,”  Afropop Worldwide , http://www.afropop.org/multi/
feature/ID/692 
 Discusses the musical traditions derived from former African slaves in the Gulf region. 
 Facey, William. “Al-‘Udhaibat: Building on the Past.”  Aramco World 50, no. 3 (July/Au-
gust 1999), 32–46. 
 An illustrated article on the restoration of a home in al-‘Udhaibat. 
 Facey, William.  Back to Earth: Adobe Building in Saudi Arabia . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Al 
Turath and St. Martin’s, 1997. 
 Describes the art of building with adobe in local design and the process of restoring an old 
farmhouse at al-‘Udhaibat for Prince Sultan ibn Salman al-Sa‘ud, who supports Islamic 
and indigenous design. 
 Facey, William.  Diriyyah and the First Saudi State . London: Stacey International, 1997. 
 An illustrated work on Diriyyah and the al-Sa‘ud conquest of the area, as well as the alli-
ance with Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab. 
 Facey, William.  The Story of the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia . London: Stacey Interna-
tional, 1994. 
 History and description of settlements and architecture in Sharqiyyah, the Eastern 
Province. 
 Facey, William.  Riyadh: The Old City from Its Origins until the 1950s . London: Immel, 
1992. 
 This title shows the architectural and historical development of the older sections of Riyadh. 
 Al-Fahad, Abdulaziz H. “From Exclusivism to Accomodation: Doctrinal and Legal Evolu-
tion of Wahhabism.”  New York University Law Review 79 (2004). 
 This account describes events in Wahhabi political life from the ﬁ rst to the third Sa‘udi 
realms. Holds that the Gulf War  fatwa permitting foreign forces to ﬁ ght to defend the 
kingdom was the culmination of gradual accommodations made by Wahhabists, despite 
the exclusivism of early southern Wahhabism. 
 Fakhro, Munira. “Gulf Women and Islamic Law.” In  Feminism and Islam: Legal and Liter-
ary Perspectives , edited by Mai Yamani. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1996, 251–262. 
 This essay outlines major problems in Islamic law for women as interpreted in the Gulf 
states. 
 Fandy, Mamoun.  Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent . New York: St. Martin’s, 1999. 
 This book presents the origins, ideas, and experiences of diff erent strands of political op-
position in Saudi Arabia, from the Shi‘a to the neosalaﬁ sts. 
 al-Farsy, Fouad.  Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques: King Fahd bin Abdul Aziz . New 
York: Knight Communications, 2001. 
 A biography and account of King Fahd’s accomplishments. 
 al-Farsy, Fouad.  Modernity and Tradition: The Saudi Equation . London and New York: 
Kegan Paul International, 1990. 
 Like so much of Arab and Western literature at this time, the work views Saudi Arabia as 
being in transition from traditional modes. 

 Annotated Bibliography
460 |
 Al-Fassi, Hatoon.  Women in Pre-Islamic Arabia . Oxford, UK: British Archaeological Re-
ports, Archaeopress, 2007. 
 An original study of women in pre-Islamic Arabia. Original studies are important be-
cause scholars have disagreed about many issues—whether women’s roles in ceremonial, 
 political, and war activities were curtailed by Islam or whether they were much more dis-
advantaged prior to Islam. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth.  In Search of Islamic Feminism: One Woman’s Journey . New York: Dou-
bleday, 1998. 
 This book includes a short chapter on the author’s visit to the kingdom as part of the au-
thor’s investigation of Islamic feminism throughout the Middle East, North Africa, and 
other countries. 
 Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock, and Robert Fernea.  The Arab World: Personal Encounters . 
Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1987. 
 The book concerns the distinguished anthropologist Robert Fernea and author/sociologi-
cal scholar B. J. (as she was known) Fernea’s experiences in various parts of the Arab world . 
Pertinent to Saudi Arabia are Robert Fernea’s letters and notes from the ﬁ eld in Ha’il in 
1983 and a short essay on the disappearing opportunities for ﬁ eldwork (on pages 293–316). 
 Field, Michael.  The Merchants: The Big Business Families of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf 
States . Woodstock, NY: Overlook, 1985. 
 Illustrates the details of the families who built business empires in the Gulf states. 
 Freedman, Lawrence , and Efraim Karsh.  The Gulf Conﬂ ict, 1990–1991: Diplomacy and War 
in the New World Order . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993. 
Explores the implications of the Iraq’s occupation of Kuwait and the ensuing Gulf War 
and discusses the strategic aim of all involved in the conﬂ ict, including Saudi Arabia.
 al-Fuhayd, Mandil.  Min adabina al-sha ‘ biyya . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Yamama li-l-
bahth wa tarjuma wa nashr, 1978. 
 A study of popular (vernacular) oral literature that has become part of the  adab , or literary 
tradition of the area. 
 Fürtig, Henner.  Iran’s Rivalry with Saudi Arabia between the Gulf Wars , Reading, UK: 
Ithaca, 2002. 
 A detailed study of the two nations’ interactions. 
 Gause, Gregory F., III.  Oil Monarchies: Domestic and Security Challenges in the Arab Gulf 
States . Washington, DC: Council on Foreign Relations, 1994. 
 Views these monarchies in transition and under modernization. 
 Gause, Gregory F., III.  Saudi-Yemeni Relations: Domestic Structures and Foreign Inﬂ uence . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1990. 
 A comprehensive study of the Sa‘udi Arabian role in the Yemeni Civil War and eff orts to 
inﬂ uence Yemen until the late 1980s. 
 Al-Ghadeer, Moneera.  Desert Voices: Bedouin Women’s Poetry in Saudi Arabia . London: 
Tauris Academic Studies, 2009. 
 A collection of poetry composed by tribal women. 

Annotated Bibliography | 461
 al-Ghadyan, Ahmed A. “The Judiciary in Saudi Arabia.”  Arab Law Quarterly 13, no. 3 
(1998), 235–252. 
 A review of the role and particular features of the judges in Saudi Arabia. 
 Ghazanfar, Shahina.  Handbook of Arabian Medicinal Plants . London: CRC, 1994. 
 A review of the plants, herbs, and spices used as medicine in the Arabian tradition. 
 Gibb, H A. R.  Arabic Literature: An Introduction . Oxford and London: Oxford University 
Press, 1963, 1974. 
 A classic Orientalist overview of various genres of Arabic literature. 
 Gordon, Murray.  Slavery in the Arab World . New York: New Amsterdam Books, 1989. 
 A study of slavery in the Arab countries. 
 al-Gosaibi (or al-Qusaybi), Ghazi. “Octopus,” “When I am With You,” and “Silence.” 
Translated by Sherif Elmusa and Charles Doria. In  Modern Arabic Poetry , edited by 
Salma Khadra Jayyusi. New York: Columbia University Press, 1987. 
 Several poems by the noted writer and government ﬁ gure. 
 al-Gosaibi (al-Qusaybi) , Ghazi.  Fever . 1980. 
 Collection of poetry by the late writer and government ﬁ gure (whose name is also rendered 
al-Qusaybi or al-Qusaibi). 
 al-Gosaibi (al-Qusaybi), Ghazi.  Chosen Poems . 1980. 
 Poetry collection. 
 al-Gosaibi (al-Qusaybi), Ghazi.  You Are My Riyadh . 1976. 
 Another of the favorite collections of this author’s work. 
 Grund, F. “Danses d’ailleures: La mâle danse, ceremonies masculines en Arabie Saoudite.” 
 Danser , no. 269 (September 1998), 26–28. 
 On men’s dances in Saudi Arabia, including the  ‘ardha . 
 Guillaume, Alfred Guillaume, trans. and ed.  The Life of Muhammad: A Translation of [Ibn 
Hisham’s adaptation of] Ishaq’s Sirat Rasul Allah . London: Oxford University Press, 1955. 
 The most important biographical work on the Prophet Muhammad in English, which 
actually combines a translation of Ibn Ishaq’s Sirah  (or biography) of the Prophet from 
Ibn Hisham’s recension of that work with material by the historian al-Tabari and others. 
 Habib, John S.  Saudi Arabia and the American National Interests . Boca Raton, FL: Univer-
sal, 2003. 
 An examination of the U.S.–Saudi Arabian relationship. 
 Habib, John S.  Ibn Saud’s Warriors of Islam: The Ikhwan of Najd and Their Role in the Cre-
ation of the Saudi Kingdom, 1910–1930 . Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1978. 
 An account of the critical role of the Ikhwan in the conquest of the state. 
 Habib, Mohammed A. “Development of Agriculture in Tihamah: Regional Growth and 
Development in the Jizan Region.” PhD diss., University of Arizona, 1988. 
 A study of agriculture in Tihamah. 

 Annotated Bibliography
462 |
 al-Hadhdhal, A. I.  Mukhtarat min al-shi ‘ r al-nabati al-mu ‘ asir . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: 
Matabi’ al-shihri, 1392h. 
 A collection of modern Nabati (oral vernacular) poetry. 
 Halliday, Fred.  Arabia without Sultans: A Political Survey of Instability in the Arab World . 
New York: Vintage Books, 1975. 
 A study of the Arabian Peninsular countries in the context of the political struggles of the 
late 1960s and 1970s by a scholar who headed this area of study at the London School of 
Economics during the latter part of his career. 
 Hamdan, Amani. “Women and Education in Saudi Arabia: Challenges and Achievements.” 
 International Education Journal 6, no. 1 (2005), 42–64. 
 An assessment of women’s status in education. 
 Hamzah, Fuad.  Fi bilad Asir . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Maktabat al-Nasr al-Hadithah, 1968. 
 The customs and practices of the Asir area are discussed in this book. 
 Hamzah, Fuad. “Najran.”  Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society 22 (1935), 631–640. 
 This article concerns Najran in southern Saudi Arabia, captured by the al-Sa‘ud from 
Yemeni rule. 
 Hansen, Eric. “The Hidden History of a Scented Wood.”  Saudi Aramco World 51, no. 6 
(November/December 2000), 2–13. 
 This essay relates the origins of  ‘ud in Southeast Asia. It is burned like incense in Saudi 
Arabia. 
 al-Harbi, Abdullah. “The Impact of New Towns in Saudi Arabia: A Case Study of Yanbu.” 
PhD diss., University of Lancaster, 1991. 
 A dissertation about the changing role and nature of Yanbu in the context of development 
in Saudi Arabia. 
 Harrigan, Peter. “New Pieces of Mada’in Saleh’s Puzzle.”  Saudi Aramco World 58, no. 4 
(July/August 2007), 14–23. 
 This piece discusses new discoveries about the Nabataean site Mada’in Saleh. 
 Harrigan, Peter. “Volcanic Arabia.”  Saudi-Aramco World , March/April 2006. 
 A brief article on the Harrah region and Saudi Arabia’s volcanic past. 
 Harrigan, Peter. “Art Rocks in Saudi Arabia.”  Saudi-Aramco World , March/April 2002. 
 This piece summarizes ﬁ ndings about the prehistoric drawings on stone sites in Saudi 
Arabia. 
 Harrigan, Peter , and Rosalind Mazzawi. “Saudi Arabia’s First Olympic Medals.”  Saudi-
Aramco World , January/February 2001. 
This article gives an account of the ﬁ rst Saudi Arabian athletes’ victories at the Olympic 
Games.
 Hart, Parker T.  Saudi Arabia and the United States: Birth of a Security Partnership . Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1998. 
 An account of U.S.–Saudi Arabian relations and their rationale. 
 Hashim, Najwa.  Al-Safar ﬁ  layl al-ahzan . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Al-Dar al-Sa‘udiyya li-
Nashr wa-Tawzi‘, 1986. 

Annotated Bibliography | 463
 A collection of stories in a modern style. 
 al-Hashimi, Muhammad  Ali.  The Ideal Muslim Society: As Deﬁ ned in the Qur’an and Sun-
nah . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: International Islamic Publishing House, 2007. 
A work about the Muslim ummah in its ideal state.  Dr. al-Hashimi, a Syrian, is also known 
for his books on the idealized Muslim woman and man. He studied in Saudi Arabia and 
taught in the Faculty of Arabic Language at Imam Muhammad ibn al-Sa‘ud Islamic Uni-
versity, and hosted a religious radio program.
 al-Hathloul, Saleh Ali, and Narayanan Edadan.  Urban Development in Saudi Arabia . Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Sahan, 1995. 
 A study of urban planning and growth in the early 1990s. 
 Hawali, Safar.  Haqa’iq hawl ‘ azmat al-khalij . Cairo: Dar Makka al-Mukarram, 1991. 
 A strong critique of the al-Sa‘ud government, its alliance with the West, and its betrayal of 
the Saudi Arabian people by one of the best-known Awakening (sahwa) shaykhs. 
 Hayes, John R., ed.  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renaissance . New York: New 
York University Press, 1992. 
 Scholars noted for their work on Arabic music, art, literature, music, sciences, architec-
ture, military history, history, and philosophy discuss the Arab contributions to these 
ﬁ elds. 
 al-Hazimi, Mansur Ibrahim, Ezzat Khattab, and Salma al-Jayusi, eds.  Beyond the Dunes: 
An Anthology of Modern Saudi Writers . London: I. B. Tauris, 2006. 
 A large anthology of poetry and short stories, introduced by a chronological overview of 
modern Saudi Arabian literature. 
 El-Hazmi, M. A., A. R. Al-Swailem, A. S. Warsy, et al. “Consanguinity among the Saudi 
Arabian Population.”  Medical Genetics 32 (1995), 623–626. 
 This piece estimates and discusses the medical risks of the large numbers of Saudi Arabians 
who are typically married to ﬁ rst or second cousins with regard to certain conditions. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas.  Jihad in Saudi Arabia: Violence and Pan-Islamism since 1979 . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 An account of the global jihadist (al-Qa’ida, also transliterated as al-Qa’ida) movement 
in Saudi Arabia, primarily from 1998/1999 to early 2009, by a researcher then in the Nor-
wegian defense sector. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas. “Terrorist Recruitment and Radicalization in Saudi Arabia.”  Mid-
dle East Policy 13, no. 4 (Winter 2006), 39–60. 
 This piece describes the rise of Islamic militants known as al-Qa’ida ﬁ  Jazirat al-‘Arabiyyah 
in Saudi Arabia and the government’s response. 
 Hegghammer, Thomas, and Stèphane Lacroix. “Rejectionist Islamism in Saudi Arabia: The 
Case of Juhayman al-‘Utaybi Revisited.”  International Journal of Middle East Studies 39, 
no. 1 (2007), 103–122. 
 These two authors, who helped produce the International Crisis Group’s reports on Saudi 
Arabia and are respectively connected to Giles Kepel and the Norwegian defense sector, 
link the 1979 so-called ‘Utaybi movement that took over the Grand Mosque with the con-
temporary  salaﬁ  (neosalaﬁ st) opposition movement. 

 Annotated Bibliography
464 |
 Helms, Christine M.  The Cohesion of Saudi Arabia . London: Croom Helm, 1981. 
 A political study of Saudi Arabia. 
 Henderson, Simon. “After King Abdullah: Succession in Saudi Arabia.”  Policy Focus #96 . 
 Washington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2009. 
 An updated version of the 1994 study. 
 Henderson, Simon.  After King Fahd: Succession in Saudi Arabia . Washington, DC: Wash-
ington Institute for Near East Policy, 1994. 
 A study of the royal family and the succession process. 
 Herz, Siba Al.  The Others . Beirut, Lebanon, 2008; New York: Seven Stories, 2009. 
 A novel, published under a pseudonym, which includes the protagonist’s amorous relation-
ships with other women. 
 High Commission for the Development of Arriyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Al-Riyadh: 
Abq al- ‘ Asala wa Rawnaq w-al-Hadatha (Riyadh: The Redolence of the Original City and 
the Beauty of the Modern ). Riyadh: High Commission for the Development of Arriyadh, 
1424h. 
 Titled in Arabic and English, this is a book of photographs of Riyadh, juxtaposing those 
from more than 50 years earlier with others of the contemporary city. 
 Hilden, Joy [May] Totah.  Bedouin Weaving of Saudi Arabia and Other Countries . London: 
Arabian Publishing; Oakﬁ eld, CT: David Brown, 2010. 
 A study of bedouin ﬂ at-weave textiles used for dress, tents, rugs, saddlebags, and other 
items and their history. 
 Hilden, Joy May. “The Use of Wasm (Animal Brands) in Beduin Weavings.” Beduin Weav-
ing. n.d. http://www.beduinweaving.com 
 A study of the markers indicating tribal ownership by an expert on Bedouin weaving practices. 
 Hillenbrand, Robert. “Traditional Architecture of the Arabian Peninsula.”  Bulletin of the 
British Society of Middle Eastern Studies 16, no. 2 (1989), 186–192. 
 Style and forms of traditional architecture are described. 
 Hogarth, David George.  Hejaz before World War One :  A Handbook . 2nd ed. Cambridge 
and New York: Oleander; Naples: Falcon, 1978. 
 An extremely detailed survey of the physical area, routes, tribes, leaders, politics, and cus-
toms of the Hijaz, originally published in Naples by Falcon. 
 Hogarth, David George.  The Penetration of Arabia: A Record of the Development of West-
ern Knowledge Concerning the Arabian Peninsula . Beirut, Lebanon: Khayats, 1966. 
 A reprint of archaeologist Hogarth’s 1904 work. Hogarth starts by asking why the Western 
travelers, including those in very poor health and without funds, like Charles Doughty, were 
drawn to the region despite various mishaps and dangers and what their explorations tell us. 
 Holden, David, and Richard Johns.  The House of Saud . New York: Holt Rinehart and 
Winston, 1982. 
 A study of the royal family and Saudi Arabia. 
 Holes, Clive.  Dialect, Culture and Society in Eastern Arabia: A Glossary . Leiden, the Nether-
lands: Brill, 2001. 

Annotated Bibliography | 465
 A very thorough study of the pre-oil dialects of Bahrain and, in some cases, the surround-
ing area and their social context. Useful for the study of language and culture in eastern 
Saudi Arabia as well, not least because of the glossary, which explains phrases and various 
usages. Based in part on personal interviews and recordings. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “Pearls, Globalization and the African Diaspora in the Arabian Gulf in 
the Age of Empire.” Paper presented at the 124th Annual Meeting of the American His-
torical Association, San Diego, January 9, 2010. 
 An overview of the African slaves’ role in the pearl-diving industry and of that industry’s 
demise due to the global depression in the 1930s and the production of cultured pearls. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “Slavery and the Slave Trades in the Indian Ocean and Arab Worlds: 
Global Connections and Disconnections.” Paper presented at 10th Annual Gilder Leh-
rmann International Center Conference, Yale University, November 7–8, 2008. 
 This conference paper follows on the author’s dissertation coverage of slavery and its im-
port in world economic history of the period. 
 Hopper, Mathew S. “The African Presence in Arabia: Slavery, the World Economy, and the 
African Diaspora in Eastern Arabia, 1840–1940.” PhD diss., University of California, 
Los Angeles, 2006. 
 An important review showing that slavery from Africa was essential to agricultural produc-
tion and pearl diving in this era. 
 Hopwood, Derek, ed.  The Arabian Peninsula: Society and Politics . London: Allen and 
Unwin, 1972. 
 Studies of Saudi Arabia and its smaller neighbors up to the late 1960s. 
 Hourani, Albert.  A History of the Arab Peoples . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1989. 
 A masterful social history of the Islamic and Arab empires and of the Arab world under 
the Ottomans and in modern times. 
 Howarth, David.  The Desert King . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. 
 A biography and study of Ibn Sa‘ud. 
 Hoyland, Robert.  Arabia and the Arabs: From the Bronze Age to the Coming of Islam . Lon-
don and New York: Routledge, 2001. 
 An history of the peninsula in the earliest periods. 
 Human Rights Watch  (HRW). “Saudi Arabia: Women’s Rights Promises Broken. Evidence 
Shows Male Permission Still Being Required for Surgery, Travel.” July 8, 2009. http://
www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/07/08/saudi-arabia-women-s-rights-promises-broken 
Women are required to obtain permissions from their male guardians for surgery, travel, 
education etc. and this may restrict their individual rights.
 Human Rights Watch (HRW). “As If I Am Not Human.” July 7, 2008. http://www.hrw.
org/en/reports/2008/07/07/if-i-am-not-human-0 
This report covers the deplorable situation of non-Saudi Arabian national domestic work-
ers who have been subject to abuse, long hours, and non-payment.

 Annotated Bibliography
466 |
 Hume-Griffi  th, M. E.  Behind the Veil in Persia and Turkish Arabia: An Account of an Eng-
lishwoman’s Eight Years’ Residence amongst the Women of the East . London: Seeley, 
1909. 
 A Western traveler’s account of her experiences in parts of Arabia and Persia that high-
lights the world of women. 
 Al Hussain, M., and M. Al Bunyan. “Consanguineous Marriages in a Saudi Population and 
the Eff ect of Inbreeding on Perinatal and Postnatal Mortality.”  Annual Tropical Paediat-
rics 17 (1997), 155–160. 
 Considers how consanguinity, which is prevalent in Saudi Arabia due to the preference for 
cousin marriage, aff ects women’s maternal death rates. 
 Ibn Bishr, ‘Uthman. ‘ Unwan al-majd ﬁ  tarikh Najd . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Maktabah al-
Riyadh al-Hadithah, n.d. 
 An account of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s mission and the ﬁ rst Sa’udi state by a 
contemporary who approved of ‘Abd al-Wahhab. His account is used by many scholars of 
the movement as it contains information from oral sources from the period. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn,  Tarikh Najd . Edited by Nassar Al-Din Assad. Riyadh: ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Shaykh, 1982. 
 An alternate edition of the same work as in Ibn Ghannam’s 1961 work. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Rawdat al-afkar wa al-afham li-murtad hal al-Imam wa-ta ‘ dad 
ghazawat dhawi al-Islam . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 1381h. 
 Ibn Ghannam (d. 1810) was a scholar and supporter of ‘Abd al-Wahhab and describes his 
movement in this text. This account also includes information derived from oral sources 
who diff er from those drawn on by Ibn Bishr. 
 Ibn Ghannam, Husayn.  Tarikh Najd . Cairo, 1961. 
 The history of Najd at the time of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab and the ﬁ rst Sa‘udi 
state. 
 Ibn Hurayyil, S. H.  Diwan al-Nabat al-hadith . Beirut, Lebanon: Matabi‘ al-Wafa, 1374h. 
 A collection of modern oral poetry (Nabati). 
 Ibn Qasim, ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad, ed.  al-Durar al-saniyah ﬁ  al-ajwiba al-najdi-
yyah . 12 vols. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 1995. 
 A collection of writings by 19th-century Nadji  ‘ulama . 
 Ibrahim, Fuad.  The Shi’as of Saudi Arabia . London: Saqi Books, 2007. 
 This title describes the historic and contemporary situation of the Shi‘a population of 
Saudi Arabia. 
 Ibrahim, Mahmood. “Social and Economic Conditions in Pre-Islamic Mecca.”  International 
Journal of Middle East Studies 14, no. 3 (1982), 343–358. 
 This article takes a position diff erent from Patricia Crone’s. 
 Ingham, Bruce.  Najdi Arabic: Central Arabian . Amsterdam: John Benjamin, 1994. 
 A study of the dialect of Najd. 
 Ingham, Bruce.  Bedouin of Northern Arabia: Traditions of the Dhaﬁ r . London: Kegan Paul 
International (KPI), 1986. 

Annotated Bibliography | 467
 An ethnographic description of the Dhaﬁ r and their oral traditions. 
 International Crisis Group. “Saudi Arabia Backgrounder: Who Are the Islamists?”  Middle 
East Report , September 21, 2004. 
 An explanation of the  sahwa and the neosalaﬁ sts and events in the ﬁ rst year of conﬂ ict with 
the Saudi Arabian militants. 
 International Crisis Group. “Can Saudi Arabia Reform Itself?”  ICG Middle East Report, 
no. 28, July 14, 2004. 
 A critique of Saudi Arabia’s political ills from a Western perspective, but with useful details 
about diff erent political currents. 
 al-‘Isa, Mayy bint ‘Abd al-‘Aziz.  al-Haya al- ‘ ilmiyya ﬁ  Najd mundhu qiyam da ‘ wat al-Shaykh 
Muhammad ibn ‘ Abd al-Wahhab wa hatta nihayat al-dawla al-Sa ‘ udiyya al-’ula . Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia: Darat al-Malik ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 1997. 
 The  ‘ulama ’s intellectual output in Najd prior to and following Shaykh Muhammad ibn 
‘Abd al-Wahhab’s movement. 
 Jabber, Paul . “Oil, Arms, and Regional Diplomacy: Strategic Dimensions of the Saudi-
Egyptian Relationship.” In  Rich and Poor States in the Middle East: Egypt and the New 
Arab Order , edited by Malcolm H. Kerr and El Sayed Yassin. Boulder, CO: Westview, 
1982, 415–448. 
In this Jabber shows how the Egyptian-Saudi Arabian relationship ﬁ ts into the volume’s 
exploration of “rich” and “poor” states. Saudi Arabia’s ﬁ rst oil boom allowed for weapons 
purchases and bore on its changing policies toward Egypt, with the most powerful military 
in the region.
 Jacquard, Roland.  In the Name of Osama bin Laden: Global Terrorism and the Bin Laden 
Brotherhood . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002. 
 With an introduction and analysis by Jacquard, original documents issued by Osama bin 
Laden are provided in this book. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Arabian Peninsula.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 663–669. 
 An important review of the role of poetry in popular music. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Sung Poetry in the Oral Tradition of the Gulf Region and the Arabian Pen-
insula.”  Oral Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 175–187. 
 This title covers certain forms of sung poetry in Saudi Arabia and the smaller Arabian 
states. 
 Jargy, Simon. “Comments on the Concept and Characteristics of the Folk Music in the 
Gulf and Arabian Peninsula.”  Ma’thurat al-Sha ‘ biyya 1, J anuary 1986. 
 This title describes the unique features of folk music in the Gulf region. 
 al-Jayyusi, Salma Khadra.  The Literature of Modern Arabia: An Anthology . London: Kegan 
Paul, 1988. 
 An anthology of modern literature. 
 Al-Jeraisy, Khaled ‘Abd al-Rahman, coll. and ed.  Selected Fatwas on Faith Healing and 
Witchcraft . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Khaled al-Jersaisy Establishment, 1422h. 

 Annotated Bibliography
468 |
 This works contains  fatawa , Islamic legal rulings, on the form of folk medicine used in 
Saudi Arabia and also those forbidding witchcraft. 
 Al-Jeraisy, Khaled ‘Abd al-Rahman.  Raghbah . Raghbah and Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Khaled 
al-Jeraisy, 1420h. (1999/2000). 
 A complete illustrated study of the city of Raghbah, its history, its environs, and its major 
families. 
 Jones, Toby . “Saudi Arabia’s Silent Spring.”  Foreign Policy , February 2009. http://www.
foreignpolicy.com/story/cms.php?story_id=4718 
Discusses King ‘Abdullah’s reforms announced on the 14th of February, 2009. Despite 
others’ perceiving this as a new age in Saudi Arabia, Jones reminds that women lack suf-
frage and power is not being shared outside the royal family.
 Jones, Toby. “Saudi Arabia’s Not So New Anti-Shi’ism.”  Middle East Report 242 (Spring 
2007). 
 On the origins of  salaﬁ  anti-Shi‘a sentiments in earlier Wahhabist thought and history. 
 Joyce, Miriam.  Ruling Shaikhs and Her Majesty’s Government 1960–1969 . Portland, OR: 
Frank Cass, 2003. 
 This title explains the changing relationships between the British government and the 
traditional leaders of Gulf nations in the years prior to Britain’s withdrawal from the 
Gulf. 
 al-Juhany, Uwaidah M.  Najd before the Salaﬁ  Reform Movement: Social, Religious and Po-
litical Conditions in the Three Centuries Preceding the Rise of the Saudi State . Reading, 
UK: Ithaca, 2002. 
 An important historical description of the conditions leading up to the  salaﬁ  movement of 
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab. 
 al-Kamali, Sh.  al-Shi ‘ r ‘ inda al-badu [Poetry among the bedouin]. Baghdad: Matba‘at al-
Irshad, 1964. 
 A study of oral poetry. 
 Katakura, Motoko .  Bedouin Village . Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1977. 
A study of the Bedouin lifestyle, customs and changes in that lifestyle as of the 1970s.
 Kay, Shirley.  The Bedouin . North Vancouver, BC, Canada: Douglas David and Charles, 1978. 
 Kechichian, Joseph A.  Faysal: Saudi Arabia’s King for All Seasons . Gainesville: University 
Press of Florida, 2008. 
 An analysis of King Faysal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz and his era. 
 Kechichian, Joseph A.  Succession in Saudi Arabia . New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
 This title explains the process of determining leadership in Saudi Arabia and how this can 
be accomplished collectively by the large Sa‘udi royal family. 
 Kerr, Malcolm.  The Arab Cold War: Gamal Abd al-Nasir and His Rivals, 1958–1970 . Lon-
don: Oxford University Press, 1971. 
 A study of the polarization between Saudi Arabia and Jordan, Egypt, Syria, and other 
populist republican regimes that the author calls a cold war. This cold war dominated 
regional politics in the mid-20th century. 

Annotated Bibliography | 469
 Keynoush, Banafsheh. “The Iranian-Saudi Arabian Relationship: From Ideological Con-
frontation to Pragmatic Accommodation.” PhD diss., Fletcher School, Tufts University, 
2007. 
 An overview of the bilateral relationship from the Khomeinist revolutionary period to later 
accommodation or cooperation. 
 King, Geoff rey.  The Traditional Architecture of Saudi Arabia . London: I. B. Tauris, 1998. 
 Saudi Arabia’s architecture in various regions and how climate, building materials, and 
various cultural styles have inﬂ uenced it, with numerous illustrations. 
 King, Geoff rey.  The Historical Mosques of Saudi Arabia . New York: Longman, 1986. 
 An art history and archaeology professor covers the historic mosques of Saudi Arabia. 
 King, Geoff rey. “Some Notes on Mosques in Eastern and Western Saudi Arabia.”  Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental and African Studies 42, no. 2 (1980), 251–276. 
 This article was written when King taught in Saudi Arabia and includes special details of 
the local mosque architecture. 
 King, Geoff rey. “Traditional Najdi Mosques.”  Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 41, no. 3 (1978), 464–498. 
 On the style of the mosques of Najd, Saudi Arabia’s central region. 
 The King Abdulaziz Historical Centre . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Arriyadh Development Au-
thority, 2000. 
 This title outlines the history of Saudi Arabia, the facilities of the historical center and 
national museum, and restorations. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “The Rise of  Jihadi Trends in Saudi Arabia: The Post Iraq-Kuwait War 
Phase.” In  Radical Islam and International Security: Challenges and Responses , edited by 
Hillel Frisch and Efraim Inbar. New York: Routledge, 2007, 73–92. 
 This chapter covers the upsurge in newer, more militant individuals and groups in Saudi 
Arabia after the Gulf War. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “The Role of Tribal Groups in State Expansion and Consolidation.” In 
 Changing Nomads in a Changing World , edited by Joseph Ginat and Anatoly Khazanov. 
Brighton, UK: Sussex Academic, 1998, 143–155. 
 This chapter presents a role for tribal groups based on the Saudi Arabian example. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “State, Islam and Opposition in Saudi Arabia: The Post Desert-Storm 
Phase.”  Middle East Review of International Aff airs 1, no. 2 (July 1997). 
 A discussion of the state’s reaction to Islamic opposition, under a new  ‘ulama , and other 
ﬁ gures during the Gulf War. 
 Kostiner, Joseph.  The Making of Saudi Arabia, 1916–1936 . New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1993. 
 Describes the establishment of the modern Saudi Arabia by ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud and 
the Ikhwan. 
 Kostiner, Joseph. “Transforming Dualities: Tribes and State Formation in Saudi Arabia.” 
In  Tribe and State Formation in the Middle East , edited by Philip S. Khoury and Joseph 
Kostiner.  Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1991. 

 Annotated Bibliography
470 |
 This chapter concerns the role of tribes, and tribal chieftaincy in the context of the forma-
tion of the Ikhwan and their challenge, in keeping with the volume editors’ thesis that tribal 
(or family) loyalties were a signiﬁ cant aspect of state formation. 
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Arabia of the Bedouins . London: Al Saqi, 2001. 
 This title covers the author’s travels in central Saudi Arabia in the late 1980s and the per-
formance and content of the oral poetry he was collecting and studying. 
 Kurpershoek, P. Marcel.  Oral Poetry and Narratives from Central Arabia . Vol. 1. Leiden, 
the Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1994. 
 A study of oral poetry and folk literature. 
 Lacey, Robert.  Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists and the Struggle 
for Saudi Arabia . New York: Viking Penguin, 2009. 
 This book brings to life the contemporary kingdom and the many contradictions in the 
decades since the author wrote  The Kingdom . 
 Lacey, Robert.  The Kingdom . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1981. 
 The history and background of Ibn Sa‘ud’s battle for power and the growth of the Sa’udi 
state up to the late 1970s is detailed here. One of the most readable treatments but long 
banned within Saudi Arabia. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane.  Awakening Islam: Religious Dissent in Contemporary Saudi Arabia . 
Translated by George Holoch. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011. 
 This book is a translation of the volume in French listed below. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane.  Les islamistes saoudiens. Une insurrection manquée [Saudi Islamists. 
A failed uprising]. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2010. 
 Lacroix, a graduate student of Giles Kepel, analyzes the neosalaﬁ st movement as a form of 
political opposition and considers it to have failed. (In other media comments, he suggests 
that it may be the main revolutionary force in Saudi Arabia or that it has been bought off  ). 
His description of the  sahwa  (Islamic awakening) is based on at least 50 personal interviews. 
He makes a claim that it was Islamists from Egypt and elsewhere who supposedly radical-
ized Saudi Arabia, and that they became entrenched in state institutions. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Islamo-Liberal Politics in Saudi Arabia.” In  Saudi Arabia in the Bal-
ance , edited by Paul Aarts and Gerd Nonneman. London: Hurst, 2005, 35–56. 
 This title is about the inﬂ uence of two diff erent groups—the so-called  tayyar libarali , or 
liberal trend, and the salaﬁ sts, Islamists who believe religious reform is the proper path and 
who challenged the Saudi Arabian government in 2003–2004. 
 Lacroix, Stéphane. “Between Islamists and Liberals: Saudi Arabia’s New ‘Islamo-Liberal’ 
Reformists.”  Middle East Journal 58, no. 3 (Summer 2004). 
 An analysis of two diff erent strands of opposition in Saudi Arabia that have arisen since 
the ﬁ rst Gulf War. 
 Lambert, Jean. “The Arabian Peninsula: An Overview.” In  Garland Encyclopedia of World 
Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and Dwight Reynolds. New York: 
Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 649–661. 
 A broad description of unifying aspects of music in the peninsula. 

Annotated Bibliography | 471
 Lancaster, William.  The Rwala Bedouin Today . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1981; Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland, 1997. 
 An ethnography of the Rwala Bedouin of the Arabian Peninsula, with whom the author 
spent several years. 
 Larsen, Torben B.  The Butterﬂ ies of Saudi Arabia and Its Neighbors . London: Stacey Inter-
national, 1984. 
 An illustrated study by an expert on the butterﬂ ies of the Middle East. 
 Larsen, Torben B. “In the Alps of Arabia.”  Aramco World , July/August 1983, 16–21. 
 This piece describes unique ﬂ ora of the highlands of Arabia. 
 Lebkicher, Roy, George Rentz, and Max Steineke.  The Arabia of Ibn Saud . New York: 
Russell F. Moore, 1952. 
 A classic study of Arabia in Ibn Sa‘ud’s period and about the al-Sa‘ud. 
 Lebling, Robert W., Jr. “The Treasure of Tarthuth.”  Saudi Aramco World , March/April 
2003. 
 Tarthuth ( Cynomorium coccineum or  Fungus melitensis ) is known as “Maltese mushroom,” 
“desert thumb,” or “red thumb.” It grows in the al-Dahna Desert in early spring and is 
eaten and used as medicine. 
 Lebling, Robert W., and Donna Pepperdine. “Natural Remedies of Arabia.”  Saudi Aramco 
World 57, no. 5 (September/October 2006). 
 Excerpt from the book  Natural Remedies of Arabia on herbs and spices used as medicine 
in Saudi Arabia. 
 Lebling, Robert W., and Donna Pepperdine.  Natural Remedies of Arabia . London: Al-
Turath/Stacey International, 2006. 
 Discusses herbs and spices employed as medicine in Saudi Arabia. 
 Lecker, Michael.  Muslims, Jews and Pagans: Studies on Early Islamic Medina . Leiden, the 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1995. 
 A study of the political struggles of early Medina from the Arabic sources. 
 Letter to the West: A Saudi View . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: www.ghainaa.net, 2005. 
 A controversial letter written by a group of Saudi Arabian scholars and intellectuals. Avail-
able on many diff erent websites in Arabic. 
 Lewis, Bernard.  Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry . New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1990. 
 A work on the issue of race and slavery from classical sources that illustrates instances of 
racism and counterexamples of cultural and religious tolerance. 
 Lippmann, Thomas W.  Inside the Mirage: America’s Fragile Partnership with Saudi Arabia . 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 2004. 
 The story of U.S.–Saudi Arabian relations from the ﬁ rst journey of Standard Oil of Cali-
fornia geologists to the kingdom in 1933 up to the years preceding the September 11, 2001, 
attacks. Written by a former Middle East bureau head and national security correspondent 
for the  Washington Post . 

 Annotated Bibliography
472 |
 Long, David E.  Culture and Customs of Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 
 An introduction to Saudi Arabian customs, etiquette, and culture. 
 Long, David E. “The Hajj and Its Impact on Saudi Arabia and the Muslim World.”  Saudi-
Arabian Forum , February 2003; reposted on SUSRIS (Saudi-U.S. Relations), December 
16, 2007. http://www.saudi-us-relations.org/articles/2007/ioi/071216-long-hajj.html 
 Describes the yearly pilgrimage to Mecca and its eff ects on Saudi Arabia and the broader 
Islamic world. 
 Long, David E.  The United States and Saudi Arabia: Ambivalent Allies . Boulder, CO: West-
view, 1985. 
 Recounts the U.S.–Saudi Arabian relationship up to the mid-1980s. 
 Long, David E.  The Hajj Today: A Survey of Contemporary Makkah Pilgrimage . Albany: 
State University of New York, 1979. 
 A study of the pilgrimage in the mid-1970s. 
 Looney, Robert.  Economic Development in Saudi Arabia: Consequences of the Oil Price De-
cline . Greenwich, CT: Jai, 1990. 
 An important study of Saudi Arabia’s “bust” period following the boom of the 1970s. 
 Louër, Laurence.  Transnational Shia Politics: Religious and Political Networks in the Gulf . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
 A study of the networks impacting Shi‘a in the Gulf region, including Saudi Arabia. 
 Lunde, Paul. “Science in the Golden Age” and “Arabs and Astronomy.” In “Science: The 
Islamic Legacy.” Special issue,  Aramco World . Reprint, Leiden and Washington DC: Ar-
amco, ca. 1986, 3–5 and 51–53. 
 Brief articles on the golden age of the sciences in the medieval Arab world. In an  Aramco 
World issue from 1986. 
 Lunde, Paul. “Saudization: A Useful Tool in the Kingdom’s Battle Against Unemploy-
ment?”  Journal of South Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 27, no. 3 (Spring 2004). 
 This piece questions the progress made in the Saudization policies and how they aff ect 
employment. 
 Ma’ahad al-Dirasat al-Diplumasiyya.  Al-Arshif al-Alaktruniyya li-Isdarat al-Ma ‘ ahad . 
1400–1424 (1980–2004).  Riyadh: Diplomatic Institute, Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, Saudi 
Arabia, 2005. 
 The collected works in this date range on CD by the research/educational unit of the Min-
istry of Foreign Aff airs. 
 Mabababaya, Mamarinta.  The Role of Multinational Companies in the Middle East: The 
Case of Saudi Arabia . London: University of Westminster, 2002. 
 This title describes how multinational companies are changing consumption and the eco-
nomic scene in the region and their impact in Saudi Arabia. 
 Mackey, Sandra.  The Saudis: Inside the Desert Kingdom . New York and Scarborough, ON, 
Canada: New American Library, 1987. 
 A journalistic account of Saudi Arabia from the takeover of the Great Mosque to the new 
stricter religious polices of the 1980s. 

Annotated Bibliography | 473
 Mahy, Lyn. “Saudi Aramco World Flavored with Tradition: Food from Saudi Arabia.”  Ar-
amco World , November/December 1975. 
 Food traditions in Saudi Arabia are presented in this article. 
 Maisal, Sebastien, and John A. Shoup.  Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States Today: An Encyclo-
pedia of Life in the Arab States . Westport, CT: Greenwood and ABC-CLIO, 2009. 
 A reference work on Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states covering many topics from culture 
to politics. 
 Makky, Abdel Wahed.  Mecca: The Pilgrimage City: A Study of Pilgrim Accommodations . 
London: Croom Helm, 1978. 
 A detailed study of pilgrimage housing in Mecca. 
 El Mallakh, Raguei.  Saudi Arabia: Rush to Development: Proﬁ le of an Energy Economy and 
Development . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982. 
 This title is an assessment of the Saudi Arabian economy during the ﬁ rst two ﬁ ve-year plans 
and of the prospects for the third ﬁ ve-year plan. 
 Malmignati, Countess.  Through Inner Deserts to Medina . London: Phillip Allan, 1925. 
 A travel diary of the author’s journeys in Arabia, written primarily for the European audi-
ence of the time. 
 al-Mani, Saleh. “The Ideological Dimension in Saudi-Iranian Relations.” In  Iran and the 
Gulf: A Search for Stability , edited by Jamal S. al-Suwaidi. Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates: Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research, 1996, 158–174. 
 This piece describes the political clash between Iran of Khomeini’s era and Saudi Arabia, 
which is a contest for gain in Islamic audiences as much as a strategic issue. 
 Marcel, Valérie.  Oil Titans: National Oil Companies in the Middle East . London: Chatham 
House, 2006. 
 A study of nationalized oil companies from an economic perspective. 
 Matthiesen, Toby. “The Shi’a of Saudi Arabia at a Crossroads.”  Middle East Report Online , 
May 6, 2009. http://www.merip.org/mero050609.html 
 A report on the Intifadhat of 1430 (2010) and its background. 
 Mauger, Thierry.  Impressions of Arabia: Architecture and Frescoes of the Asir Region . Paris: 
Flammarion-Pere Casto, 1996. 
 The arts and design of the living environment of the southwestern Asir region. Photographs 
of the vibrant, colorful designs painted on local houses and buildings. 
 Melman, Billie.  Women’s Orients: English Women and the Middle East, 1718–1918 . Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992. 
 An analysis of travelers’ and missionaries’ accounts of the Middle East, including the 
Blunts’. 
 al-Menaa, Fahad Nasser. “The Causes of Drug Usage, Distribution and Smuggling in 
Saudi Arabia.” PhD diss., Washington State University, 1995. 
 Drug use is forbidden and strictly punished in Saudi Arabia, yet it has grown and become 
a public health problem. This study describes what was known of the drug trade and usage 
at that time. 

 Annotated Bibliography
474 |
 Ménoret, Pascal.  The Saudi Enigma: A History . London: Zed Books, 2005. 
 An important study of Saudi Arabia. Counters the usual idea that colonization has not 
impacted the kingdom. 
 Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress.  Saudi Arabia: A 
Country Study . Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1993. 
 A detailed collection on the state of education, history, economics, ﬁ nance, politics, gov-
ernment, and society up to the early 1990s. 
 Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Eighth Development Plan, 2005–2009 . Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: Ministry of Planning, 2005. 
 The eighth economic plan for development as produced by the Saudi Arabian government. 
 Ministry of Planning, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  Seventh Development Plan 2000–2004. Ri-
yadh, Saudi Arabia: Ministry of Planning, 2000. 
 The seventh offi  cial economic plan for development in Saudi Arabia. 
 Minosa, Tchekoff .  Najran—Desert Garden of Arabia . Paris: Scorpio Editeur, 1983. 
 One of the few studies to focus on Najran. 
 Mobaraki, A. E. H., and B. Soderfeldt. “Gender Inequity in Saudi Arabia and Its Role in 
Public Health.”  Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal 16, no. 1 (January 2010). 
 This piece gives examples of direct negative eff ects on women’s health that stem from men’s 
authority over women, polygamy, arranged marriages, and other issues. 
 Mogassabi, Khalil S. “Modernity and Tradition in the Design of New Towns: Sadat City, 
Egypt and Yanbu, Saudi Arabia.” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, 1990. 
 Allusions to the past are included in modern design in these two examples of offi  cially 
planned cities. 
 Moinuddin, Hassan.  The Charter of the Islamic Conference and Legal Framework of Eco-
nomic Cooperation among Its Member States . New York: Oxford University Press, 
1987. 
 This title is concerned with the formation of the Islamic Conference and the aspirations for 
the organization and its members. 
 El Mouzan, M. L, A. A. Al Salloum, A. S. Al Herbish, M. M. Qurachi, and A. A. Al Omar. 
“Consanguinity and Major Genetic Disorders in Saudi Children: A Community-Based 
Cross-sectional study.”  Annual of Saudi Medicine 228 (2008), 69–73. 
 This study denies that major genetic disorders are due to consanguinity but does not actu-
ally mention or discuss all of them. However, the study does admit a higher rate of con-
genital heart failure in the children of close relatives. 
 Mufti, Muhammad H.  Health Care Development Strategies in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia . 
New York: Kluwer, 2000. 
 This title covers the then-ongoing process of reengineering health care in Saudi Arabia 
given the state of various facilities and need for medical workers. It discusses the establish-
ment of the National Health Care Insurance program and the associated costs of providing 
improved care. 

Annotated Bibliography | 475
 al-Mumayiz, Amin.  Al-Mamlaka al- ‘ Arabiyya kama ‘  ariftuha: Mudhakkirat diblumasiyya  
[The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as I knew it: Diplomatic memoirs]. Beirut, Lebanon, 1963. 
 The memoirs of a former offi  cial. 
 al-Munajjed (printed AlMunajjed), Mona.  Women in Saudi Arabia Today . Basingstoke, 
UK: Macmillan, 1995. 
 A preliminary study of women in Saudi Arabia and the progress made in education and 
other areas. 
 Munif, ‘Abdelrahman.  Mudun al-milh [Cities of salt]. 5 vols. 9th ed. Beirut, Lebanon: al-
Mu’assasah al-‘Arabiyyah lil-Dirasat wa-al-Nashr, 1999. 
 A ﬁ ctional account of a desert kingdom in moral and spiritual bankruptcy that closely 
resembles Saudi Arabia, written by an award-winning author in exile. Perhaps best known 
is the ﬁ rst volume of the series, which appeared in translation as  Variations on Night and 
Day , translated by Peter Theroux (New York: Pantheon Books, 1993). 
 Munif, ‘Abdelrahman.  Sharq al-Mutawwasit . 3rd ed. Beirut, Lebanon: al-Mu’sasah al-
‘Arabiyyah lil-dirasa wa al-nashr, 1991. 
 One of Munif’s many novels that predated  Mudun al-milh . It depicts the extraordinary 
measures taken by an imaginary kingdom to control the activities of its citizens at home 
and abroad. 
 Munro, Alan.  An Arabian Aff air: Politics and Diplomacy behind the Gulf War . London: 
Brassey’s, 1996. 
 A view of the Gulf War from diplomatic history. 
 Murphy, Caryle. “Analysis: What Is behind Saudi Off ensive in Yemen.”  Globalpost , No-
vember 14, 2009. 
 This piece claims that Iran’s support for the Houthis is the rationale for the Saudi Arabian 
off ensive in Yemen in the fall of 2009. 
 Murphy, Keith B., and Sherifa Zuhur. “Qur’an.” In  Encyclopedia of U.S. Middle Eastern 
Wars , edited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2010, vol. 3, 1013–1015. 
 A summary of the history of the Qur’an, its transcription, and its importance in the Middle 
East. 
 al-Mutawa, Abdullah M. “The Ulama of Najd from the Sixteenth Century to the Mid-
Eighteenth Century.” PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1989. 
 A dissertation that explores the intellectual and political attitudes of the ‘ ulama in the period 
prior to the Wahhabi reform. 
 al-Najjar, Muhammad Rajab. “Contemporary Trends in the Study of Folklore in the Arab 
Gulf States.” In  Statecraft in the Middle East: Oil, Historical Memory and Popular Cul-
ture , edited by Eric Davis and Nicolas Gavrielides. Miami: Florida International Univer-
sity Press, 1991, 176–201. 
 The studies of folklore being carried out at the Arab Gulf States Folklore Center at 
Doha, Qatar, as supported by multiple countries, are described, as are trends in folklore 
studies. 
 Nawwab, Ni‘mah Ismail. “The Suqs of Asir.”  Saudi Aramco World 49, no. 4 (1998), 2–9. 
 An illustrated description of the markets of Asir. 

 Annotated Bibliography
476 |
 Nawwab, Ni‘mah Ismail. “The Children’s Kingdom.”  Aramco World , November/December 
1995, 18–27. 
 An illustrated article about the annual children’s art contest in Saudi Arabia. 
 Nawwab, Nimah Ismail.  Unfurled . Vista, CA: Selwa Press, 2004. 
 Poetry of a modern Saudi Arabian woman written in English. 
 Nawwab, Ni‘mat. “Painting Cultural History.”  Aramco World , January/February 2001, 20–27. 
 This piece describes the career of the artist Saﬁ ya Said Binzagr and a center she established. 
 Neubauer, Eckard . “Arabic Writings on Music: Eighth to Nineteenth Centuries.” In  Gar-
land Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and 
Dwight Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 363–386. 
An informative discussion of sources in Arabic on music pertinent to various genres.
 Neubauer, Eckhard, and Veronica Doubleday. “Islamic Religious Music.” In  The New 
Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and Lon-
don: Macmillan, 2001, 599–610. 
 An overview of some of the styles of religious music and chanting. 
 Niblock, Tim.  Saudi Arabia: Power, Legitimacy, Survival . New York: Routledge, 2006. 
 Saudi Arabia’s political structure and trends, and the impact of calls for reform, are de-
tailed here. 
 Niblock, Tim, ed.  State, Society and Economy in Saudi Arabia. New York, 1982. 
 A collection on Saudi Arabia written in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
 Niblock, Tim, with Monica Malik.  The Political Economy of Saudi Arabia . London: Rout-
ledge, 2007. 
 This title covers Saudi Arabia’s economic development from 1962 to 2006. 
 Nicholson, James.  The Hejaz Railway . London: Stacey International, in association with 
Riyadh: Al-Turath, 2005. 
 An illustrated volume focused on the planning and establishment of the Hijaz Railway and 
its involvement in the events of the Arab Revolt and World War I. 
 Nicholson, Reynald A.  A Literary History of the Arabs . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1977. (Reprint of the same work published with T. F. Unwin, 1907.) 
 An instructive discussion of the literary styles and historical context of early Arab writers. 
 Nomachi, Ali Kazuyoshi, and Sayed Hossein Nasr.  Mecca, the Blessed, Medina, the Radi-
ant: The Holiest Cities of Islam . New York: Aperture, 1997. 
 The meaning of the two Holy Cities and their history for Muslims are described in this 
book. 
 Obaid, Nawaf E.  The Oil Kingdom at 100: Petroleum Policymaking in Saudi Arabia .  Wash-
ington DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 An analysis of Saudi Arabian petroleum policymaking and plans to reduce dependence on 
oil, in addition to a critical look at Saudi Arabian governance. 
 Ochsenwald, William. “Islam and Loyalty in the Saudi Hijaz: 1926–1939.”  Die Welt des Is-
lams 47, no. 1 (2007), 1–32. 

Annotated Bibliography | 477
 Similar to the author’s chapter in Ayoob and Kosebalaban, eds., a description of the eff ects 
on religious life of annexing the Hijaz. 
 Ochsenwald, William.  Religion, Society and the State in Arabia: The Hijaz under Ottoman 
Control, 1840 – 1908 . Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1984. 
 An important historical study of the Ottomans in the Hijaz. 
 Okruhlik, Gwenn. “Empowering Civility through Nationalism: Reformist Islam and Be-
longing in Saudi Arabia.” In  Remaking Muslim Politics: Pluralism, Contestation, Democ-
ratization , edited by Robert W. Hefner. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005, 
189–212. 
 This essay describes the process of creating and enhancing a Saudi Arabian political and 
civil identity while also promoting gradual reform. 
 Palms and Pomegranates: Traditional Dress of Saudi Arabia. Exhibition catalog. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Committee for Saudi Arabian Cultural Heritage, n.d. [ca. 1987]. 
 An illustrated exhibition catalog that accompanied a major exhibit of traditional, regional 
Saudi Arabian dress. 
 Pampanini, Andrea H.  Cities from the Arabian Desert: The Building of Jubail and Yanbu in 
Saudi Arabia . Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997. 
 The process of planning and building these two port cities is detailed in this book. 
 Pant, Harsh V. “Saudi Arabia Woos China and India.”  Middle East Quarterly , Fall 2006. 
 An assessment in a neoconservative (generally anti–Saudi Arabian and pro-Israeli) journal 
implying a new Saudi Arabian foreign policy due to diff erences with the United States. 
 Pellat, Charles. “Jewelers with Words: The Heritage of Arabic Literature.” In  Islam and the 
Arab World: Faith, People, Culture , edited by Bernard Lewis. New York: Albert Knopf, 
1970, 141–160. 
 A description and analysis of the medieval forms and development of Arabic literature. 
 Pesce, Angelo.  Jiddah — Portrait of an Arabian City . Cambridge, UK: Falcon, 1976. 
 Part of the literature on urban centers of the Arabian Peninsula, this work by the author 
of  Mecca: A Hundred Years Ago describes Jeddah’s lengthy history, urban landscape, and 
architecture. 
 Pesce, Angelo, and Khalid Khidr.  Taif: The Summer Capital of Saudi Arabia . Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia: Immel, 1984. 
 The historical and architectural setting of Ta’if, long a favored place for retreat and vaca-
tions, is detailed here. 
 Peters, Francis E.  The Arabs and Arabia on the Eve of Islam . Brookﬁ eld, VT: Ashgate, 1999. 
 The pre-Islamic period from a historical perspective. 
 Peters, Francis E.  The Hajj: The Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy Places . Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994 and 1996. 
 Pre-Islamic worship in Mecca up to the demise of the Hashemite Kingdom of the Hijaz in 
1926 is described here. It shows the linkages and impact of the pilgrimage on the area, the 
measures taken to defend the caravans, public health problems, costs and beneﬁ ts, and the 
transformations from the traditional to the early modern  hajj . 

 Annotated Bibliography
478 |
 Peters, Francis E.  Mecca: A Literary History of the Muslim Holy Land . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1994. 
 Mecca and the  hajj are described based on various literary sources. 
 Peterson, J. E.  Historical Dictionary of Saudi Arabia . Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2003. 
 A summary of information on Saudi Arabia with a detailed bibliography. 
 Peterson, J. E.  Saudi Arabia and the Illusion of Security . Adelphi Paper 348. London: Oxford 
University Press, 2002. 
 This title deﬁ nes a Saudi Arabian conception of security in the Gulf and within its borders 
and introduces the impact of the attacks of September 11, 2001. 
 Peterson, J. E.  Defending Arabia . London: Croom Helm, 1986. 
 This title details the origins of British interests in Arabia and its pursuit of a Gulf security 
policy through the two world wars and into the postwar era with a detailed assessment of 
air power and air routes. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  The Empty Quarter: Being a Description of the Great South 
Desert Known as the Rub ‘  al-Khali . London: Holt, 1933; London: Century, 1986. 
 This explorer, intelligence offi  cer, ﬁ gure in British politics in the Middle East, and orni-
thologist gives his account of the Rub‘ al-Khali region. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  Forty Years in the Wilderness . London: R. Hale, 1957. 
 Philby is also known as Jack Philby, or Shaykh ‘Abdullah after his conversion to Islam. 
These are his memoirs, written in Beirut after he was exiled due to his criticisms of King 
Sa‘ud. His Arabian wife and family accompanied him. His archives—other materials and 
correspondence—were sold by his Arabian family to Aramco and later acquired by the 
Middle East Centre Archive (formerly known as the Private Papers Collection) at St. Ant-
ony’s College, Oxford University. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  Sa ‘ udi Arabia . London: Benn; New York: Praeger, 1955. 
 Philby was an adviser to Ibn Sa‘ud on matters pertaining to the United Kingdom and as 
such had a unique view of the formation of the new state. This book took the new govern-
ment of King Sa‘ud to task and caused a scandal. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  Arabian Highlands . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1952. 
 A large volume on St. John Philby’s travels in the highlands of Saudi Arabia (Asir) and 
their history. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  Arabian Jubilee . London: R. Hale, 1952. 
 This title was written to coincide with King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz’s Golden Jubilee. As the king 
had collapsed (due to illness) and the ‘ ulama  would not permit the celebrations, the book 
is one of the few publications marking the event. 
 Philby, Harry St. John B.  Arabian Days . London: R. Hale, 1948. 
 Accounts by Philby of his mission, activities, and travels in Saudi Arabia. 
 Philby, Henry St. John B.  A Pilgrim in Arabia . London: R. Hale, 1946. 
 Philby describes his experiences as a pilgrim on the hajj in Saudi Arabia’s Holy Cities. 
 Philby, Harry St. John Bridger.  The Heart of Arabia: A Record of Travel and Exploration . 2 
vols. London: Constable, 1922. 

Annotated Bibliography | 479
 The ﬁ rst travel book by St. John (Jack) Philby, written while on leave at Eastbourne (in 
the United Kingdom). During its writing he was summoned by Lord Curzon’s committee 
to proceed to Ibn Sa‘ud for they had realized that he and his Ikhwan were more likely to 
prevail in power than Sharif Husayn. 
 Pierpoli, Paul, and Sherifa Zuhur. “Medina.” In  Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Wars , ed-
ited by Spencer Tucker. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2008, vol. 2, 673. 
 A brief article about Medina and its history. 
 Pint, John.  The Desert Caves of Saudi Arabia . Riyadh: Saudi Arabia: Saudi Geological Sur-
vey, 2003. 
 A book-length treatment of the cave formations in Saudi Arabia based on the author’s 
explorations. 
 Pint, John. “Saudi Arabia’s Desert Caves.”  Aramco World  51, no. 2 (March/April 2000), 27–38. 
 A description of these unique caverns, ﬁ lled with water due to the geological formations 
of this region. 
 Poché, Christian. “Music in Ancient Arabia from Archaeological and Written Sources.” In 
 Garland Encyclopedia of World Music , edited by Virginia Danielson, Scott Marcus, and 
Dwight Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2002, vol. 6, 357–362. 
 This essay summarizes what is known about music in ancient Arabia from art history and 
written sources. 
 Powell, William.  Saudi Arabia and Its Royal Family . Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart, 1982. 
 A study of Saudi Arabia through the late 1970s. 
 al-Qabesi, Mohyddin, coll. and ed.  The Holy Quran and the Sword: Selected Addresses, 
Speeches Memoranda and Interviews by HM the Late King Abdul Aziz al-Saud . Riyadh: 
Saudi Desert House for Publishing and Distribution, 1998. 
 A collection of letters, speeches, interviews, cables, and formal statements of Ibn Sa‘ud, 
illustrated with photographs, together with a brief introduction and a short essay by King 
Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz about his father. 
 al-Qahtani, Fahd.  Sira’ al-Ajniha ﬁ  al-’A’ila al-Sa ‘ udiyya . London: Safa, 1988. 
 This title focuses on the Saudi Arabian royal family. 
 al-Qarney, Mohsin ibn Farhan.  al-Qura’ al-taqlidiyya bi-al-mantaqah al-janubiyah . Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia: King Sa‘ud University, 1414h. 
 This title describes the villages of the southern region of Saudi Arabia and their traditional 
lifestyle. 
 Quandt, William.  Saudi Arabia in the 1980s: Foreign Policy, Security, and Oil . Washington, 
DC: Brookings, 1981. 
 Security and foreign policy issues in the 1980s, which explain some of the various conﬂ ict-
ing issues in U.S. foreign policy, are described in this title. 
 Qureshi, Naseem Akhtar, Aladin Hadi al-Amri, Muzamil Hasan Abdelgadir, and Esam 
Ahmed El-Haraka. “Traditional Cautery among Psychiatric Patients in Saudi Arabia.” 
 Transcultural Psychiatry 35, no. 1 (March 1998), 75–83. 
 Traditional healers use cautery, or burning, as a medical technique to treat various ills, 
including psychiatric problems. 

 Annotated Bibliography
480 |
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “The Life History of the Lyre (in the Path of the Lyre): The Tanburah of 
the Gulf Region.”  Musiké ,  International Journal of Ethnomusicological Studies 2, no. 2 
(2006). 
 The instrument known as the  tanburah or, on the Red Sea coasts and the Sinai Peninsula, 
as the  simsimiyya is related to the ancient  lyra or lyre and shows musical links between the 
Red Sea, the Gulf regions, and the coast of Egypt and northeastern Africa. 
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “Music of the Arabian Desert in the Accounts of Early Western Travelers” 
(Musiqa al-Badiyah ﬁ  Sijillat al-Rahhalah al-Gharbiyyin, translation by the author). In 
 al-Ma’thurat al-Sha ‘ biyyah . Doha, Qatar: The GCC Arab Gulf States Folklore Center, 
1998. 
 An important and useful source on the musical genres of the bedouin from the accounts 
of the early Western travelers. 
 Racy, Ali Jihad. “Music.” In  The Genius of Arab Civilization: Source of Renaissance , edited 
by John R. Hayes. New York: New York University Press, 1992, 151–171. 
 Describes unique and common elements of Arabic music; its structure, history, and ap-
preciation; and the development of various instruments. 
 Al Rajhi, Ahmed, Abdullah Al-Salamah, Monica Malik, and Rodney Wilson.  Economic 
Development in Saudi Arabia . New York: Routledge, 2003. 
 A collection on the economic condition of Saudi Arabia, given the volatility of the region 
but also its solid basis in the oil economy. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi, ed.  Kingdom without Borders: Saudi Political, Religious and Media 
Frontiers . New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
 Essays on Saudi Arabia explain various problems engendered by the offi  cial policies of the 
Saudi Arabian government, given its aim to control dissidence, the rise of violent Islamic 
elements, and the expansion of contact with outside media. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi. “Saudi Arabia and the Palestine War: Beyond Offi  cial History.” In 
 The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948 War , edited by Eugene Rogan and 
Avi Shlaim. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 228–247. 
 Adds to our historical knowledge about the al-Sa‘ud government’s actions and pragmatic 
approach to the Palestine War, as its ally, the United States, backed the creation of the 
state of Israel. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi.  A History of Saudi Arabia . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2002. 
 This title begins with her earlier work on the Rashidi dynasty, contrasting it and the Shari-
ﬁ an Hijazi state with the new Wahhabi-Najdi order. 
 Al-Rasheed, Madawi. “The Shi’a of Saudi Arabia: A Minority in Search of Cultural Au-
thenticity.”  British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 24, no. 1 (May 1993), 121–138. 
 An exploration of the Shi‘a of Saudi Arabia, who, in the eastern region, had risen up brieﬂ y 
against the government. 
 al-Rasheed, Madawi.  Politics in an Arabian Oasis: The Rashidi Tribal Dynasty . London: I. 
B. Tauris, 1991. 
 This study focused on the Rashidi history and culture of the premodern era. 

Annotated Bibliography | 481
 al-Rasheed, Madawi, and Robert Vitalis, eds.  Counternarratives: History, Contemporary 
Society, and Politics in Saudi Arabia and Yemen . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2004. 
 Both editors have issued highly critical treatments of the al-Sa‘ud government and its poli-
cies. Al-Rasheed’s contribution is about the national imaginaries, or mythologies, created 
in the 1999 centennial celebration of the capture of Riyadh. Guido Steinberg covers historic 
trade in Najd, and Gwenn Okruhlik covers some obstacles to the establishment of tourism 
based on her experiences of guided visits just after the Gulf War. 
 Raswan, Carl Reinhard.  The Arab and His Horse . Oakland, CA: By the author, 1955. 
 This title is considered a key work on the Arabian horse and the Arabian-breeding indus-
try. The author, Carl Reinhard Raswan, renamed himself after a beloved Arabian horse. 
He went to Egypt and later Arabia and was adopted by a tribe, later moving to the United 
States and spending many years compiling indexed material on the Arabians. This book 
was a labor of love and not a ﬁ nancial success. His books were republished in German 
prior to his death. 
 Raswan, Carl Reinhard.  Black Tents of Arabia: My Life among the Bedouin . Boston: Little 
Brown, 1935. (Published in expanded edition by Xlibris in 2003.) 
 A travel and adventure story and account of the bedouin as the author lived with them in 
Arabia. The expanded edition includes some of the author’s early articles. 
 Reed, Jennifer Bond.  The Saudi Royal Family . New York: Chelsea House, 2006. 
 With a forward by Arthur M. Schlesinger on leadership, this is a history of Saudi Arabia 
structured around accounts of the al-Sa‘ud rulers. 
 “Religion in the Middle Education: The Rich Cultural Attributes of Israel, Saudi Arabia, 
Turkey and Jordan.” Directed by Thomas Pollack, Roger Jackson, and Liz Marks. 2010. 
For Explore.org. Tribune Media Services. Screened LINKTV, June 16, 2011. 
 This program, focused on religious ideas in education, included a segment at an excellent 
new offi  cially funded center for disabled children in Saudi Arabia, intended to give them 
“as much joy and independence as possible.” 
 Rentz, George Snavely, Jr. “Wahhabism and Saudi Arabia.” In  The Arabian Peninsula: Soci-
ety and Politics , edited by Derek Hopwood. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld, 1972. 
 A chapter-length account of the Wahhabiyya movement and the Ikhwan’s clashes with 
other elements in Arabia by George S. Rentz, who spent his life and career working on 
(and in) Saudi Arabia and for many years was located at Aramco’s Research Division. 
 Rentz, George S.  The Birth of the Islamic Reform Movement in Saudi Arabia: Muhammad 
Ibn Abd al-Wahhab 1703/4 – 1792 and the Beginning of Unitarian Empire in Saudi Arabia . 
Edited and introduced by William Facey. London: Arabian Publishers, 2004. 
 Published version of Rentz’s important thesis that utilizes Ibn Ghannam’s and Ibn Bishr’s 
accounts (and many others) of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s reform movement. 
 Riedel, Bruce, and Bilal Y. Saab. “Al Qa’ida’s Third Front.”  Washington Quarterly 31, no. 
2 (Spring 2008), 33–46. 
 Considers the al-Qa’ida campaign in Saudi Arabia as if it were directly coordinated by 
bin Laden and Zawahiri, as has been asserted by the authors, Bruce Hoff man, and other 
Washington sources. 

 Annotated Bibliography
482 |
 Rihani, Ameen.  Ibn Sa’oud of Arabia . Boston: Houghton Miffl  in, 1928. 
 Account by a Syrian administrator and courtier of King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz with important 
details on his experiences, other ﬁ gures such as Sharif Husayn and Imam Yahya, and the 
political intrigues of the time. 
 Riolo, Amy.  Arabian Delights: Recipes and Princely Entertaining Ideas from the Arabian 
Peninsula . Herndon, VA: Capitol Books, 2008. 
 With a preface on the history of Arabian food, this book includes menus and preparation 
for great feasts and unique parties centered, for example, on desert truffl  es, the date harvest, 
Ramadan, picnics at the sea, and more. 
 Rougier, Bernard, ed.  Qu’est-ce Que le Salaﬁ sme? Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
2008. 
 A collection of essays on salaﬁ st trends and the meaning of salaﬁ sm in contemporary 
contexts. 
 Røvsing Olsen, Poul, and Ulrich Wegner. “Arabian Gulf.” In  The New Grove Dictionary of 
Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: Macmillan, 2001, 
vol. 1, 795–797. 
 An article on the music of the Arabian Gulf region, which includes eastern Saudi Arabia. 
 Rugh, William.  Arab Mass Media: Newspapers, Radio and Television in Arab Politics . West-
port, CT: Praeger, 2004. 
 This book by the former U.S. ambassador to Yemen and the United Arab Emirates divides 
this study of print news media according to political system, treating that of Saudi Arabia 
as part of the “loyalist press” designed to support the government, in contrast with the 
“mobilization” press of more radical Arab states. Also contains chapters on radio and 
television up to the mid-1990s. 
 Rugh, William. “Education in Saudi Arabia: Tradition, Growth and Reform.”  Middle East 
Journal 56, no. 3 (2002), 396–414. 
 This piece describes the changes in Saudi Arabia’s educational sector. 
 Rugh, William. “Education in Saudi Arabia: Choices and Constraints.”  Middle East Policy 
9, no. 2 (2002), 40–55. 
 This piece covers the tensions in Saudi Arabia’s goals to preserve its social and religious 
basis while expanding education. 
 Rugh, William. “Emergence of a New Middle Class in Saudi Arabia.”  Middle East Journal 
27, no. 1 (Winter 1973), 7–20. 
 This piece explores the growth of a new middle class in Saudi Arabia. 
 Rush, Alan, ed.  Records of the Hajj: A Documentary History of the Pilgrimage to Mecca . 
Slough, UK: Archive Editions, 1993. 
 A 10-volume series on the  hajj with extracts from other written works by Western travel-
ers, diplomatic correspondence, and the annual pilgrimage reports prepared by the British 
government into the 1950s. 
 Sabini, John.  Armies in the Sand: The Struggle for Mecca . London: Thames and Hudson, 
1981. 

Annotated Bibliography | 483
 A history of the region of the two Holy Cities and a detailed coverage of the Arab Revolt 
and political struggle over the Hijaz early in the 20th century. 
 Safran, Nadav.  Saudi Arabia: The Ceaseless Quest for Security . Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press, 1985. 
 A study of the foreign policy of Saudi Arabia and the development of its security forces 
and structure. 
 al-Sahaymi, Abd al-Salam.  The Ideology of Terrorism and Violence in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia: Origins, Causes for Its Spread and the Solution . Cairo: Dar al-Minhaj, 2006. 
 A salaﬁ  antiterrorist perspective by a professor in the department of jurisprudence at Ma-
dina Islamic University. 
 Salamah, Ahmad Abdullah.  Shia and Sunni Perspective on Islam: An Objective Comparison 
of the Shia and Sunni Doctrines Based on the Holy Quran and Hadith . Jeddah, Saudi Ara-
bia: Abul-Qasim, 1991. 
 Not an objective presentation but a polemical refutation of Shi’ism from the Sunni per-
spective; useful in understanding the arguments used against the sect and its beliefs in the 
Saudi Arabian environment. 
 Salameh, Ghassan. “Political Power and the Saudi State.” In  The Modern Middle East , ed-
ited by Albert Hourani, Philip S. Khoury, and Mary C. Wilson. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1993, 579–600. 
 An assessment of the political structures of the Saudi Arabian state in a volume that pro-
vides contemporary coverage, extending the work on the early-modern period in which the 
modern Middle Eastern states were founded. 
 Salameh, Ghassan.  Al-Siyasah al-kharajiyyah al-Sa ‘ udiyyah mundhu 1945: Dirasah ﬁ  ‘ alaqat 
al-duwwaliyyah . Beirut, Lebanon: Ma‘ahad al-Inma’ al-‘Arabi, 1980. 
 An analysis of Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy from 1945 to the late 1970s from the perspec-
tive of international relations. Salameh later served as Lebanon’s minister of culture in the 
fourth Hariri cabinet. 
 Salibi, Kamal.  The Bible Came from Arabia . London: Jonathan Cape, 1985. 
 This title by an emeritus professor of history and archaeology at the American University 
in Beirut presents a theory that the land of Israel of the ancient Jewish people was actually 
located on the Arabian Peninsula, in the Hijaz and Asir, based on analysis of early sources, 
ancient place-names, and their correlates. 
 al-Samiri, ‘Abd al-Jabbar. “Masadar wa maraji‘ ﬁ  fulklur al-khalij al-‘arabi wa al-jazirah: 
al-raqs al-sha‘bi” [Sources and references in the folklore of the Arabian Gulf and the 
peninsula: Folk dance].  al-Turath al-sha ‘ bi 9, no. 7 (1978), 268–270. 
 This piece focuses on Gulf folk dance and its origins. 
 el-Sanabary, Nagat. “Women and the Nursing Profession in Saudi Arabia.”  Arab Women: 
between Deﬁ ance and Restraint , edited by Suha Sabbagh. New York: Olive Branch, 1996, 
71–83. 
 This piece discusses covers the problems in expanding women’s participation in nurs-
ing when nurses are subjected to social suspicion or discouragement  for working (at all), 

 Annotated Bibliography
484 |
especially working in an environment with men and in a profession associated with the 
lower class. She covers the changes in nursing since the time of Lutﬁ yya al-Khateeb, a 
pioneer of public health and nursing in Saudi Arabia, given the revolving-door system of 
importing nurses and health professionals from outside Saudi Arabia. 
 el-Sanabary, Nagat. “The Education and Contribution of Women Health Care Profession-
als in Saudi Arabia.”  Social Science and Medicine 37, no. 11 (1993), 1331–1343. 
 An article concerning the role and training of women in nursing in Saudi Arabia. A longer 
version of the 1996 chapter in Sabbagh’s book. 
 el-Sanabary, Nagat. “The Saudi Arabian Model of Female Education and the Reproduc-
tion of Gender Divisions.” Working Paper no. 16, G. E. von Grunebaum Center for 
Near Eastern Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, 1992. 
 This paper that shows that educators were not interested in challenging the reproduction of 
gender divisions in the separation of women and men in Saudi Arabian schools but rather 
in improving programs for women within that framework. 
 Saqqaf, Khayriyya.  Li-Tobhira nahwa al-abad . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Dar al-Ulum, 1982. 
 A collection of short stories in a dramatic and captivating style. 
 al-Sa‘ud, Norah bint Muhammad, al-Jawhara Muhammad al-‘Anqari, and Madeha Mu-
hammad al-‘Atroush, eds.  Abha, Bilad Asir: Southwestern Region of the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: By the editors, printed by M. A. Ajroush, 1989. 
 Materials on the southwestern areas of Saudi Arabia with their unique cultural features 
are featured here. 
 al-Sa‘ud, Sa‘ud  al-Faisal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. “Saudi-European Relations: Towards a Reliable 
Partnership.” Public address, European Policy Center, Brussels, February 19, 2004. 
In this speech, Prince Sa‘ud described Saudi Arabia’s ongoing reforms and the need for 
cooperation in building approaches to counter terrorism, for the West should not dis-
miss a 1400-year-old culture and civilization by stigmatizing it as merely a hatchery for 
terrorism.
 al-Sa‘ud, Turki al-Faisal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. “Saudi Arabian Constitutional Evolution.” 
Keynote address at the 15th Annual Arab-U.S. Policymakers Conference, Washington, 
DC, October 30, 2006. Available at SUSRIS: http://www.saudi-us-relations.org/ar-
ticles/2006/ioi/061106-turki-succession.html 
 A public address that speaks to the growth and regularization of political practices that can 
be seen as a compact between the Saudi Arabian rulers and their people. 
 Saudiwoman’s Weblog . http://saudiwoman.wordpress.com/ 
 This website covers many women’s issues in the kingdom; for instance, at the time of writ-
ing, the sentencing of Manal al-Sharif, who has protested the ban on women’s driving and 
posted a video of herself driving on the Internet. 
 Scheuer, Michael, Stephen Ulph, and John C. K. Daly . Saudi Arabian Oil Facilities: The 
Achilles Heel of the Western Economy. Washington, DC: Jamestown Foundation, May 
2006. 
 A short pamphlet by a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst and author known as 
Anonymous (Scheuer) and an interpreter of various al-Qa’ida Internet writings (Ulph) 
with alarming warnings that al-Qa’ida will attack oil facilities in Saudi Arabia. Scheuer’s 

Annotated Bibliography | 485
position is that the United States should back away from the alliance with Saudi Arabia 
(and the one in Israel). 
 Sedgwick, Mark. “Saudi Suﬁ s: Compromise in the Hijaz 1925–1940.”  Die Welt des Islams 
37, no. 3 (1997), 349–368. 
 This study shows that the Wahhabist conquest did not eradicate other forms of Islam in the 
Hijaz but that the subsequent Suﬁ  worship was managed and contained via compromise 
with the rulers. 
 Al-Semmari, Fahd, ed.  A History of the Arabian Peninsula. Translated by S. Jayyusi. Lon-
don: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Essays that condense important insights of the contributing authors are included in this 
title. Many of these were heretofore unavailable in English. 
 Serjeant, Robert B.  Customary and Shari ‘ ah Law in Saudi Arabia. Brookﬁ eld, VT: Varo-
rium, 1991. 
 A study of ‘ urf (tribal or customary law) in Saudi Arabia and Islamic law with many ex-
amples of procedures and issues. 
 Serjeant, Robert B.  Saudi Arabian Poetry and Prose of Hadramawt. London: Taylor’s For-
eign Press, 1951. 
 A work on popular poetry and prose of Saudi Arabia and Hadramaut. 
 Serjeant, Robert B., and G. Rex Smith.  Farmers and Fishermen in Arabia: Studies in Cus-
tomary Law and Practice. Brookﬁ eld, VT: Varorium, 1995. 
 This title shows how customary ( ‘urf  ) or tribal law works in practice and is responsive to 
the material conditions of those living from farming or ﬁ shing. 
 Shaker, Fatna.  Nabt al-Ardh [The earth’s planet]. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Tihamah, 1981. 
 A work by a noted Saudi Arabian woman writer. 
 al-Shamlan, Sharifa.  Muntahal Hudu’ . Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Nadi al-Qissa al-Sa‘udi. al-
Jam‘iyya al-‘arabiyya lil-thaqafa wa-l-funun, 1989. 
 A collection of short stories with social aspects. 
 al-Shayeb, Abdullah A.  Al-Jubail: Saudi Village (Architectural Survey) . Doha, Qatar: Arab 
Gulf States Folklore Center, 1985. 
 A survey of al-Jubayl. 
 Sheikh, Naveed.  The New Politics of Islam: Pan-Islamic Foreign Policy in a World of States . 
London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003. 
 This title characterizes Saudi Arabian foreign policy as building on Islamic alliances. 
 Al-Shetaiwi, Abdullah S. “Factors Aff ecting the Underutilisation of Qualiﬁ ed Saudi 
Women in the Saudi Private Sector.” PhD diss., Loughborough University, 2002. 
 Social, religious, and economic factors impeding the hiring of Saudi Arabian women are 
described in this thesis. 
 Shiloah, Amnon, II. “Folk Music” (section of “Arab Music”). In  The New Grove Dictionary 
of Music and Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. New York and London: Macmillan, 
2001, vol. 1, 824–831. 

 Annotated Bibliography
486 |
 The second section of the larger entry on Arab music considers popular (or folk) genres 
and includes aspects that are part of the music of the Arabian Peninsula. 
 Silsby, Jill.  Inland Birds of Saudi Arabia. London: Immel, 1980. 
 A study of the birds of the interior of Saudi Arabia. 
 Simon, Geoff .  Saudi Arabia: The Shape of a Client Feudalism. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1998. 
 A description of Saudi Arabia’s failure to reform that is viciously critical of the royal family 
and the authoritarianism of the Saudi   Arabian government. 
 Simpson, William.  The Prince: The Secret Story of the World’s Most Intriguing Royal: 
Prince Bandar bin Sultan. New York: Regan (Harper-Collins), 2006. 
 The biography of Prince Bandar, former ambassador to the United States. 
 Snouck Hurgronje, Christaan.  Mekka in the Latter Part of the Nineteenth Century, 1885 –
 1889. Translated by James Henry Monahan. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1931 (re-
print, 1970). 
 An important record of lifestyles in Mecca and the Hijaz; the Dutch author also collected 
various items, instruments, costumes, and artifacts. 
 Sowayan, Sa‘d Abdullah. “Tonight My Gun Is Loaded: Poetic Dueling in Arabia.”  Oral 
Tradition 4, no. 1–2 (1989), 151–173. 
 An article on poetic duels or contests, based on the author’s original research on  nabati 
poetry and performance. 
 Sowayan, Sa‘d Abdullah.  Nabati Poetry: The Oral Poetry of Arabia. Berkeley and Los An-
geles: University of California Press, 1985. 
 A title on the development and current tradition of Nabati, oral poetry of Saudi Arabia. 
 Sowayan, Sa‘d Abdullah.  al-Shi ‘ r al-sha ‘ bi ﬁ  al-mamlakah al- ‘ arabiyyah al-sa ‘ udiyyah. 
Doha, Qatar: Arab Gulf States Folklore Center, 1985. 
 A discussion of popular, or folk, poetry of Saudi Arabia. 
 Sultan, Khaled bin, HRH General (with Patrick Seale).  Desert Warrior: A Personal View 
of the Gulf War by the Joint Forces Commander . London and New York: HarperCollins, 
1995. 
 A memoir of the Saudi  Arabian commander of the coalition forces (and son of the defense 
minister) in the ﬁ rst Gulf War. 
 Steinberg, Guido. “The Shiites in the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, 1913–1953.” In  The 
Twelver Shia in Modern Times: Religious Culture and Political History , edited by Rainer 
Brunner and Werner Ende. Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 2001, 236–254. 
 The history of the Shi‘a of the Eastern Province. 
 Tarabulsi, Mohammed Yusof.  Jeddah: A Story of a City. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: King Fahd 
National Library, 2006. 
 Jeddah’s past and present. 
 Tasnee Petrochemicals.  Environmental Impact Assessment Ethylene Project. Attachment 4: 
Environmental Baseline Study. Al-Jubail, Saudi Arabia: Tasnee Petrochemicals, 2005. 
 A study that shows the impact of a major ethylene project in accessible language. 

Annotated Bibliography | 487
 Tayash, Fahad. “Sameri Tradition and Zar Dance in Saudi Arabia.”  al-Ma’thurat al-
Sha ‘ biyya 9 (1988), 23–36. 
 An article on the  samri song and performance format and the  zar , or performance and 
music of exorcism. 
 al-Tayer, ‘Abdullah ibn Musa.  Amrika allati qad ta’ud. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Author, 2005 
(1426h). 
 This title is about the troubled Saudi Arabian–American relationship and the idealized 
America that Saudi Arabians hope will return after the rise of neoconservativism and 
anti–Saudi Arabian stances following 9/11. 
 Teitelbaum, Joshua.  Holier Than Thou: Saudi Arabia’s Islamic Opposition . Washington, 
DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000. 
 This short monograph traces the rise of Islamic opposition to the Saudi Arabian govern-
ment in the 1990s. This opposition called for an even more stringent application of Islamic 
law and mores and a diff erent foreign policy, not so beholden to the West. 
 Teitelbaum, Joshua.  The Rise and Fall of the Hashemite Kingdom of Hejaz. New York: New 
York University Press, 2001. 
 A study of the short-lived kingdom of the Hijaz, which had been backed by Britain until 
the ascent of Ibn Sa‘ud. 
 al-Thabit, ‘Abdullah.  al-Irhabi 20. Beirut, Lebanon and Damascus, Syria: Dar al-Mada, 
2006. (Available in translation as  Terroriste no. 20 , translated by Françoise Neyrod 
[Paris: Actes Sud Sindbad, 2010].) 
 An autobiographical work about a young man swept into Islamic militance. 
 Thesiger, Wilfred.  Crossing the Sands. Dubai, United Arab Emirates: Motivate, 2006. 
 This book chronicles the author’s travels in the Empty Quarter and the Arabian Peninsula 
in the 1940s, including his view of the bedouin, and contains excellent photographs. 
 Topham, John,  Traditional Crafts of Saudi Arabia. London: Stacey International, 1981. 
 A study of numerous crafts and folk products and practices of Saudi Arabia with illustra-
tions by one of the most avid collectors of these products. 
 Trench, R., ed.  Gazetteer of Arabian Tribes. 18 vols. Farnham Commons, UK: Cambridge 
Archive Editions, 1996. 
 A huge survey of information about the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula and Iraq from 
19th- and 20th-century sources. 
 Troﬁ mov, Yaroslav.  The Siege of Mecca: The Forgotten Uprising in Islam’s Holiest Shrine 
and the Birth of Al Qa’ida . New York: Random House, 2007. 
 An account of the 1979 uprising and takeover of the Grand Mosque at Mecca. The author 
explores the connections of the ‘Utaybi movement with the growth of al-Qa’ida in Saudi 
Arabia. 
 Unger, Craig.  House of Bush, House of Saud: The Secret Relationship between the World’s 
Two Most Powerful Dynasties . New York: Scribner, 2004. 
 An exposé of relationships between the Bush family from its corporate dealings with the 
Sa’udi royal family blaming the latter for Islamic radicalism. I have excluded similar books 
from the bibliography. 

 Annotated Bibliography
488 |
 Urkevich, Lisa A. “Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of.” In  The New Grove Dictionary of Music and 
Musicians , edited by Stanley Sadie. 2nd ed. New York and London: Macmillan, 2001, 
vol. 22, 324–328. 
 A very useful overview of nonreligious music in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by a special-
ist on music of the Gulf. 
 al-‘Uthaymin, ‘Abd Allah Saleh.  Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab: The Man and His Works. 
London: I. B. Tauris, 2009. 
 This book, based on the author’s 1972 dissertation for the University of Edinburgh, covers 
Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s life and output; the travails of the Wahhabis from their 
own sources and others  ; and the debates about ‘Abd al-Wahhab’s additions to doctrine. 
 Van der Meulen, Daniel.  The Wells of Ibn Saud. New York: Praeger, 1957. 
 The memoirs of a Dutch diplomat stationed in Jeddah in the 1920s and the 1940s. 
 Vassiliev, Alexei.  The History of Saudi Arabia. London: Saqi Books, 1998; New York: New 
York University Press, 2000. 
 A well-translated thorough history of the kingdom to the late 1990s, with excellent cover-
age of earlier sources by the former  Pravda correspondent to Saudi Arabia. 
 Vincett, Betty A. Lipscombe.  Animal Life in Saudi Arabia. Cernusco, Italy: Garzanti Edi-
tore, 1982. 
 This title describes the animals of Saudi Arabia, their habits, and their habitats. 
 Vincett, Betty A. Lipscombe.  Wild Flowers of Central Arabia. Milan, Italy: Published by the 
author, 1977. 
 A work on wildﬂ owers of Najd and the central regions. Each species is photographed, 
identiﬁ ed with its Latin name, and described. 
 Vitalis, Robert.  America’s Kingdom: Mythmaking on the Saudi Oil Frontier. New York: 
Verso, 2009. 
 This title covers the Aramco venture, as do Brown (1999) and Lippman (2004), but is more 
critical of American exploitation of Saudi Arabia and the defeat of progressive Saudi Ara-
bians by the royal powers loyal to Fahd who are still in power. 
 Vogel, Frank. “The Public and Private in Saudi Arabia: Restrictions on the Powers of 
Committees for Ordering the Good and Forbidding the Evil.”  Social Research 70, no. 3 
(2003), 749–768. 
 An article on the historical role of the  muhtasib (the offi  cial who enforced the  hisba  [the 
principle of commanding the good and forbidding evil] in the marketplace) and its usurpa-
tion by the CPVPV (Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice—the 
“religious police”) in Saudi Arabia. Vogel argues for certain restrictions given the intent of 
the original offi  ce; it was not used to spy on private citizens, for example. 
 Vogel, Frank.  Islamic Law and Legal System: Studies of Saudi Arabia. Leiden, the Nether-
lands: Brill, 2000. 
 A study of applied Islamic law in Saudi Arabia. The author observed such noted judges 
as Shaykh Sulayman al-Muhanna and Shaykh Ahmad al-‘Umari, looks at  fatawa of the 
Grand Mufti Shaykh Bin Baz and others, and contrasts the laws of the  madhahib with those 
deriving from the royal edicts of the king. 

Annotated Bibliography | 489
 Voll, John. “Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi and Muhammad b. Abd al-Wahhab.”  Bulletin of 
the School of Oriental and African Studies 38 (1975), 32–39. 
 A review of these noted Islamic thinkers and their impact. 
 Wardak, Ali. “Crime and Social Control in Saudi Arabia.” In  Transnational and Compara-
tive Criminology , edited by James Sheptycki and Ali Wardak. London: Glasshouse, 
2005, 91–116. 
 This title describes the theory of crime and how the laws work to produce social control in 
Saudi Arabia as part of a comparative study. 
 Watt, W. Montgomery.  Muhammad at Medina. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 
1951, 1956. 
 An essential work built on classical sources about the new Muslim community at Medina. 
 Watt, W. Montgomery.  Muhammad at Mecca. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1953. 
 The pre-Islamic setting and advent of the revelations up to the  hijrah (the emigration from 
Mecca to Yathrib/Medina) are described in this title. 
 Wehry, Frederick, Theodore W. Karasik, Alireza, Nader, Jeremy Ghez, Lydia Hansell, and 
Robert A. Guff ey.  Saudi-Iranian Relations since the Fall of Saddam: Rivalry, Cooperation 
and Implications for U.S. Policy . Washington, DC: Rand Corporation (National Security 
Research Division), 2009. 
 A lengthy and insightful report on the security and political relationship between Iran and 
Saudi Arabia after 2003. 
 Wheeler, Brannon.  Mecca and Eden: Ritual, Relics and Territory in Islam. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2006. 
 This title uses works of  tafsir (exegesis) and other texts to explain the sacred and symbolic 
aspects of Mecca, likening it to Eden. 
 Winder, R. Bayly.  Saudi Arabia in the Nineteenth Century. London: Macmillan, 1965. 
 A classic history that thoroughly covers Muhammad ‘Ali Pasha of Egypt’s eff orts to con-
quer the Arabian Peninsula for the Ottomans. 
 Wolfe, Michael.  One Thousand Roads to Mecca: Ten Centuries of Travelers Writing about 
the Muslim Pilgrimage. New York: Grove, 1997. 
 A collection of writings about the  hajj. A few are by the early Muslim travelers Nasr-e 
Khosraw, Ibn Jubayr, and Ibn Batuta; some are by European travelers like John Burck-
hardt and Richard Burton; and others are from Muslims like Sikander, the Begum of 
Bhopal, Muhammad Asad, and Malcolm X. 
 Wynbrandt, James.  A Brief History of Saudi Arabia. New York: Facts on File, 2004. 
 A brief review of events in the Arabian Peninsula and Saudi Arabia suitable for younger 
readers. 
 Yamani, Maha A. Z.  Polygamy and Law in Saudi Arabia. Reading, UK: Ithaca, 2008. 
 The scriptural basis of men’s claim to multiple wives and other resulting legal implications. 
 Yamani, Mai. “The Two Faces of Saudi Arabia.”  Survival , February 1, 2008. 
 This work describes the conﬂ icting views on reform and change to be found in Saudi 
Arabia. 

 Annotated Bibliography
490 |
 Yamani, Mai. “The Challenge of Globalization in Saudi Arabia.” In  On Shifting Ground: 
Muslim Women in the Global Era , edited by Fereshteh Norahie-Simone. New York: 
Feminist Press, 2005, 80–87. 
 According to this chapter, the insular Saudi Arabian government does not know how to 
respond to globalization; its reforms are halfhearted; and radical conservatives are expand-
ing more rapidly than are liberals. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Cradle of Islam: The Hijaz and the Quest for an Arabian Identity. London: 
I. B. Tauris, 2004. 
 This book chronicles the growth of premodern regional identity in the Hijaz and how this 
was subsumed by the Najdi and Wahhabi movement establishing the modern state. The 
author also shows various ways in which those from the Hijaz continue to express their 
own identity. 
 Yamani, Mai.  Changed Identities: The Challenge of a New Generation in Saudi Arabia. Lon-
don: Royal Institute of International Aff airs, 2000. 
 Based on survey data, the author explores the ideas and worldview of young Saudi 
Arabians. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Muslim Women and Human Rights in Saudi Arabia: Aspirations of a 
New Generation.” In  The Rule of Law in the Middle East and the Islamic World: Human 
Rights and the Judicial Process , edited by Eugene Cotran and Mai Yamani. London: 
Tauris, in association with the Centre of Islamic Studies and Middle Eastern Law, SOAS 
(School of Oriental and African Studies), University of London, 2000, 137–143. 
 This work details the obstacles to human rights to be found in the laws as applied to women 
in Saudi Arabia and the hopes of younger women for jobs, the right to drive, and more 
freedom from social control. 
 Yamani, Mai. “You Are What You Cook: Cuisine and Class in Mecca.” In  A Taste of 
Thyme: Culinary Cultures in the Middle East, edited by Sami Zubaida and Richard Tap-
per. London: Tauris Parke, 2000. 
 Mecca’s unique dishes and their social location are described here. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Cross-Cultural Marriage within Islam: Ideals and Reality.” In  Cross- 
Cultural Marriage: Identity and Choice , edited by R. Breger and Rosanna Hill. Oxford, 
UK: Berg, 1998, 153–169. 
 An example of a marriage between a Saudi Arabian woman and a Pakistani man is given 
to illustrate the challenges of cross-cultural marriage, which is a challenge anywhere but a 
special one in Saudi Arabia. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Changing the Habits of a Lifetime: The Adaptation of Hejazi Dress to the 
New Social Order.” In  Languages of Dress in the Middle East , edited by Nancy Lindes-
farne-Tapper and Bruce Ingham. Richmond, UK: Curzon, 1997. 
 The natives of the Hijaz had to adapt to new roles of dress imposed by the Najdi al-Sa‘ud 
government. These impacted women and men. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Some Observations on Women in Saudi Arabia.” In  Feminism and Islam: 
Legal and Literary Perspectives , edited by Mai Yamani. Reading, UK: Garnet, 1996, 
263–281. 

Annotated Bibliography | 491
 General observations that some women in Saudi Arabia rejected the Western truisms about 
their “oppression” and had diff erent priorities for change. 
 Yamani, Mai. “Fasting and Feasting: Some Social Aspects of the Observance of Ramadan 
in Saudi Arabia.” In  The Diversity of the Muslim Community: Anthropological Essays in 
Memory of Peter Lienhardt , edited by Ahmed al-Shabi. London: Ithaca, 1987. 
 This piece addresses certain issues in food consumption and fasting during the month of 
Ramadan. 
 Yamani, Sarah. “Toward a National Education Paradigm in the Arab World: A Compara-
tive Study of Saudi Arabia and Qatar.”  al-Nakhlah: The Fletcher School Online Journal 
for Issues Related to Southwest Asia and Islamic Civilization , Spring 2006. http://ﬂ etcher.
tufts.edu/al_nakhlah/archives/spring2006.asp 
 A comparison of the two countries that is critical of Saudi Arabia in that women are not 
being employed despite their educational attainment. 
 Al-Yassini, Ayman.  Religion and State in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Boulder, CO: West-
view, 1985. 
 One of the works that claims that there are two poles of power in Saudi Arabia, the royal 
family and the Wahhabi religious leaders and that the royal family has used Wahhabism 
as a means of expanding state control. 
 Zain al-Abedin, Sohaila.  Masirat al-mar’a al-Sa ‘ udiyya ila ayna? Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-
Dar Sa‘udiyya li-Nashr wa-Tawzi‘, 1982. 
 The writings on the “woman question” by a noted essayist who rejects a Western feminist 
imprint on Saudi Arabia. 
 Zain al-Abedin, Sohaila.  Bina’ al-usra al-Muslima. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: al-Dar Sa‘udiyya 
li-Nashr wa-Tawzi‘, 1984. 
 The author asserts that the true Muslim family, the building block of Muslim society, must 
observe Islamic principles. 
 Zaydan, Jurji.  Tarikh adab al-lughah al- ‘ arabiyyah. Cairo: Dar al-Hilal, 1911. 
 A history of Arabic literature and language written as part of the author’s eff ort to revital-
ize Arabic. 
 Zeghidour, Slimane.  La Vie Quotidienne á La Mecque de Mahomet á Nos Jours. Paris: Hach-
ette, 1989. 
 The lifestyle of Mecca from ancient times to the 1980s is described here. 
 Zirinsky, Roni.  Ad-Hoc Arabism: Advertising, Culture and Technology in Saudi Arabia. New 
York: Peter Lang, 2005. 
 A study by an Israeli scholar of motifs in Saudi Arabian advertising and the cultural mean-
ing of these motifs. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Ideological and Motivational Factors in the Defusing of Radical Islamist Vio-
lence . Carlisle, PA, and Cairo: Institute of Middle Eastern, Islamic, and Strategic Stud-
ies, 2010. 
 Assesses the role of ideology in the defusing of violence by members of the al-Qa’ida 
movement in Saudi Arabia and in the government’s counseling prison program, and 

 Annotated Bibliography
492 |
 reformulations of religious principles (on jihad, for example) that are similar to those in 
the Egyptian and Libyan militants’ self-produced recantations. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Considerations of Honor Crimes, FGM, Kidnapping/Rape and Early 
Marriage in Selected Arab Nations.” Expert Paper presented at “Good Practices in 
Legislation to Address Harmful Practices against Women,” United Nations Division 
for the Advancement of Women and U.N. Economic Commission for Africa, Addis 
Ababa, May 25–28, 2009. http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/vaw/v-egms-gplahpaw
.htm 
 This Expert Paper covers instances of female genital mutilation  , kidnapping/rape, and 
child marriage in Saudi Arabia along with a discussion of legal reforms in other Arab 
countries to inhibit such practices. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Decreasing Violence in Saudi Arabia and Beyond.” In  Home-Grown Ter-
rorism: Understanding and Addressing the Root Causes of Radicalisation Among Groups 
with an Immigrant Heritage in Europe , edited by Thomas M. Pick, Anne Speckhard, and 
Beatrice Jacuch. Amsterdam: IOS, 2009, 74–98. 
 This title looks at the role of Islamic principles in decreasing violence or convincing radicals 
in Saudi Arabia to desist from opposition to the state. 
Zuhur, Sherifa.  Personal interviews and ﬁ eld notes.  Riyadh, Jeddah, Dirriyyah and other 
sites, Saudi Arabia, 2005–2008.
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Military Perspectives on the U.S.-Saudi Arabian Relationship and Future 
of the Global War on Terror” [in Arabic]. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Institute of Diplomatic 
Studies, Ministry of Foreign Aff airs, 2005. 
 Addresses the U.S.–Saudi Arabian relationship in light of the rise of neoconservative inﬂ u-
ence in American foreign policy making and U.S. projections of a 20-year (or longer) war 
(dubbed the Long War) on transnational jihadists and all “extreme” Muslims. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa.  Saudi Arabia: Islamism, Political Reform and the Global War on Terror. 
Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, 2005. 
 Describes the rise of Islamic and liberal opposition and forces for reform in Saudi Ara-
bia, the Saudi Arabian government’s responses, and appropriate responses by the United 
States. 
 Zuhur, Sherifa. “Arabs and Arab Culture.” In  Nazar, Photography and Visual Culture of the 
Arab World , edited by Wim Melis. Leeuwarden, the Netherlands: Stichting Fotograﬁ e 
Noorderlicht, 2004, 22–24 (English) and 14–16 (Arabic). 
 Why do Arabs claim a common culture? This essay is included in a collection of photog-
raphy of and by Arabs to explain the basis of Arab identity in history and the presence of 
a visual culture. 
 SELECTED RECORDINGS 
 Arabie saoudite: Musique de ‘Unayzah, Ancienne Cité du Najd. Pierre Bois, dir. Paris: Mai-
son des Cultures du Monde, 1999. Inédit. CD W 260087. 
 The music of the city of ‘Unayzah in Saudi Arabia is featured here. 
 Ettab-Talal Madah. Performed by ‘Itab and Talal Madah, Funun al-Jazeera, FJCD 1109. 

Annotated Bibliography | 493
 The Saudi Arabian female singing star ‘Itab and the male star Talal Maddah, who men-
tored so many other singers and musicians, in some of their best-known songs. 
 A Musical Anthology of the Arabian Peninsula. Recorded by Simon Jargy and Poul Røvs-
ing Olsen (also cited as: and Ali Zakariyya al-Ansari). 4 vols. Vol. 1, Sung Poetry of the 
Bedouins. Vol. 2, Music of the Pearl Divers. Vol. 3,  Sawt : Music from the City. Vol. 4, 
Women’s Songs. Geneva: Archives Internationales de Musique Populaire de la Musée 
d’Éthnographie, 1994 (Field recordings made in the Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula 
from the early 1970s). Distributed by Gary Thal Music Inc. Geneva: 1994, VDE-Gallo 
CD 758–59–60–61. 
 This work of music demonstrates many of the musical forms that are described in Chapter 
6 of this book. 
 Musique des bédouins. Bhattacharya, Deben, dir. Paris: Bam. Folkore et Musiques de 
l’univers, [ca. 1970s]. LD 5783, LP, disk. 
 Anthropological recordings of bedouin music. 
 al-Quran al-Karim. Qari’ [Reciter]: Mishary bin Rashid Alafasy. Set of 26 CDs. UFI. 
1424H. (ca. 2003) 
 A complete collection of  tajwid , or the recitation of the Qur’an in a clear and powerful 
rendition. 
 Rayigh. Performed by A. Abd al-Majid. Rotana. 397 TC ROT, 1997. 
 A performance by a noted Saudi Arabian performer. 
 Rhythms from an Oasis. Comp. Dhafer Kohaji and Aref al-Amer. CD. Saudi Aramco, 2003. 
 This collection is of entirely instrumental music (without vocals); it plays on traditional 
forms but with the modern addition of electriﬁ ed keyboard. 
 Samra: Songs from Saudi Arabia. Produced by Kay Hardy Campbell. Audiocassette, 1985. 
 Samra II: More Songs from Saudi Arabia. Produced by Kay Hardy Campbell. Audiocas-
sette, 1986. 
 Sha ‘ biyyat. Vols. 15–16. Performed by Muhammad ‘Abdu, Sawt El Jazira. MACD 528 and 
MACD 529. 
 Sha‘biyyat Muhammad ‘Abduh: Folk Songs. Performed by M. ‘Abduh. Sawt El Jezira. 
MACD 516 and MACD 517, 1991. 
 Tanburah Music of the Gulf. Coll. A. J. Racy (accompanies volume). Arab Gulf States Folk-
lore Center, 1988. 
 Al-Tawhîd . Comp. by Siraj Omar, lyrics by Prince Khalid al-Faisal. A modern musical epic 
with vocals by Talâl Maddâh, Muhammad ‘Abduh, ‘Abd-al Majîd ‘Abd Allah, ‘Abd 
Allah Rashâd, and Râshid al-Mâjid. W 260001, Maison des Cultures du Monde, 1994. 
 The Very Best of Ettab. Performed by ‘Itab. Relax-In REL CD 313, 1989. 
 The favorite recording of female singing star ‘Itab. 


495
 GEOGRAPHY 
 Abqaiq oil ﬁ eld, 7, 25, 69, 365 
 al-Dahna Desert, 3, 4, 7 
 al-Jafurah Desert, 7 
 al-Nafud Desert, 7 
 al-Qasim region, 10, 13 – 14 
 al-Uqayr Convention, 1 
 Arabian Gulf, 9, 10 – 11, 36, 148, 176 
 badu (bedouin/nomads) population, 2, 
31 – 32, 336 
 climate of Saudi Arabia, 10
 
 divisions of Saudi Arabia, historic and 
modern, 12 – 14 
 Eastern Province (Sharquiyyah), 3, 7, 9, 
11, 14, 22, 42, 55, 60, 101 
 emirates/divisions  (manatiq idariyya) of 
Saudi Arabia, 13 
 fauna (animals and ﬁ sh), 10 – 11 
 ﬂ ag of Saudi Arabia, 2 
 geography, 1 – 14 
 Arabic plant names, 11 – 12 
 climate, 10 
 deserts, 1, 3, 7 – 9, 48 
 environment and pollution, 12 
 fauna (animals and ﬁ sh), 10 – 11 
 ﬂ ora (plants), 11 – 12 
 historic and modern divisions, 12 – 14 
 petroleum geology, 5 – 7 
 provinces of Saudi Arabia, 4 
 water and desalination, 9 – 10 
 See also individual deserts 
 geology of petroleum, 5 – 7 
 Ghawar oil ﬁ eld, 6 – 7 
 Great Rift Valley, 1 
 Harrat Khaybar volcano, 3 
 manatiq idariyya (emirates/divisions) 
of Saudi Arabia, 13 
 Muhammara, Treaty of (1922), 1 
Thematic Index

 Thematic Index
496 |
 Najd region plateau, 3 
 Najran Valley Dam, 13 
 National Commission for Wildlife 
Conservation and Development 
(1986), 11 
 Northern Border (al-Hudud 
al- Shamaliyyah) region, 14 
 petroleum geology, 5 – 7 
 plants (ﬂ ora) and plant names, 11 – 12 
 pollution, 12, 401 
 Qatif oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Red Sea, 1, 3, 8, 9, 10 – 11 
 Riyadh region, 3, 5 – 6, 12 – 14 
 Rub al-Khali Desert (Empty Quarter), 3, 
7 – 8, 13, 23, 40, 43 
 Safniyya-Khaﬁ ji oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Saudi Arabian ﬂ ag, 2 
 Shayba oil ﬁ eld, 7, 23 
 Syrian Desert, 1, 7, 40 
 Umm al-Radhuma mountainous forma-
tion, 4 – 5 
 water and desalination issues, 9 – 10 
 Zuluf oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 HISTORY 
 ABB-Lummus offi  ces terrorist attack 
(2004), 25 
 Abbasid Caliphate, 18, 36 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Saud 
(1932 – 1953), 19, 20, 42, 43 – 48 
 formation of consultative council, 44 
 internal challenges of, 46 
 joining with Allies in WW II, 46, 48 
 meeting with Captain Shakespear, 45 
 modern Saudi Arabia named for, 28 
 pursuit if U.S. alliance, 48 
 ‘Abd al-Malik, 36 
 ‘Abdullah ibn Ibrahim ibn Sayf (scholar), 
39 
 Abdulhamid (Ottoman sultan), 44 
 ‘Abdullah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(2005-present), 69 – 73 
 ‘Abdullah ibn Thunayyan, 41 – 42 
 Act for International Development (U.S.) 
(1950), 50 
 Afghanistan 
 Operation Enduring Freedom vs., 23 
 Soviet Union invasion of, 60 
 Soviet withdrawal from, 22 
 Ahmad ibn Hanbal al-Shaybani (religious 
leader), 39 
 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi ‘Ubayd al-Thaqaﬁ , 
36 
 al-Qa‘ida terrorist group, 26, 27, 68 
 Arab-Israeli Wars 
 First (1948), 20 
 Second (1967), 21 
 Third Arab-Israeli War (1973), 21 
 Arab Petroleum Congress (1959), 52 
 Arab polytheism, 31 
 Arab Revolt (1916), 19 
 Ayyubid dynasty, 37 
 Badr, Battle of (624), 17 
 Baghdad Pact (1955), 50 
 Balfour Declaration (1917), 19 
 Banu an-Nadir tribe, 34 
 Banu Khalid uprising (1669), 18 
 Banu Qaynuqa tribe, 34 
 Banu Qurayza tribe, 34 
 Basic (Fundamental) Law of Saudi 
Arabia 
 on “dynastic right” of sons of ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz, 85 
 Fahd’s proclamation of, 67, 80 
 Faysal’s recommendation for, 52 
 onset of, 22, 61 
 “Rights and Duties,” 80 – 81 
 Begin, Menachem, 59 
 bin Laden, Osama 
 assassination of by U.S., 28, 70 

Thematic Index | 497
 complaints against Western presence, 
66 
 family background, 106, 158 
 loss of Saudi citizenship, 23, 67 – 68 
 militants trained by, 361 
 terrorist actions, 22 
 Black September (1969), 57 
 Bolton, John, 71 
 Bush, George W., 71 
 California Arabian Standard Oil 
Company (CASOC), 20 
 Caliphates 
 Abbasid Caliphate, 18 
 Rashidun (Rightly Guided) Caliphate, 
17 
 Ummayyad Caliphate, 17 
 Camp David Accords (1979), 22, 59 
 Carter, Jimmy, 59 
 Central Planning Organization (1968), 57 
 Christianity 
 Arab conversions to, 32 
 beliefs of, 176 
 establishment in Abyssinia, 30 
 Qur’an’s beliefs about, 177 
 ritual practices, 34 
 Committee for Defense of Legitimate 
Rights (CDLR), 23, 66 
 Committee for the Promotion of Virtue 
and the Prevention of Vice (2002), 24 
 Consultative Council (Majlis al-Shura), 
23 
 Continental Shelf Agreement (1968), 55 
 The Crusades (1107 – 1291), 18 
 Dilmun civilization, 17, 29 
 Ditch, Battle of the (627), 17 
 Dulles, John Foster, 50 
 Egypt 
 Free Offi  cers revolt, 20, 49 
 January 25th Revolution, 113 
 Eisenhower, Dwight D. (Eisenhower Doc-
trine), 50 
 Facebook, Saudi Revolution page, 27 – 28 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(1982 – 2005), 62 – 64 
 Faisal ibn Abd al-Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(1964 – 1975), 54 
 Falluja Brigade (of the al-Qa’ida), 68 – 69 
 Faysal (brother of Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz), 21, 22 
 assumption of ﬁ nancial responsibilities, 
51, 53 
 call for Islamic leaders’ unity, 56 
 establishment of Central Planning 
Organization, 57 
 Khartoum agreement with Nasser, 55 
 military, industrial modernization 
eff orts, 54 
 reform government proposals of, 52 
 support for education, 54, 55 
 Faysal ibn Turki (1843 – 1865), 20 
 FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) 
 detainment of Saudi Arabians, 68 
 First Arab-Israeli War (1948), 21 
 First Gulf War (1991), 23 
 First National (Meeting for Intellectual) 
Dialogue (2003), 24 
 First Revelation of Muhammad (at 
Mount Hira), 17 
 Free Offi  cers revolt (Egypt), 20 
 Global War on Terror, 67 – 69 
 Guantanamo detention center, 26, 363 
 Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) (1981), 
22, 61, 109, 113 – 114, 242, 360 
 Gulf Wars (Persian Gulf) 
 environmental threats from, 12 
 onset of ﬁ rst war (1991), 23, 64 – 65 
 reactions to, 65 – 67 
 sahwa (Islamic awakening preachers), 362 
 HAIA (religious police), 26 
 Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (1949), 20 
 history of Saudi Arabia 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman al-
Saud, 42, 43 – 48 

 Thematic Index
498 |
 ‘Abdullah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 
69 – 73 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 62 – 64 
 ﬁ rst Saudi state, 38 – 41 
 Gulf Wars, 64 – 67 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 58 – 62 
 King Faysal, 21, 22, 51, 53 – 58 
 Muslim dynasties, 35 – 38 
 rise of Islam, 32 – 35 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 49 – 53 
 second Sa‘udi realm (1824 – 1891), 
41 – 43 
 timeline, 17 – 28 
 War on Terrorism/Global War on 
Terror, 67 – 69 
 Hizballah (terrorist group), 71 
 Hudaybiyya, truce of, 34 
 Hussein, Saddam, 22, 65 – 66 
 Ikhwan Brotherhood, 19 
 International Conference for Dialogue 
(Muslim World League), 72 
 Iran 
 GCC concerns about, 61 
 Islamic Revolution (1979), 58, 59 
 Iran-Iraqi Wars, 61 – 62 
 Iraq 
 attack against Iran, 61 – 62 
 Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait, 22, 66 
 threats against Kuwait, 21 
 Treaty of Sèvres and, 19 
 Islam 
 birth of Prophet Muhammad, 17 
 Mecca as religious center, 31 
 rise of, 32 – 35 
 Islamic Front for the Liberation of 
Bahrain, 61 
 Islamic Revolution (Iran) (1979), 58, 59 
 Jews/Judaism, 31, 32, 72 
 Arabian peninsula population, 31 
 Muhammad’s agreements with, 34 
 Muhammad’s hope for, 33 
 promise of Jewish state, 19 
 ritual practices, 34 
 three tribes of, 32 
 Johnson, Paul M., 68 – 69 
 Juhayman ibn Muhammad ibn Sayf 
al-‘Utaybi, 59 – 60 
 Kalb tribal confederation, 36 
 Kennedy, John F., 53 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1975 – 1982), 
58 – 62 
 Grand Mosque takeover during reign 
of, 59 – 60 
 reconciliation with Sadat, 59 
 Second Economic Plan implementation, 
58 
 Ta‘if/Mecca summit participation, 61 
 Khawariji (Kharijite) movement, 35 – 36 
 Khobar Towers terrorist attack (1996), 
23, 67 
 Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 59 
 Kissinger, Henry, 21, 22, 58 
 Lebanese Civil War, 58, 64 
 Mamluk dynasty, 37 
 Movement for Islamic Reform, 66 
 Muhammad Hayat al-Sindi (scholar), 
39 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, and the 
ﬁ rst Saudi state, 38 – 41 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (Prophet 
of Islam) 
 birth of, in Mecca, 17, 31 
 hope for the Jews, 33 
 ordering of removal of idols, 34 – 35 
 tribes expelled by, 34 
 Muhammad ibn Rashid, 42 – 43 
 Mulayda, Battle of (1891), 43 
 Muslim dynasties, 35 – 38 
 Nabataean kingdom, 17, 30, 246 
 al-Nasser, Gamal abd (Jamal ‘abd 
al-Nasir), 20, 49 – 50, 55 
 Natana Delong-Bas (scholar), 39 
 Nehru, Jawaharlal (India), 50 
 Nixon, Richard, 21 

Thematic Index | 499
 Nkrumah, Kwame (Ghana), 50 
 Nonaligned Movement of Third World 
Nations (1961), 50 
 Obama, Barack, visit to Saudi Arabia 
(2009), 26 
 oil 
 discoveries of, 46 
 loss of revenues under King Fahid, 64 
 Seven Sisters (oil companies), 52 
 Trans-Arabian Pipeline, 57 
 Operation Desert Shield (1991), 107, 359 
 Operation Desert Storm (1991), 65, 107, 
108, 359 
 Operation Enduring Freedom (2001), 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003), 24, 118 
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Companies (OPEC), 21, 52 
 boycott of, 154 
 cooperation from Iran, 67 
 crude oil production discussions, 142 
 formation (1960), 21, 52, 141, 152 
 Saudi Arabia production quota, 139 
 support for Saudi withdrawal, 57 
 Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC), 67, 85, 125 
 Organization of the Islamic Conference 
summit, 67 
 Ottoman Empire, 18, 19, 37 – 38, 41 
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 
59, 66 
 petroleum geology, 46 
 Point Four economic aid (of the U.S.), 50 
 Qadhdhaﬁ , Mu‘ammar (of Libya), 57 
 Qur’an, 29 
 as basis of government, 80 
 beliefs about Christianity, 177 
 fatawa based on, 176 
 impact on literature, 270 
 jihad-based revelations, 33 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah’s revelation, 
32 
 on racial relations, 205 – 206 
 theological importance of, 178 – 179 
 Quraysh clan, 35 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 94, 229 
 Rashidun (Rightly Guided) Caliphate, 17 
 Rice, Condoleezza, 71 
 Ridda, Wars of, 35 
 Riyadh region 
 Al-Masmak Fort, 38 
 terrorist attacks, 23, 24, 25 
 Rogers Plan (of U.S.), 56 
 Rumsfeld, Donald, 24 
 Sabaean civilization, 17 
 Sadat, Anwar, 59, 62 
 salaﬁ  movement, 59 – 60 
 Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (Saladin), 37 
 Saleh terrorist attacks (2007), 26 
 Sassanid Empire (Sassanians), 30 – 31, 35 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1953 – 1964) (son 
of ‘Abd al-Aziz), 49 – 53 
 Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency 
(SAMA), 27 
 Saudi Revolution Facebook page, 27 
 Second Arab-Israeli War (1967), 21 
 Second Economic Plan implementation 
(1958), 58 
 Selim I (Ottoman sultan), 37 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, 23 
 Seven Sisters (oil companies), 52 
 Sèvres, Treaty of (1920), 19 
 Shakespear, William Henry Irvine, 45 
 shari ‘ ah legal code, 39 
 Shi‘a Muslims, 36, 60 
 Six-Day (June War) War (1967), 56 
 slaves and slavery 
 abolishment of (1962), 21 
 Faysal’s help in abolition of, 52 
 historical background, 31, 34 
 slaves and slavery (‘ ubudiyya ) 
 abolishment of (1962), 21 
 Faysal’s help in abolition of, 52 
 historical background, 31, 34 
 Islam and, 204 – 205 
 pearl ﬁ shing by, 8, 52 

 Thematic Index
500 |
 Soviet Union 
 invasion of Afghanistan, 60 
 withdrawal from Afghanistan, 22 
 statehood establishment 
 ﬁ rst Sa‘udi sate, 38 – 41 
 second Sa‘udi realm, 41 – 43 
 Suez (Tripartite) War, 21, 49 – 50 
 Sukarno (Indonesia), 50 
 Sykes-Picot Treaty, 19 
 Ta‘if, Treaty of (1934), 20, 58, 64 
 Taliban (Pakistani Islamic militia group), 
67, 70 
 Tapline (Trans-Arabian Pipeline), 57 
 Taqi al-Din ibn Ahmad Ibn Taymiyya 
(scholar, law teacher), 39 
 terrorist attacks 
 at ABB-Lummus offi  ces (2004), 25 
 al-Khobar suicide bomber (2001), 24 
 American embassies (Kenya and Tan-
zania), 67 
 beheading of Paul M. Johnson, 68 – 69, 
365 
 British Airways, 24 
 French tourists in Saleh (2007), 26, 365 
 Grand Mosque at Mecca, 96, 154, 361 
 Khobar Towers (1996), 23, 67 
 Mada’in al-Saleh attack, 365 
 police arrests (2002), 364 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 74, 
229 
 in Riyadh, 23, 24, 25, 118 
 September 11, 2001 attacks, 23 
 USS  Cole (2000), 23, 67, 104 
 Vinelli Corporation, 363 
 Thatcher, Margaret, 63 
 Third Arab-Israeli (Ramadan or October) 
War (1973), 21 
 Third National Dialogue (2004), 25 
 Tripartite (Suez) War (1956), 21, 49 – 50 
 Uhud, Battle of (625), 17 
 Ummayyad Caliphate, 17, 36 
 UN Special Rapporteur on Violence 
against Women, 26 
 United States 
 Act for International Development, 50 
 assassination of bin Laden, 28 
 attacks on American embassies, 67 – 68 
 Camp David Accords, 22, 59 
 Operation Enduring Freedom, 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom, 24 
 Rogers Plan proposal, 56 
 sale of ﬁ ghter jets to Saudi Arabia, 58 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, 23 
 USS  Cole terrorist attack (2000), 23, 67, 
104 
 Utayba tribe (of Juhayman), 60 
 Wahhabism, 39, 95, 128, 143, 180, 189, 
367 
 Walid I, 36 
 War on Terrorism, 67 – 69 
 Wars of Ridda, 35 
 yasa legal code, 39 
 Yazid caliphate, 36 
 Yemen 
 Civil War, 53 
 formation of People’s Democratic Re-
public, 55 
 Zionists (Zionism), 19 
 GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Saud 
(1932 – 1953) 
 appointment of Council of Ministers, 
90 
 lineage of, 82 – 83 
 political dominance of, 82 
 Administration, Human Resources, and 
Petitions Committee, 93 
 ahl al-hal wa-l- ‘ aqd (informal governmen-
tal structure), 79 
 Allegiance (Bay‘ah) Commission, 86 – 87 
 Allegiance Commission Law, 84 
 Allegiance Council, 84 
 Anglo-Persian Oil Company, 114 
 Arab League, 112 
 Arab League Summit (2002), 120 
 Arab Peace Initiative, 120 

Thematic Index | 501
 Arab Socialist Action Party, 101 
 Aramco Oil Company, 114 
 Bahrain-Saudi relations, 115 – 116 
 Basic (Fundamental) Law of Saudi 
Arabia 
 “dynastic right” of sons of ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz, 85 
 Fahd’s proclamation of, 67, 80 
 Faysal’s recommendation for, 52 
 onset of, 22, 61 
 “Rights and Duties,” 80 – 81 
 Bay‘ah (Allegiance) Commission, 86 – 87 
 Bedouin Aff airs, Offi  ce of, 90 
 Begin, Menachem, 112 
 Black September (1969), 122 
 Board of Senior ‘Ulama, 96 
 Bush, George H. W., 88 
 Bush, George W., 88 
 Camp David Accords (1979), 112 
 Carter, Jimmy, 112 
 China-Saudi relations, 126, 131 
 Civil Service Board, 94 – 95 
 Clinton, Bill, 88 
 Communist Party of Saudi Arabia, 101 
 Council for Islamic Mission and Guid-
ance (Majlis lil-Da‘wa wa Irshad), 96 
 Council of Ministers, 90 – 91 
 Crown Princes, 88 – 89 
 Cultural and Informational Aff airs Com-
mittee, 93 
 domestic political issues, 101 – 102 
 Economic Aff airs and Energy Commit-
tee, 93 
 Educational and Scientiﬁ c Research Af-
fairs Committee, 93 
 Egypt 
 Free Offi  cers revolt, 20 
 January 25th Revolution, 113 
 Saudi relations with, 111 – 113 
 family and tribal inﬂ uences, 96 – 100 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82 
 Faysal (brother of Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz), 83 
 Ford, Gerald, 88 
 Foreign Aff airs Committee, 93 
 foreign policy relations 
 Bahrain, 115 – 116 
 China, 126, 131 
 Egypt, 111 – 113 
 GCC states, 113 – 114 
 Iran, 108 – 111 
 Iraq, 106 – 108 
 Jordan, 121 – 122 
 Kuwait, 115 
 Lebanon, 122 – 124 
 Oman, 114 
 Palestine and Israel, 119 – 121 
 Qatar, 114 
 Russia, 126 
 Syria, 124 – 125 
 United Arab Emirates, 116 
 United States, 116 – 119 
 Yemen, 103 – 106 
 Future Party of Lebanon, 123 
 GCC states-Saudi relations, 113 – 114 
 General Petroleum and Mineral Organi-
zation, 91 
 government and politics, 79 – 131 
 ahl al-hal wa-l- ‘ aqd (informal structure), 
79 
 Allegiance Council, 84 
 civil service board/independent agen-
cies, 94 – 95 
 Council of Ministers, 90 – 91 
 the Crown Prince, 88 – 89 
 domestic issues, 101 – 102 
 family and tribal inﬂ uences, 96 – 100 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82 
 foreign policy, 103 – 126, 131 
 House of al-Shaykh/House of Sa‘ud, 82 
 humanitarian assistance, 127 – 131 
 judiciary and legal system, 93 – 94 
 the King, 81 – 88 
 Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Council), 
91 – 93 
 national dialogue, 100 

 Thematic Index
502 |
 regional and municipal government, 
95 
 the Royal Diwan, 80, 89 – 90 
 Sudayri Seven, 86 
 the ‘ ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96 
 Grand Mosque of Meccas terrorist attack, 
96 
 Green Party of Saudi Arabia, 101 
 Health and Environmental Aff airs Com-
mittee, 93 
 House of al-Shaykh, 82 
 House of Sa‘ud, 82 
 humanitarian assistance provided by 
Saudi Arabia (2010), 127 – 131 
 ‘Id al-Adha (feast of the sacriﬁ ce), 80 
 Institute of Islamic and Arabic Studies 
(LIPIA), 125 
 Inter-Parliamentary Union (global asso-
ciation), 93 
 International Compact with Iraq, 108 
 International Court of Justice (The 
Hague), 116 
 Iran-Saudi relations, 108 – 111 
 Iraq 
 International Compact with Iraq, 108 
 Saudi relations with, 106 – 108 
 Treaty of Sèvres and, 19 
 Islamic and Judicial Aff airs and Human 
Rights Committee, 93 
 Islamic law ( shari ‘ ah legal code), 39, 80, 
94, 180 – 181 
 Islamic Revolution (Iran) (1979), 58, 59, 
108 – 109, 111 
 January 25th Revolution (2011), 113 
 Jordan-Saudi relations, 121 – 122 
 judiciary and legal system, 93 – 94 
 Kennedy, John F., 117 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1975 – 1982), 
58 – 62 
 Grand Mosque takeover during reign 
of, 59 – 60 
 reconciliation with Sadat, 59 
 Second Economic Plan implementation, 
58 
 Ta‘if/Mecca summit participation, 61 
 King Abdulaziz Library (in Riyadh), 87 
 King Abdullah University of Science and 
Technology (KAUST), 82, 87 
 King structure of Saudi Arabia, 81 – 88 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman 
al-Saud, 42, 43 – 48 
 ‘Abdullah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 
69 – 73 
 as Custodian of the Two Holy 
Mosques, 83 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 62 – 64 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 58 – 62 
 King Faysal, 21, 22, 51, 53 – 58 
 line of succession, 47, 84 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 49 – 53 
 Kuwait-Saudi relations, 115 
 Lebanese Civil War, 123 
 Lebanon-Saudi relations, 122 – 124 
 legal and judiciary system, 93 – 94 
 Ministry of Defense, 91 
 Ministry of Justice, 91, 93 – 94 
 Ministry of the Interior, 91 
 Mishaal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Meccan 
Prince), 87 
 Muslim Brotherhood, 101, 113 
 Muslim dynasties, 35 – 38 
 mutawa ‘ in (Committee for the 
Promotion of Virtue and the 
Prevention of Vice), 219 – 220 
 National Front for the Liberation 
of Saudi Arabia, 195 
 National Meeting for Intellectual 
Dialogue (2011), 94, 100 
 Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (deputy premier), 
84 
 Obama, Barack 
 championing of Saudi Arabia, 111 

Thematic Index | 503
 meeting with King ‘Abdullah, 88 
 visit to Saudi Arabia (2009), 26 
 Offi  ce of Bedouin Aff airs, 90 
 Offi  ce of the Grand Mufti, 96 
 Oman-Saudi relations, 114 
 Operation Desert Shield (1991), 107, 359 
 Operation Desert Storm (1991), 65, 107, 
108, 359 
 Operation Enduring Freedom (2001), 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003), 24, 118 
 Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC), 125 
 Ottoman Empire, 18, 19, 37 – 38, 41, 115 
 Palestine/Israel-Saudi relations, 119 – 121 
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 
107 
 Palestine National Authority, 120 
 Peninsula Lions Brigades, 115 
 Permanent Committee for Scientiﬁ c 
Research and Legal Opinion, 96 
 Qatar-Saudi relations, 114 
 Qur’an, as basis of government, 80 
 Ramadan, 80 
 Ramadan War (1973), 112 
 Reagan, Ronald, 123 
 religious feasts, 80 
 Religious Research, Missionary Activities 
and Guidance Department, 90 
 Rice, Condoleezza, 120 
 “Rights and Duties” of Basic Law, 
80 – 81 
 Royal Decree No. 91 (March, 1992), 92 
 Royal Diwan, 89 – 90 
 Russia-Saudi relations, 126 
 sahwa (Islamic Awakening), 95, 101 
 salaﬁ yya (religious purists), 80 
 Sassanid Empire (Sassanians), 30 – 31, 35 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1953 – 1964) (son 
of ‘Abd al-Aziz), 49 – 53 
 Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency 
(SAMA), 91 
 Saudi Arabian National Guard, 87, 91 
 Saudi Fund for Development, 112 
 Saudi National Day, 80 
 Saudi War College, 107 
 Schwarzkopf, Norman, 104 
 Second Development Plan (1975 – 1980), 
140 
 Security Aff airs Committee, 93 
 Shammar tribe, 87 
 Shura Council of the Hijaz (1927), 92 
 Six-Day (June War) War (1967), 112 
 Social, Family, and Youth Aff airs 
Committee, 93 
 statehood establishment, 38 – 43 
 Statute of Principles, Temporary 
Conﬁ nement, and Preventive 
Detention, 93 
 Sudayri Seven (sons of Ibn Sa‘ud and 
Hussah al-Sudayri), 86, 88 
 Sultan bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (Crown 
Prince), 88 – 89 
 Supreme Council of Islamic Aff airs 
(al-Majlis al-‘A’la lil-Shu‘un 
Islamiyyah), 96 
 Supreme Judicial Council, 91 
 Syria-Saudi relations, 124 – 125 
 Third National Dialogue Meeting (2004), 
100 
 Transitional Ruling Council, 87 
 Transportation, Communications, 
and Information Technology 
Committee, 93 
 ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96 
 the  ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96, 178, 
189 – 190, 203, 222 
 United Arab Emirates-Saudi relations, 
116 
 United Nations Relief and Work Agency 
for Palestinian Refugees in the Near 
East (UNRWA), 121 – 122 
 United States-Saudi relations, 116 – 119 
 U.S.-Saudi Arabian Joint Economic 
Commission (JECOR), 117 

 Thematic Index
504 |
 Water and Public Facilities and Services 
Committee, 93 
 Yemen-Saudi relations, 103 – 106 
 SOCIETY 
 Religion and Law 
 Abbasid Caliphate, 177 – 178 
 Basic (Fundamental) Law of Saudi 
Arabia 
 on “dynastic right” of sons of ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz, 85 
 Fahd’s proclamation of, 67, 80 
 Faysal’s recommendation for, 52 
 onset of, 22, 61 
 Buddhism, 72, 176 
 Christianity 
 Arab conversions to, 32 
 beliefs of, 176 
 establishment in Abyssinia, 30 
 Qur’an’s beliefs about, 177 
 ritual practices, 34 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama, 190 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82, 176, 178 
 Federation of Democratic Forces, 195 
 Five Pillars (Islamic duties) 
 hajj (mandatory pilgrimage), 182 – 184, 
191 
 salat (daily prayers), 181 – 182 
 sawm (fasting), 182 
 shahadah (testimony of faith), 181 
 zakat (charity), 182 
 governmental religious departments 
 Grand Mufti, 192 – 193 
 Permanent Committee for Islamic 
Research and Fatawa, 193 
 hajj (mandatory pilgrimage), 182 – 184, 
191 
 Hanbali Sunni Muslims, 175 
 Hinduism, 176 
 Islamic duties 
 charity, 182 
 daily prayers, 181 – 182 
 fasting, 182 
 independent striving of the jurist, 186 
 inheritance rules, 186 
 mandatory pilgrimage, 182 – 184 
 personal modesty, 185 
 testimony of faith, 181 
 Islamic law ( shari ‘ ah legal code), 39, 80, 
94, 180 – 181 
 Jews/Judaism, 31, 32, 72 
 Arabian peninsula population, 31 
 Muhammad’s agreements with, 34 
 Muhammad’s hope for, 33 
 promise of Jewish state, 19 
 ritual practices, 34 
 three tribes of, 32 
 King Fahd Complex for the Printing of 
the Holy Qur’an (Medina), 180 
 madhhab (legal school) of Ahmad ibn 
Hanbal, 176 
 Ministry for Islamic Aff airs, 
Endowments, Da‘wah and 
Guidance, 190 
 Movement for Islamic Reform, 66 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, 38 – 41, 
81, 179, 186 – 189 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (Prophet 
of Islam), 178 
 National Front for the Liberation 
of Saudi Arabia, 195 
 non-Saudi Arabian Muslims, 175 
 “People of the Book” (Jews and 
Christians), 176 
 Popular Democratic Front, 195 
 Qur’an, 29 
 as basis of government, 80 
 beliefs about Christianity, 177 

Thematic Index | 505
 fatawa based on, 176 
 impact on literature, 270 
 jihad-based revelations, 33 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah’s revelation, 
32 
 on racial relations, 205 – 206 
 theological importance of, 178 – 179 
 religion and law, 175 – 195 
 Buddhism, 72, 176 
 competing ideologies, 194 – 195 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama, 190 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82, 176, 178 
 government religious departments, 
190 – 193 
 Hinduism, 176 
 Islamic duties, 181 – 186 
 Islamic law, 39, 80, 94, 180 – 181 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, 
38 – 41, 81, 179, 186 – 189 
 Suﬁ  Muslim traditions, 175, 179, 187, 
189, 195, 301 
 Sunni Muslims, 102, 175 – 176, 304 
 the  ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96, 
189 – 190, 203 
 Wahhabism, 39, 95, 128, 143, 180, 189, 
367 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims, 176 
 salat (daily prayers), 181 – 182 
 sawm (fasting), 182 
 shahadah (testimony of faith), 181 
 Shi‘a Muslims, 36, 60, 100 
 ‘Ashura religious holiday, 36 
 attacks on, 110 
 in Bahrain, 115 
 and higher education, 240 
 Iran activism and, 109 
 population data, 175 
 religious practices, 300 
 in Saudi Arabia, 193 – 194 
 social status of, 204 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims, 176 
 Suﬁ  Muslim traditions, 175, 179, 187, 189, 
195, 301 
 Sunni Muslims, 102, 175 – 176, 304 
 Twelver Shi‘a, 175 – 176 
 ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96, 
189 – 190, 203 
 Ummayyad Caliphate, 177 – 178 
 Wahhabism, 39, 95, 128, 143, 180, 189, 
367 
 zakat (charity), 182 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims, 176 
 Social Classes and Ethnicity 
 Abyssinian concubines, 205 
 age status, 207 – 208 
 al-Murrah nomads, 203 
 bedouin nomads, 200 
 Bell, Gertrude, 200 – 201 
 Blunt family travels, 200 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis, 205 
 CIA World Factbook data 
 Palestinian refugees, 210 – 211 
 Saudi Arabia demographics, 210, 400 
 endogamy (in-group marriage), 202, 226, 
370 
 ethnicity vs. nationality, 201 – 202 
 foreign workers, 209 – 212 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 in-group marriage (endogamy), 202 
 “Instruction Concerning the Trade in 
Slaves” document (1936), 204 – 205
 
 khadira (nontribal free men), 202 
 merchant status, 203 – 204 
 modern societal studies, 201 
 modernization and society, 209 

 Thematic Index
506 |
 Pasha, Midhat, 200 
 polygyny practice, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 poverty in Saudi Arabia, 212 
 Qabyala (tribal status), 202 
 Qur’an, on racial relations, 205 – 206 
 racial relations, 205 – 206 
 religious minorities, 204 
 Royal Diwan, 89 – 90 
 Royal Family, 212 – 213 
 Shi‘a Muslims, social status of, 204 
 slaves and slavery (‘ ubudiyya ), 204 – 205 
 abolishment of (1962), 21 
 Faysal’s help in abolition of, 52 
 historical background, 31, 34 
 Islam and, 204 – 205 
 pearl ﬁ shing by, 8, 52 
 social classes and ethnicity, 199 – 213 
 age, 207 – 208 
 bias in social information, 200 – 201 
 endogamy, 202, 226, 370 
 ethnicity vs. nationality, 201 – 202 
 foreign workers, 209 – 212 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 merchants, 203 – 204 
 modern societal studies, 201 
 modernization and society, 209 
 poverty, 212 
 racial relations, 205 – 206 
 religious elite, 203 
 religious minorities, 204 
 the Royal Family, 212 – 213 
 slavery, 204 – 205 
 traditional social values, 206 – 207 
 tribal values, 203 
 tribalism, 202 
 social information biases, 200 – 201 
 social values, traditional, 206 – 207 
 tribal values, 203 
 tribalism (tribal affi  liation), 202 
 urbanization outcomes, for Saudi Arabia, 
209 
 Women and Marriage 
 abuse of women, 229 
 CIA World Factbook data, female 
illiteracy rates, 222 
 Committee for the Promotion of Vir-
tue and the Prevention of Vice 
 (mutawa ‘ in), 219 
 divorce, diffi  culty for women, 228 
 dress, modesty for women, 229 – 230 
 employment issues for women, 
223 – 224 
 female genital mutilation (FGM), 225, 
369 – 370 
 gender 
 equity issues, 220 
 social status and, 208 – 209 
 guardianship 
 marriage and, 225 – 227 
 of women, 225 
 hijab (Islamic head covering), 208 – 209 
 matrilocal and matrilineal practices, 
218 – 219 
 mudandash (highland long dresses), 336 
 mutawa ‘ in (Committee for the 
Promotion of Virtue and the 
Prevention of Vice), 219 – 220 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 94, 
229 
 restrictions on women, 222 – 223 
 rules and expectations for women, 
224 – 225 
 segregation of women, 219 
 servants employed by women, 230 
 social equivalence and women, 
227 – 228 
 tawb aswad (ladies black dress), 336 

Thematic Index | 507
 United Nations Division for the 
Advancement of Women, 227 
 United States, female students traveling 
to, 223 
 virginity, expectations of women, 224 – 225 
 women 
 age and status, 207 
 education and, 221 – 222 
 expectations of virginity, 224 – 225 
 female genital mutilation, 225, 
369 – 370 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 harassment of, 218 – 220 
 harsh rulings against, 193 
 hijab (Islamic head covering), 208 – 209 
 polygyny and, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 women and marriage, 218 – 230 
 abuse of women, 229 
 divorce, 228 
 employment, 223 – 224 
 expansion of opportunities, 223 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 guardianship, 225 
 guardianship and marriage, 
225 – 227 
 historical role of women, 
218 – 219 
 modesty in dress, 229 – 230 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 94, 
229 
 restrictions, 222 – 223 
 rules and expectations, 224 – 225 
 servants, 230 
 social equivalence and polygyny, 
227 – 228 
 zabun (princess-cut ankle-length dress), 
335 
 Education 
 al-Hussah Academy, 239 
 alternative education, 242 – 243 
 American University (in Beirut), 237 
 boys’ education, 233 – 234 
 British International School, 239 
 British International School of 
al-Khobar, 239 
 CIA World Factbook data 
 male illiteracy rates, 239 
 College of Nursing and Allied Health 
Sciences (King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
Medical City), 369 
 College of Nursing at al-Hasa, 369 
 Communist Party of Saudi Arabia, 239 
 Dar al-Hadith al-Khayriyya University 
(in Mecca), 240 – 241 
 education, 232 – 243 
 alternative education, 242 – 243 
 Aramco and, 239 
 boys’ vs. girls’ education, 233 – 234 
 critiques of Islamic education, 241 – 242 
 international schools, 239 
 Islamic education, 240 – 241 
 length of school year, 234 – 235 
 madrasah (Islamic academies), 232 
 Qur’anic schools  (kuttab), 232 
 separate gender education, 238 – 239 
 Shi‘a higher education and activism, 
240 
 teachings about Prophet Muhammad, 
233 
 Ten-Year Educational Plan, 
235, 236 
 universities, 236 – 237 
 various Ministries, 234 
 Education, Ministry of, 234 
 General Organization for Technical 
Education and Vocational 
Training, 234 
 girls’ education, 233 – 234 
 Higher Education, Ministry of, 234 
 Imam Mohammad Bin Saud Islamic 
University, 376 

 Thematic Index
508 |
 Institute of Public Administration, 234 
 international schools in Saudi Arabia, 
239 
 Islamic University of Medina, 240 
 Jeddah Preparatory and Grammar, 239 
 King Abdullah University of Science 
and Technology (KAUST), 82, 87, 
148, 163, 237 
 King Fahd University of Petroleum and 
Minerals, 236 
 King Khalid University, 236 
 madhhab (legal school) of Ahmad ibn 
Hanbal, 176 
 madrasah (Islamic academies), 232 
 Message Movement (of Muhammad 
Taqi al-Mudarissi), 240 
 Ministry of Education, 234 
 Ministry of Higher Education, 234 
 Museum of Science and Technology in 
Islam, 237 
 Prince Sultan College for Tourist and 
Hotel Management, 325 
 Public Administration, Institute of, 234
 
 Qur’anic schools  (kuttab), 232 
 Riyadh International School, 239 
 Saudi Arabia’s National Guard (SANG), 
242 
 Saudi War College, 107 
 separate gender education, 238 – 239 
 Shi‘a Muslims, and higher education, 240 
 Supreme Committee for Educational 
Policy, 234 
 Ten-Year Educational Plan, 235, 236 
 U.S Army Medical College, 243 
 U.S. Marine Corp Technical Assistance 
Field Team, 242 
 U.S. Military Training Mission 
(USMTM), 242 
 Umm al-Qura University, 240 
 War College, 243 
 CULTURE 
 Language 
 ‘amiyyah (ordinary language), 246 
 Academy of the Arabic Language in 
Cairo, 252 
 Arabic language, 245 – 256 
 ‘amiyyah (ordinary language), 246 
 bedouin dialects, 247 
 calligraphy, 253 – 254 
 common phrases, 254 – 255 
 consonants in diff erent positions, 249 
 features of Arabic, 245 – 246, 251 – 254 
 fusha (classical Arabic), 245 – 246 
 numbers, 250 
 pre-Islamic poetry, 246 
 script, 248 
 spread of, 246 – 247 
 variances of transliterations, 254 
 vowels, diacritics, doubled letter 
symbols, 248 – 250
 
 bedouin dialects, 247 
 calligraphic arts, 253 – 254 
 common Arabic language phrases, 
254 – 255 
 consonants (in Arabic language), 249
 
 fusha (classical Arabic), 245 – 246 
 numbers (Arabic numbers), 250
 
 pre-Islamic poetry, 246 
 script (Arabic language), 248 
 transliterative variances in Arabic 
language, 254 

Thematic Index | 509
 vowel diacritics/double letter symbols 
(Arabic language), 248 
 Etiquette 
 bargaining etiquette, 266 – 267 
 burial etiquette, 267 – 268 
 business etiquette, 265 – 266 
 clothing etiquette, 262 – 264 
 coff ee rituals, 261 – 262 
 deportation and segregation of the sexes, 
264 – 265 
 etiquette, 256 – 268 
 bargaining, 266 – 267 
 business, 265 – 266 
 clothing, 262 – 264 
 coff ee rituals, 261 – 262 
 deportation/segregation of the sexes, 
264 – 265 
 evolution of, 256 
 gestures, 262 
 gifts, 262 
 greetings and initial small talk, 258 – 259 
 greetings between friends, 259 – 260 
 majlises (public etiquette), 260 
 male-female, 265 
 photographs, 267 
 respect/care for the family, 258 
 rhetorical eloquence of language, 259 
 social and linguistic expressions, 
256 – 257 
 social hierarchies, 257 
 socialization, men  vs. women, 261 
 societal interweaving of Islamic 
customs, 258 
 virtues of modesty and chastity, 
257 
 weddings and funerals, 267 – 268 
 funeral etiquette, 267 – 268 
 gesture etiquette, 262 
 gift etiquette, 262 
 greetings between friends etiquette, 
259 – 260 
 greetings/initial small talk etiquette, 
258 – 259 
 majlises (public etiquette), 260 
 male-female etiquette, 265 
 photograph etiquette, 267 
 respect/care for the family etiquette, 258 
 weddings and funerals etiquette, 267 – 268 
 Literature 
 alﬁ yya (poetry form), 271
 
 early-modern literature, 272 
 Fawziya Abu Khalid, 273 
 folk/vernacular poetry and lyrics, 
271 – 272 
 ghazal poetry, 270 – 271 
 Ghazi al-Gosaibi, 273 
 The Girls of Riyadh (Rajaa), 278 
 The Green March (al-Faraj), 275 
 “Illumination” poem (‘Abdullah al-Faysal 
al Saud), 272 – 273 
 literature, 268 – 279 
 alﬁ yya (poetry form), 271 
 early-modern literature, 272 
 folk/vernacular poetry, lyrics, 271 – 272 
 ghazal poetry, 270 – 271 
 later novels, 278 – 279 
 novels (modern), 274 – 275 
 poetry (modern), 272 – 274 
 qasidah (ode form of poetry), 269 
 short stories, 275 – 277 
 theater and drama, 277 
 theater in private spaces, 279 
 Mahmud Sami al-Barudi, 272 

 Thematic Index
510 |
 Mecca’s Maiden novel (Ahmad Rida 
Houhou), 274 
 Muhammad Hassan ‘Awwad, 272 
 Muhammad ibn Li‘bun al-Wayali, 271 
 novels (modern), 274 – 275 
 poetry (modern), 272 – 274 
 Popular Literature in the Arabian 
Peninsula (‘Abdullah ibn Khamis), 
274 
 The Price of Sacriﬁ ce (Damanhouri), 274 
 qasidah (ode form of poetry), 269 
 Qur’an’s impact on literature, 270 
 The Red Devils (al-Faraj), 275 
 short stories, 275 – 277 
 The Silk Road (Raja ‘al-Alim), 278 
 A Slit in the Night’s Attire (Ibrahim 
al-Nasser), 274 – 275 
 The Temperamental Revenge novel 
(Mohammad Nour ‘Abdullah 
al-Jawhari), 274 
 theater and drama, 277 
 theater in private spaces, 279 
 There Is No Shadow beneath the 
Mountain (Fouad Abd al-Hamid 
Anqawi), 275 
 The Twins novel (‘Abd al-Qaddous al-
Ansary), 274 
 Unforgettable Memories (al-Faraj), 
275 
 “When I Am with You” poem (Ghazi 
al-Gosaibi), 273 
 Visual Art and Film 
 According to Local Time movie, 285 
 Acquitted Dreams movie, 286 
 Beirut International Film Festival (2010), 
286 
 calligraphic arts, 282 
 Cinema 500 Kilometers movie, 286 
 Dhilal al-Samt movie, 285 
 
 Etaar, Matar movie, 286 
 
ﬁ lm, 284 – 286 
 ﬁ lms/ﬁ lm productions, 284 – 286 
 folk art, 281 – 282 
 
I Don’ Wanna movie, 285 
 
Just Words movie, 286 
 
Kayf al-Hal movie, 285 
 
Last Say movie, 285 
 Lawrence of Arabia movie, 286 
 
muralists, 283 
 
Nisa’ bila Dhil (Women without Shadow) 
movie, 285 
 
painting and graphic design, 282 – 283 
 photography, 283 
 
Shadow movie, 285 
 The Slave Trade Today (Le Schiave 
Esistona Accora) movie, 286 
 studio art, 282 
 Sunrise/Sunset movie, 285 
 
Three Men and a Woman movie, 285 
 
visual art and ﬁ lm, 281 – 286 
 calligraphic arts, 282 
 ﬁ lm, 284 – 286 
 folk art, 281 – 282 
 muralists, 283 
 painting, graphic design, 
282 – 283 
 photography, 283 
 studio art evolution, 282 
 young artists, 283 – 284 
 

Thematic Index | 511
Women without Shadows movie, 286 
 
young artists, 283 – 284 
 Music and Dance 
 adhan (form of religious music), 299 – 300 
 aghani al-ghaws and ﬁ jiri (traditional 
music), 294 – 295 
 al-Dawsario (traditional music), 293 
 al-Samri (traditional music), 294 
 ‘arda (traditional music), 293 
 
dance (raqs), 293, 298 – 299 
 Dandarawi Suﬁ  tradition, 301 
 dewinih (traditional music), 292 – 293 
 
galith (riddiyih) (traditional music), 293 
 
inshad and mada’ih (religious music), 
301 
 inshad of the mawalid (religious music), 
301 
 
khaliji (Gulf) music and dance, 288 
 
large-ensemble music, 296 – 297 
 liwa (leiwah) (traditional music), 295 
 
majlis al-Tarab (form of music), 291 
 majrur (form of music), 297 
 mizmar (form of music), 297 – 298 
 music 
 as celebration, 289 
 large-ensemble music, 296 – 297 
 majlis al-Tarab form, 291 
 popular music industry, 292 
 religious forms, 289 – 290 
 songs of pilgrimage, 301 – 302 
 wedding celebrations, 289, 
291 
 women’s music, 290 
 music, hijaz and asir style 
 majrur, 297 
 mizmar, 297 – 298 
 sahba, 298 
 urban music, 297 
 yanbuwiyya, 298 
 zar, 298 
 music, religious 
 adhan, 299 – 300 
 inshad and mada’ih, 301 
 inshad of the mawalid, 301 
 tajwid and qira’a, 300 
 music, traditional forms 
 aghani al-ghaws and ﬁ jiri, 294 – 295 
 al-Dawsario, 293 
 al-Samri, 294 
 ‘arda, 293 
 dewinih, 292 – 293 
 galith (riddiyih), 293 
 liwa (leiwah), 295 
 sawt, 295 – 296 
 pilgrimage songs, 301 – 302 
 religious forms of music, 289 – 290 
 sahba (form of music), 298 
 sawt (traditional music), 295 – 296 
 Shi‘a Muslims 
 religious practices, 300 
 songs of pilgrimage, 301 – 302 
 
tajwid and qira’a (religious music), 300 
 
urban music, 297 
 
wedding celebration music, 289, 291 
 women’s music, 290 
 
yanbuwiyya (form of music), 298 
 
zar (form of music), 298 
 Food 
 Baharat (spice mix), 310 
 Basal Mahshi (stuff ed onions), 314 
 breakfast foods, 305 
 
coff ee preparations, 307 – 308 
 
dessert dishes, 308, 315 
 

 Thematic Index
512 |
food, 305 – 316 
 Baharat (spice mix), 310 
 Basal Mahshi (stuff ed onions), 314 
 bedouin/sedentary lifestyles, 306 – 307 
 breakfast foods, 305 
 coff ee preparations, 307 – 308 
 dessert dishes, 308, 315 
 ground lamb dish, 313 
 halal (allowed/lawful) foods, 306 
 Hawaij (spice mix), 310 – 311 
 hospitality rules, 307 
 Jarish Bi-Laban (cracked wheat, 
yogurt), 312 
 Kabsa (chicken dish), 311 
 Muff alaq (crushed wheat dish), 311 – 312 
 Qahwa Arabiyya (Arabic coff ee), 308 
 restaurant foods, 308 
 rice-based meals, 308 
 Sharab Al-Na’Na (hot mint drink), 
314 – 315 
 stuff ed lamb dish, 309 – 310 
 Tumr Bi-L-Simsim recipe, 315 
 wheat breads, 308 
 
ground lamb dish, 313 
 
halal (allowed/lawful) foods, 306 
 Hawaij (spice mix), 310 – 311 
 
Jarish Bi-Laban (cracked wheat, yogurt), 
312 
 
Kabsa (chicken dish), 311 
 
Muff alaq (crushed wheat dish), 311 – 312 
 
Qahwa Arabiyya (Arabic coff ee), 
308 
 
restaurant foods, 308 
 rice-based meals, 308 
 
Sharab Al-Na’Na (hot mint drink), 
314 – 315 
 stuff ed lamb dish, 309 – 310 
 
wheat breads, 308 
 Sports and Leisure 
 Alltech World Equestrian Games (2010), 
321 
 Arabian Horses Festival (in Riyadh), 320 
 Arriyadh Equestrian Club, 320 
 Asian Football Confederation (AFC), 318 
 auto racing, 322 
 
basketball, 318 – 319 
 
camel racing, 322 
 camping, 323 – 324 
 cricket and baseball, 320 
 Crown Prince’s Horse Race, 320 
 
Equestrian Federation, 321 
 
falconry, 324 – 325 
 Fédération Internationale de Basketball 
(FIBA), 318 
 Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association (FIFA), 318 
 
golf, 319 
 
hiking/outdoor recreation, 323 – 324 
 horse racing (equestrian sports), 320 – 322 
 hunting and falconry, 324 – 325 
 
International Olympic Committee, 319, 
322 
 Islamic Solidarity Games, 319 – 320 
 Islamic solitary games, 319 – 320 
 
Janadiriyyah Cultural Festival, 322 
 Jeddah Cricket Association, 320 
 Jeddah Rugby Football Club, 320 
 Jeddah United Basketball Team, 318 – 319 
 Jeddah Youth Baseball League, 320 
 
King Abdulaziz Arabian Horse Center, 
320 
 King’s Cup Horse Race, 320 

Thematic Index | 513
 kyokushin karate, 319 
 
leisure and entertainment 
 media entertainment, 326 – 327 
 restrictions, 326 
 shopping, 326 
 
martial arts, 319 
 
“No Women No Play” campaign, 322 
 
Olympic sports participation, 319 
 
Prince Sultan College for Tourist and 
Hotel Management, 325 
 
Riyadh Cricket Association, 320 
 Riyadh Rugby Football Club, 320 
 rugby, 320 
 
Saudi Arabia Equestrian Federation, 320 
 Saudi Arabian Basketball Federation, 318 
 Saudi Commission for Tourism and 
Antiquities, 323 
 Saudi Cricket Center (in Jeddah), 320 
 shotokan karate, 319 
 soccer (football), 318 
 solitary games, 319 – 320 
 sports 
 auto racing, 322 
 basketball, 318 – 319 
 camel racing, 322 
 cricket and baseball, 320 
 golf, 319 
 horse racing, equestrian sports, 
320 – 322 
 hunting and falconry, 324 – 325 
 Islamic solitary games, 
319 – 320 
 martial arts, 319 
 Olympic participation, 319 
 rugby, 320 
 soccer (football), 
318 
 Third Development Plan, 317 – 318 
 tourism, camping, hiking, outdoor 
recreation, 323 – 324 
 
tourism, camping, hiking, outdoor 
recreation, 323 – 324 
 
Youth Olympics, 319 
 Popular Culture 
 al-saqlah (little girl’s game), 330 – 331 
 amthal (proverb reﬂ ecting popular belief), 
329 – 330 
 ‘asayib (ladies head circlets), 336 
 attarin (herbalists, sellers of oil), 332 
 bridal costumes, 335 
 burqa millayya (head covering), 335 
 
card games, 330 – 331 
 cautery (hot stones) healing treatment, 
333 
 children and men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 clothing and historic costume, 334 – 339 
 children and men, 338 – 339 
 henna body decoration, 337 – 338 
 modern niqab and covering, 338 
 practical weaving, 339 
 
damir (male embroidered jacket), 339 
 dhiyya (blood payment), 331 
 
furmaliyya (male embroidered jacket), 
339 
 
games, 330 – 331 
 gub (children’s hood), 338 
 
handheld electronic games, 330 – 331 
 henna bodily decoration, 337 – 338 
 
jokes,  nawadir, short tales, 330 
 
kalam rijaal (“language of real men”), 
334 
 kote (male embroidered jacket), 339 
 kuﬁ yya (male skullcap), 339 
 

 Thematic Index
514 |
majlis al-tarab (guest reception rooms), 
334 
 medicine, tribal and traditional, 332 – 333 
 men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 mihrama wa mudawara (light-colored head 
scarf), 335 
 mudandash (highland long dresses), 336 
 mzayyan (popular occasions), 334 
 
niqab (black face veil), 338 
 
popular culture, 328 – 339 
 amthal, 329 – 330 
 children and men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 clothing and historic costume, 334 – 337 
 games, 330 – 331 
 henna bodily decoration, 337 – 338 
 jokes,  nawadir, short tales, 330 
 medicine, tribal and traditional, 
332 – 333 
 modern niqab and covering, 338 
 popular occasions, 334 
 practical weaving, 339 
 superstitions, 330 
 tribal law and mediation, 331 – 332 
 
shillahat (male body shirt), 338 
 superstitions, 330 
 
tawb aswad (ladies black dress), 336 
 tiba nabawi (medicine of the Prophet), 332 
 tribal and traditional medicine, 332 – 333 
 tribal law and mediation, 331 – 332 
 
unani-tibb (tribal/traditional medicine), 
332 
 ‘urf (tribal law), 331 – 332 
 
video games, 330 – 331 
 
zabun (princess-cut ankle-length dress), 
335 
 zaff at al-shibshib (festive bridal 
procession), 337 
 Architecture 
 Abha (city) architecture, 349 
 architecture, 342 – 352 
 Asir and Abha (cities), 349 
 Eastern Province, 351 – 352 
 Hijaz (city), features of, 346 – 349 
 markets, 345 – 346 
 mosques, 343 – 345 
 Najd (city), 349 – 351 
 Asir and Abha (cities) architecture, 349 
 
Eastern Province architecture, 351 – 352 
 
haram (prayer hall), 344 
 Hijaz (city) architecture, 346 – 349 
 
khutbah (sermons), 344 
 
market  (suqlaswaq) architecture, 345 – 346 
 masjid (place of bowing), 343 
 Masjid al-Haram (Holy Mosque), in 
Mecca, 346 
 mosque architecture, 343 – 345 
 musallah (place of praying), 343 
 
Najd (city) architecture, 349 – 351 
 
qiblah (direction of prayer), 344 
 
suqlaswaq (markets), 345 – 346 
 
ziyadah (open space coverted to prayer 
area), 344 – 345 
 CONTEMPORARY ISSUES 
 Defense 
 defense, 355 – 361 
 
Gfoeller, Michael, 360 
 
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard, 356 
 Israeli Defense Forces, 359 
 
King Khalid Military City, 359 
 

Thematic Index | 515
Ministry of Defense, 91 
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation 
(MODA), 355, 358 
 
Operation Desert Shield (1991), 107, 359 
 Operation Desert Storm (1991), 65, 107, 
108, 359 
 Operation Enduring Freedom (2001), 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003), 24, 118 
 
Petraeus, David, 360 
 
Revolutionary Guard (Iran), 356 
 Royal Saudi Air Defense, 355 
 Royal Saudi Land Forces (RSLF), 355, 
356, 357 – 358 
 Royal Saudi Navy, 355 
 
Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG), 
355, 356, 357 – 358 
 Saudi Royal Air Force, 358 
 Saudi Royal Guard, 355 
 
Two Holy Places (Saudi Arabia), 357 
 
U.S. Military Training Mission, 359, 
365 
 U.S. Military Training Mission 
(USMTM), 242 
 Islamist Opposition and Terrorism 
 9/11 Commission Report, 365 
 al-Qa‘ida terrorist group.  See also bin 
Laden, Osama; September 11, 2001 
terrorist attack 
 arrests of operatives, 26 – 27, 70, 361 
 bombing of U.S. embassies, 23 
 coalition with Yemeni jihadist 
organizations, 365 – 367 
 inner kingdom attacks by, 68 
 links with Peninsula Lions Brigades, 
115 
 USS  Cole terrorist attack, 23, 67, 104 
 Uyayri network of, 364 – 365 
 bin Laden, Osama.  See also al-Qa‘ida 
terrorist group 
 assassination of by U.S., 28, 70 
 complaints against Western presence, 
66 
 family background, 106, 158 
 loss of Saudi citizenship, 23, 67 – 68 
 militants trained by, 361 
 terrorist actions, 22 
 ‘Utaybi uprising (1979), 362 
 ABB-Lummus offi  ce attacks (2004), 25 
 al-Khobar suicide bomber (2001), 24 
 American embassy terrorist attacks 
(Kenya and Tanzania), 67 
 
beheading of Paul M. Johnson, 68 – 69, 
365 
 British airways terrorist attack, 24 
 
French tourist terrorist attack (Saleh, 
2007), 26, 365 
 
Grand Mosque at Mecca terrorist attack, 
96, 154, 361 
 Guantanamo detention center, 
water-boarding torture, 363 
 Gulf Wars (Persian Gulf), 64 – 67 
 environmental threats from, 12 
 onset of ﬁ rst war (1991), 23, 64 – 65 
 reactions to, 65 – 67 
 sahwa (Islamic awakening preachers), 
362 
 Islamist opposition and terrorism, 
361 – 367 
 
Johnson, Paul M., 68 – 69, 365 
 
Khobar Towers terrorist attack (1996), 
23, 67 
 Mada’in al-Saleh archaeological site 
attack, 365 

 Thematic Index
516 |
 mujahidin movement 
 attraction for new recruits, 362 
 
Palestinian  inﬁ tadhah, 364 
 
rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 94, 229 
 Riyadh terrorist attacks, 23, 24, 25, 118 
 Rumsfeld, Donald, 365 
 
sahwa (Islamic awakening preachers), 
362 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, 23, 
118, 237 
 
terrorist attacks.  See also al-Qa‘ida 
terrorist group; Hizballah; Taliban 
 al-Khobar suicide bomber (2001), 24 
 American embassies (Kenya and 
Tanzania), 67 
 at ABB-Lummus offi  ces (2004), 25 
 beheading of Paul M. Johnson, 68 – 69, 
365 
 British Airways, 24 
 French tourists in Saleh (2007), 26, 
365 
 Grand Mosque at Mecca, 96, 154, 361 
 in Riyadh, 23, 24, 25, 118 
 Khobar Towers (1996), 23, 67 
 Mada’in al-Saleh attack, 365 
 police arrests (2002), 364 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif,” 26, 71, 74, 
229 
 USS  Cole (2000), 23, 67, 104 
 Vinelli Corporation, 363 
 
U.S. Military Training Mission, 365 
 Uyayri network of al-Qa’-ida, 364 – 365 
 
Vinelli Corporation terrorist attack, 363 
 
water-boarding (torture) at Guantanamo, 
363 
 Health 
 alcohol and drug poisoning, 370 
 
CIA World Factbook life expectancy data, 
368 
 College of Nursing and Allied Health 
Sciences (King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
Medical City), 369 
 College of Nursing at al-Hasa, 369 
 
drug poisoning, 370 
 H1N1 ﬂ u, 370 
 health issues, 368 – 371 
 HIV/AIDS, 370 
 King Faisal Specialist Hospital, 369 
 
life expectancy data, 368 
 Lutﬁ yya al-Khateeb (Florence 
Nightingale of Saudi Arabia), 369 
 
malnutrition issues (of children), 370 
 medicine, tribal and traditional, 332 – 333, 
369 
 
nursing in Saudi Arabia, 369 
 
public health issues, 369 
 
Saudi Cancer Registry, 371 
 
tiba nabawi (medicine of the Prophet), 332 
 tribal and traditional medicine, 332 – 333 
 
unani-tibb (tribal/traditional medicine), 
332 
 
Zahra Breast Cancer Association, 371 
 Women and Social Transformation 
 age and status issues for women, 207 
 Ahmad, Thoraya, 373 
 al-Nahda Philanthropic Society, 372 
 
business and education rights of women, 
373 
 
divorce rates, 372 
 dress, modesty for women, 229 – 230 
 

Thematic Index | 517
education, women and, 221 – 222 
 employment issues for women, 223 – 224 
 etiquette and socialization, men  vs. 
women, 261 
 
female genital mutilation, 225, 369 – 370 
 
gender equity issues, 220 
 guardianship of women, 225 
 
labor (workforce), women’s employment, 
160 – 161, 163 
 
National Charitable Institute for Home 
Health Care, 372 
 
polygyny and women, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 Princess Amira al-Taweel, 372 
 Princess Moodi bint ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 372 
 Princess Nouf bint Bandar al-Sa‘ud, 372 
 Princess Sarah bint Talal ibn ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz, 373 
 
segregation of women, 219 
 social equivalence and women, 227 – 228 
 
UN Board on Women, 373 
 UN Special Rapporteur on Violence 
against Women, 26 
 United Nations Division for the Advance-
ment of Women, 227 
 United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA), 373 
 
virginity, expectations of women, 224 – 225 
 
Wajiha al-Huwaidar, 373 – 374 
 women 
 age and status, 207 
 business and education rights, 373 
 education and, 221 – 222 
 expectations of virginity, 224 – 225 
 female genital mutilation, 225, 369 – 370 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 harassment of, 218 – 220 
 harsh rulings against, 193 
 hijab (Islamic head covering), 208 – 209 
 polygyny and, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 social transformation and, 372 – 374 
 women and marriage, 218 – 230 
 abuse of women, 229 
 divorce, 228 
 employment, 223 – 224 
 expansion of opportunities, 223 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 guardianship, 225 
 guardianship and marriage, 225 – 227 
 historical role of women, 218 – 219 
 modesty in dress, 229 – 230 
 rape/Girl from Qatif case, 229 
 restrictions, 222 – 223 
 rules and expectations, 224 – 225 
 servants, 230 
 social equivalence and polygyny, 
227 – 228 
 women’s music, 290 
 Media, Freedom of Speech, 
and Censorship 
 al-Hayat London-based newspaper, 
374 
 al-Jazeera network, 374 
 al-Riyadh newspaper, 374 
 al-Sharq al-Awsat Saudi newspaper, 374 
 Arab Radio and Television Network 
(ART), 374 
 
Communications and Information 
Technology Commission, 376 
 
Facebook page 
 access blocked by government, 375 – 376 
 call for Saudi Revolution (2011), 27 – 28 
 pro-democracy activism on, 102, 327 
 
“Good Morning Saudi Arabia” tv show, 
375 
 
Haaretz Israeli newspaper, 376 
 

 Thematic Index
518 |
Internet Service Unit (King ‘Abdulaziz 
City for Science and Technology), 
375 – 376 
 
media, freedom of speech, censorship, 
374 – 376 
 Middle East Broadcasting Corporation 
(MBC), 374 
 
Riyadh Television network, 375 
 
Saudi Communications Commission, 376 
 Saudi-girl.blog, 376 
 
Voice of Saudi Women (political rights 
group), 376 
 
Wajiha al-Huwaidar, 373 – 374 
 Human Rights 
 Asian migrant workers issues, 211 
 
begging by children, 376 
 
capital punishment, 377 – 378 
 Communications and Information Tech-
nology Commission, 376 
 
foreign worker labor disputes, 145, 162 
 
Haaretz Israeli newspaper, 376 
 homelessness, 376 
 human rights, 376 
 Human Rights Watch data 
 Asian migrant workers, 211 
 capital punishment, 377 – 378 
 foreign worker labor disputes, 145, 162 
 Islamic law, 182 
 Sunni Yemeni refugees, 196 
 torture, 379 
 women’s rights, 225 – 226 
 
Imam Mohammad Bin Saud Islamic Uni-
versity, 376 
 International Labor Organization, 376 
 
Saudi Communications Commission, 376 
 Saudi-girl.blog, 376 
 
torture issues, 379 
 traffi  cking of children, 376 
 
Voice of Saudi Women (political rights 
group), 376 
 
women’s rights issues, 225 – 226 
 Capital Punishment 
 capital punishment, 377 – 380 
 methods, 377 
 Saudi Arabia data (1990 – 2008), 378 
 
Human Rights Watch data 
 capital punishment, 377 – 378 
 torture, 379 
 
United Nations Organisation Contre La 
Torture, 377 

519
 ABB-Lummus offi  ces terrorist attack 
(2004), 25 
 Abbasid Caliphate, 18, 36, 177 – 178 
 Abbasid-era cooking, 30  –  306 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Saud 
(1932 –  1953), 42, 43  –  48, 79 
 appointment of Council of Ministers, 
90 
 formation of consultative council, 44 
 internal challenges of, 46 
 joining with Allies in WW II, 46, 48 
 lineage of, 82  –  83 
 meeting with Captain Shakespear, 45 
 modern Saudi Arabia named for, 28 
 political dominance of, 82 
 pursuit if U.S. alliance, 48 
 See also Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
 ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Salman, 153 
 ‘Abd al-Malik, 36 
 Abd al-Nasser, Gamal (amal ‘abd 
al-Nasir), 20, 49  –  50, 55, 111 
 ‘Abdullah ibn Ibrahim ibn Sayf (scholar), 
39 
 Abdulhamid (Ottoman sultan), 44 
 ‘Abdullah al-Tariki, 152 
 ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(2005 – present), 69 – 73, 87 – 88 
 See also Sudayri Seven 
 ‘Abdullah ibn Thunayyan, 41 – 42 
 Abha (city) architecture, 349 
 Abqaiq oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 abuse of women, 229 
 Abyssinian concubines, 205 
 Academy of the Arabic Language in 
Cairo, 252 
 According to Local Time movie, 285 
 Acquitted Dreams movie, 286 
 Act for International Development (U.S.) 
(1950), 50 
 adhan (form of religious music), 299 – 300 
 Administration, Human Resources, and 
Petitions Committee, 93 
 Afghanistan 
 Operation Enduring Freedom vs., 23 
 Soviet Union invasion of, 60 
 Soviet withdrawal from, 22 
Index

 Index
520 |
 age status, 207 – 208 
 aghani al-ghaws and ﬁ jiri (traditional 
music), 294 – 295 
 agriculture industry 
 (al-zira ‘ a al-taqlidiyya) traditional 
agriculture, 144 
 CIA World Factbook data, 144 
 ﬁ shing and pearl diving, 145 
 land tenure  (‘ardh baydah), 146 
 wheat farming experiments, 146 
 ahl al-hal wa-l- ‘ aqd (informal 
governmental structure), 79 
 Ahmad, Thoraya, 373 
 Ahmad ibn Hanbal al-Shaybani (religious 
leader), 39 
 air travel industry, 157, 167 
 al-Dahna Desert, 3, 4, 7 
 al-Dawsario (traditional music), 293 
 al-Hayat London-based newspaper, 374 
 al-Hussah Academy, 239 
 al-Jafurah Desert, 7 
 al-Jazeera network, 374 
 al-Khobar suicide bomber (2001), 24 
 Al-Mukhtar ibn Abi ‘Ubayd al-Thaqaﬁ , 
36 
 al-Murrah nomads, 203 
 al-Nafud Desert, 7 
 al-Nahda Philanthropic Society, 372 
 al-Qa‘ida terrorist group 
 arrests of operatives, 26 – 27, 70, 361 
 bombing of U.S. embassies, 23 
 coalition with Yemeni jihadist organi-
zations, 365 – 367 
 inner kingdom attacks by, 68 
 links with Peninsula Lions Brigades, 
115 
 USS  Cole terrorist attack, 23, 67, 104 
 Uyayri network of, 364 – 365 
 See also bin Laden, Osama; 
September 11, 2001 terrorist 
attack 
 al-Riyadh newspaper, 374 
 al-Samri (traditional music), 294 
 al-saqlah little girl’s game, 330 – 331 
 al-Sharq al-Awsat Saudi newspaper, 374 
 al-Uqayr Convention, 1 
 alcohol and drug poisoning, 370 
 alﬁ yya (poetry form), 271 
 Allegiance (Bay‘ah) Commission, 86 – 87 
 Allegiance Commission Law, 84 
 Allegiance Council, 84 
 Alltech World Equestrian Games (2010), 
321 
 alternative education, 242 – 243 
 American embassy attacks (Kenya and 
Tanzania), 67 
 American University (in Beirut), 237 
 ‘amiyyah (ordinary language), 246 
 Amnesty International, 182, 377, 379 
 amthal (proverb reﬂ ecting popular belief), 
329 – 330 
 Anglo-Persian Oil Company, 114 
 animal husbandry and trading, 146 – 147 
 Arab-Israeli Wars 
 First (1948), 20 
 Second (1967), 21 
 Third Arab-Israeli War (1973), 21 
 Arab League, 112 
 Arab League Summit (2002), 120 
 Arab Peace Initiative, 120 
 Arab Petroleum Congress (1959), 52 
 Arab polytheism, 31 
 Arab Radio and Television Network 
(ART), 374 
 Arab Revolt (1916), 19 
 Arab Socialist Action Party, 101 
 Arab Super Light (crude oil), 153 
 Arabian American Oil Company, 148 
 Arabian Business 2009 Rich List, 158 
 Arabian Gulf, 9, 10 – 11 
 Arabian Horses Festival (in Riyadh), 320 
 Arabic language, 245 – 256 
 ‘amiyyah (ordinary language), 246 
 bedouin dialects, 247 
 calligraphy, 253 – 254 
 common phrases, 254 – 255 
 consonants in diff erent positions, 249 
 features of Arabic, 245 – 246, 251 – 254 
 fusha (classical Arabic), 245 – 246 
 numbers, 250 

Index | 521
 pre-Islamic poetry, 246 
 script, 248 
 spread of, 246 – 247 
 variances of transliterations, 254 
 vowels, diacritics, doubled letter 
symbols, 248 – 250 
 Aramco Mobile Oil, 114 
 architecture, 342 – 352 
 Asir and Abha (cities), 349 
 Eastern Province, 351 – 352 
 Hijaz (city), features of, 346 – 349 
 markets, 345 – 346 
 mosques, 343 – 345 
 Najd (city), 349 – 351 
 ‘arda (traditional music), 293 
 Arriyadh Equestrian Club, 320 
 ‘asayib (ladies head circlets), 336 
 Asian Football Confederation (AFC), 
318 
 Asir (city) architecture, 349 
 attarin (herbalists, sellers of oil), 332 
 auto racing, 322 
 Ayyubid dynasty, 37 
 Badr, Battle of (624), 17 
 badu (bedouin/nomads) population, 2, 
31 – 32 
 Baghdad Pact (1955), 50 
 Baharat (spice mix), 310 
 Bahrain-Saudi relations, 115 – 116 
 Balfour Declaration (1917), 19 
 banking and ﬁ nancial systems, 168 – 169 
 Banu an-Nadir tribe, 34 
 Banu Khalid uprising (1669), 18 
 Banu Qaynuqa tribe, 34 
 Banu Qurayza tribe, 34 
 bargaining etiquette, 266 – 267 
 Basal Mahshi (stuff ed onions), 314 
 Basic (Fundamental) Law of Saudi 
Arabia 
 on “dynastic right ” of sons of ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz, 85 
 Fahd’s proclamation of, 67, 80 
 Faysal’s recommendation for, 52 
 onset of, 22, 61 
 “Rights and Duties, ” 80 – 81 
 basketball, 318 – 319 
 Bay‘ah (Allegiance) Commission, 86 – 87 
 Bedouin Aff airs, Offi  ce of, 90 
 bedouin nomads, 200 
 begging by children, 376 
 Begin, Menachem, 59, 112 
 beheading of Paul M. Johnson, 68 – 69, 
365 
 Beirut International Film Festival (2010), 
286 
 Bell, Gertrude, 200 – 201 
 bin Laden, Osama 
 assassination of by U.S., 28, 70 
 complaints against Western presence, 
66 
 family background, 106, 158 
 loss of Saudi citizenship, 23, 67 – 68 
 militants trained by, 361 
 terrorist actions, 22 
 See also al-Qa‘ida terrorist group 
 Black September (1969), 57, 122 
 Blunt family travels, 200 
 Board of Senior ‘Ulama, 96 
 Bolton, John, 71 
 boys’ education, 233 – 234 
 breakfast foods, 305 
 bridal costumes, 335 
 British Airways terrorist attack, 24 
 British International School of 
al-Khobar, 239 
 Broadcasting Service of the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia, 158 
 Buddhism, 72, 176 
 Burckhardt, John Lewis, 205 
 burial etiquette, 267 – 268 
 burqa millayya (head covering), 335 
 Bush, George H. W., 88 
 Bush, George W., 71, 88, 156 
 business etiquette, 265 – 266 
 California Arabian Standard Oil 
Company (CASOC), 20, 148 
 Caliphates 
 Abbasid Caliphate, 18 

 Index
522 |
 Rashidun (Rightly Guided) Caliphate, 
17 
 Ummayyad Caliphate, 17 
 calligraphic arts, 282 
 camel racing, 322 
 Camp David Accords (1979), 22, 59, 112, 
121 
 camping, 323 – 324 
 capital punishment, 377 – 380 
 methods, 377 
 Saudi Arabia data (1990 – 2008), 378 
 card games, 330 – 331 
 Carter, Jimmy, 59, 112, 154 
 cautery (hot stones) healing treatment, 
333 
 Central Planning Organization (1968), 57 
 Cheney, Dick, 156 
 children and men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 China-Saudi relations, 126, 131 
 Christianity 
 Arab conversions to, 32 
 beliefs of, 176 
 establishment in Abyssinia, 30 
 Qur’an’s beliefs about, 177 
 ritual practices, 34 
 CIA World Factbook data 
 agriculture estimates, 144 
 airports, 157 
 communications and transportation, 
402 
 education, 403 
 female illiteracy rates, 222 
 geography, 401 
 industries, 402 
 labor force statistics, 161 
 life expectancy, 368 
 male illiteracy rates, 239 
 military, 403 
 Palestinian refugees, 210 – 211 
 per-capita GDP estimates, 140 
 petroleum production and exports, 165, 
407 
 Saudi Arabia demographics, 210, 400, 
405 
 stock data, 165 – 166 
 telephones, 158 
 Cinema 500 Kilometers movie, 286 
 Civil Service Board, 94 – 95 
 climate of Saudi Arabia, 10 
 Clinton, Bill, 88 
 clothing and historic costume, 334 – 339 
 children and men, 338 – 339 
 clothing etiquette, 262 – 264 
 henna body decoration, 337 – 338 
 modern niqab and covering, 338 
 practical weaving, 339 
 coff ee 
 preparations, 307 – 308 
 rituals, 261 – 262 
 College of Nursing and Allied Health 
Sciences (King ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 
Medical City), 369 
 College of Nursing at al-Hasa, 369 
 Committee for Defense of Legitimate 
Rights (CDLR), 23, 66 
 Committee for the Promotion of Virtue 
and the Prevention of Vice (CPVPV), 
24, 79, 191, 192, 219, 264 
 Communications and Information 
Technology Commission, 376 
 Communist Party of Saudi Arabia, 101, 
239 
 consonants (in Arabic language), 249 
 Consultative Council (Majlis al-Shura), 
23, 79 – 80, 91 – 93 
 Continental Shelf Agreement (1968), 55 
 Council for Islamic Mission and Guid-
ance (Majlis lil-Da‘wa wa Irshad), 96 
 Council of Ministers, 90 – 91 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama, 94, 190, 
192 – 193 
 cricket and baseball, 320 
 Crown Princes, 88 – 89 
 Crown Prince’s Horse Race, 320 
 The Crusades (1107 – 1291), 18 
 Cultural and Informational Aff airs 
Committee, 93 
 damir (male embroidered jacket), 339 
 dance (raqs), 293, 298 – 299 

Index | 523
 Dandarawi Suﬁ  tradition, 301 
 Dar al-Hadith al-Khayriyya University 
(in Mecca), 240 – 241 
 defense, 355 – 361 
 deportation and segregation of the sexes, 
264 – 265 
 deserts 
 al-Dahna Desert, 3, 4, 7 
 al-Jafurah Desert, 7 
 al-Nafud Desert, 7 
 Rub ‘al-Khali Desert (Empty Quarter), 
1, 7 – 8, 23, 40 
 Syrian Desert, 1, 7, 48 
 dewinih (traditional music), 292 – 293 
 Dhilal al-Samt movie, 285 
 dhiyya (blood payment), 331 
 diglossia.  See language (Arabic language) 
 Dilmun civilization, 17, 29 
 Ditch, Battle of the (627), 17 
 divisions of Saudi Arabia, historic and 
modern, 12 – 14 
 divorce 
 diffi  culty for women, 228, 267 
 increasing rates, 372 
 domestic political issues, 101 – 102 
 dress, modesty for women, 229 – 230 
 drug abuse, 370, 376 
 Dulles, John Foster, 50 
 Eastern Province (Sharquiyyah), 14 
 architecture, 351 – 352 
 Economic Aff airs and Energy 
Committee, 93 
 economic outreach and aid, 169 – 171 
 economy of Saudi Arabia, 137 – 171 
 agricultural industry, 144 – 145 
 animal husbandry and trading, 146 – 147 
 banking/ﬁ nancial systems, 168 – 169 
 crafts, 159 
 goals and planning cycles, 140 – 144 
 investments, 167 – 168 
 labor, 160 – 164 
 land tenure, 146 
 outreach and aid, 169 – 171 
 petroleum and natural gas, 147 – 157 
 pilgrimage income and tourism, 160 
 samphire and seawater irrigation, 146 
 taxation, 166 – 167 
 telecommunications industry, 158 
 trade and ﬁ nance, 164 – 166 
 transportation sector, 157 – 158 
 See also ﬁ ve-year development plans 
 education, 232 – 243 
 alternative education, 242 – 243 
 Aramco and, 239 
 boys’ vs. girls’ education, 233 – 234 
 CIA World Factbook data, 403 
 critiques of Islamic education, 241 – 242 
 Faysal’s support for, 54 – 55 
 international schools, 239 
 Islamic education, 240 – 241 
 length of school year, 234 – 235 
 madrasah (Islamic academies), 232 
 Qur’anic schools  (kuttab), 232 
 separate gender education, 238 – 239 
 Shi‘a higher education and activism, 
240 
 teachings about Prophet Muhammad, 
233 
 Ten-Year Educational Plan, 235, 236 
 universities, 236 – 237 
 various Ministries, 234 
 women and, 221 – 222 
 Education, Ministry of, 234 
 Educational and Scientiﬁ c Research 
Aff airs Committee, 93 
 Egypt 
 Free Offi  cers revolt, 20, 49 
 January 25th Revolution, 113 
 Saudi relations with, 111 – 113 
 Egyptian Free Offi  cers revolt (1952), 49 
 Eighth Development Plan (2005 – 2010), 
141 
 Eisenhower, Dwight D. (Eisenhower 
Doctrine), 50 
 emirates/divisions  (manatiq idariyya) of 
Saudi Arabia, 13 
 employment issues for women, 223 – 224 
 endogamy (in-group marriage), 202, 226, 
370 

 Index
524 |
 environment and pollution, 12 
 Equestrian Federation, 321 
 Etaar, Matar movie, 286 
 ethnicity vs. nationality, 201 – 202 
 etiquette, 256 – 268 
 bargaining, 266 – 267 
 business, 265 – 266 
 clothing, 262 – 264 
 coff ee rituals, 261 – 262 
 deportation/segregation of the sexes, 
264 – 265 
 evolution of, 256 
 gestures, 262 
 gifts, 262 
 greetings and initial small talk, 258 – 259 
 greetings between friends, 259 – 260 
 majlises (public etiquette), 260 
 male-female, 265 
 photographs, 267 
 respect/care for the family, 258 
 rhetorical eloquence of language, 259 
 social and linguistic expressions, 
256 – 257 
 social hierarchies, 257 
 socialization, men vs. women, 261 
 societal interweaving of Islamic cus-
toms, 258 
 virtues of modesty and chastity, 257 
 weddings and funerals, 267 – 268 
 Facebook page 
 access blocked by government, 375 – 376 
 call for Saudi Revolution (2011), 
27 – 28 
 pro-democracy activism on, 102, 327 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(1982 – 2005), 62 – 64, 80 
 Faisal ibn Abd al-Aziz al-Sa‘ud 
(1964 – 1975), 54 
 falconry, 324 – 325 
 Falluja Brigade (of the al-Qa’ida), 68 – 69 
 family and tribal inﬂ uences, 96 – 100 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82, 96, 110, 176, 
178, 187, 192, 193, 222, 364 
 fauna (animals and ﬁ sh), 10 – 11 
 Fawziya Abu Khalid, 273 
 Faysal (brother of Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd 
al-‘Aziz), 21, 22, 51 
 assumption of ﬁ nancial responsibilities, 
51, 53 
 call for Islamic leaders’ unity, 56 
 establishment of Central Planning 
Organization, 57 
 expanded role of, 83 
 Khartoum agreement with Nasser, 55 
 military, industrial modernization 
eff orts, 54 
 reform government proposals of, 52 
 support for education, 54, 55 
 Faysal ibn Turki (1843 – 1865), 20 
 FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), 
68 
 Fédération Internationale de Basketball 
(FIBA), 318 
 Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association (FIFA), 318 
 Federation of Democratic Forces, 195 
 female genital mutilation (FGM), 225, 
369 – 370 
 Fifth Development Plan (1990 – 1995), 
141, 224 
 ﬁ lms/ﬁ lm productions, 284 – 286 
 First Arab-Israeli War (1948), 20, 21 
 First Development Plan (1970 – 1975), 
140 
 First Gulf War (1991), 23 
 First National (Meeting for Intellectual) 
Dialogue (2003), 24 
 First Revelation of Muhammad (at 
Mount Hira), 17 
 Five Pillars (Islamic duties) 
 hajj (mandatory pilgrimage), 182 – 184, 
191 
 salat (daily prayers), 181 – 182 
 sawm (fasting), 182 
 shahadah (testimony of faith), 181 
 zakat (charity), 182 
 ﬁ ve-year development plans 
 Eighth Development Plan (2005 – 2010), 
141 

Index | 525
 Fifth Development Plan (1990 – 1995), 
141, 224 
 First Development Plan (1970 – 1975), 
140 
 Ninth Development Plan (2010 – 2014), 
141 
 Second Development Plan (1975 – 1980), 
140 
 Sixth Development Plan (1996 – 2000), 
141 
 Third Development Plan (1980 – 1985), 
140 – 141, 160 
 ﬂ ag of Saudi Arabia, 2 
 folk art, 281 – 282 
 folk/vernacular poetry and lyrics, 271 – 272 
 food, 305 – 316 
 Abbasid-era cooking, 30 – 306 
 Baharat (spice mix), 310 
 Basal Mahshi (stuff ed onions), 314 
 bedouin/sedentary lifestyles, 306 – 307 
 breakfast foods, 305 
 coff ee preparations, 307 – 308 
 dessert dishes, 308, 315 
 ground lamb dish, 313 
 halal (allowed/lawful) foods, 306 
 Hawaij (spice mix), 310 – 311 
 hospitality rules, 307 
 Jarish Bi-Laban (cracked wheat, yo-
gurt), 312 
 Kabsa (chicken dish), 311 
 Muff alaq (crushed wheat dish), 311 – 312 
 Qahwa Arabiyya (Arabic coff ee), 308 
 restaurant foods, 308 
 rice-based meals, 308 
 Sharab Al-Na’Na (hot mint drink), 
314 – 315 
 stuff  lamb dish, 309 – 310 
 Tumr Bi-L-Simsim recipe, 315 
 wheat breads, 308 
 Ford, Gerald, 88 
 Foreign Aff airs Committee, 93 
 Foreign Capital Investment Committee, 
166 
 foreign policy relations 
 Bahrain, 115 – 116 
 China, 126, 131 
 Egypt, 111 – 113 
 GCC states, 113 – 114 
 Iran, 108 – 111 
 Iraq, 106 – 108 
 Jordan, 121 – 122 
 Kuwait, 115 
 Lebanon, 122 – 124 
 Oman, 114 
 Palestine and Israel, 119 – 121 
 Qatar, 114 
 Russia, 126 
 Syria, 124 – 125 
 United Arab Emirates, 116 
 United States, 116 – 119 
 Yemen, 103 – 106 
 foreign workers, 209 – 212 
 as agriculture workers, 144 
 cheap housing issues, 161 – 162 
 expansion data, 160 
 money transfers made by, 143 
 population variety, 21 
 proﬁ tability of importation, 102 
 Saudization and, 163 
 treatment concerns, 72 
 urban annual growth rate, 210 
 Free Offi  cers revolt (Egypt), 20 
 funeral etiquette, 267 – 268 
 furmaliyya (male embroidered jacket), 339 
 fusha (classical Arabic), 245 – 246 
 Future Party of Lebanon, 123
 
 galith (riddiyih) (traditional music), 293 
 games, 330 – 331 
 GCC. See Gulf Cooperation Council 
 GCC states-Saudi relations, 113 – 114 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 General Organization for Social 
Insurance (GOSI), 168 – 169 
 General Organization for Technical 
Education and Vocational 
Training, 234 
 General Petroleum and Mineral 
Organization, 91 
 geography, 1 – 14 

 Index
526 |
 Arabic plant names, 11 – 12 
 climate, 10 
 deserts, 1, 3, 7 – 9, 48 
 environment and pollution, 12 
 fauna (animals and ﬁ sh), 10 – 11 
 ﬂ ora (plants), 11 – 12 
 historic and modern divisions, 12 – 14 
 petroleum geology, 5 – 7 
 provinces of Saudi Arabia, 4 
 water and desalination, 9 – 10 
 geology of petroleum, 5 – 7 
 gesture etiquette, 262 
 Gfoeller, Michael, 360 
 Ghawar oil ﬁ eld, 6 – 7 
 ghazal poetry, 270 – 271 
 Ghazi al-Gosaibi, 273 
 gift etiquette, 262 
 girls’ education, 233 – 234 
 The Girls of Riyadh (Rajaa), 278 
 Global War on Terror, 67 – 69 
 See also al-Qa‘ida terrorist group; 
Taliban (Pakistani Islamic militia 
group); terrorist attacks 
 golf, 319 
 “Good Morning Saudi Arabia ” tv show, 
375 
 government and politics, 79 – 131 
 ahl al-hal wa-l- ‘ aqd (informal structure), 
79 
 Allegiance Council, 84 
 civil service board/independent 
agencies, 94 – 95 
 Council of Ministers, 90 – 91 
 the Crown Prince, 88 – 89 
 domestic issues, 101 – 102 
 family and tribal inﬂ uences, 96 – 100 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82 
 foreign policy, 103 – 126, 131 
 House of al-Shaykh/House of Sa‘ud, 82 
 humanitarian assistance, 127 – 131 
 judiciary and legal system, 93 – 94 
 the King, 81 – 88 
 Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Council), 
91 – 93 
 national dialogue, 100 
 regional and municipal government, 95 
 the Royal Diwan, 80, 89 – 90 
 Sudayri Seven, 86 
 the ‘ ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96 
 governmental religious departments 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama, 94, 190, 
192 – 193 
 Grand Mufti, 82, 96, 108, 192 – 193 
 Permanent Committee for Islamic 
Research and Fatawa, 193 
 Grand Mosque at Mecca (terrorist 
attack), 96, 154, 361 
 Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, 82, 96, 108, 
192 – 193 
 Great Rift Valley, 1 
 The Green March (al-Faraj), 275 
 Green Party of Saudi Arabia, 101 
 greetings between friends etiquette, 
259 – 260 
 greetings/initial small talk etiquette, 
258 – 259 
 ground lamb dish, 313 
 Guantanamo detention center 
 detainee suicides, 26 
 torture by water-boarding, 363 
 guardianship 
 marriage and, 225 – 227 
 of women, 225 
 gub (children’s hood), 338 
 Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) (1981), 
22, 61, 109, 113 – 114, 242, 360 
 Gulf One Investment Bank, 168 
 Gulf Wars (Persian Gulf), 64 – 67 
 environmental threats from, 12 
 onset of ﬁ rst war (1991), 23, 64 – 65 
 reactions to, 65 – 67 
 sahwa (Islamic awakening preachers), 
362 
 Haaretz Israeli newspaper, 376 
 HAIA (religious police), 26 
 HAIA. See Committee for the Promotion 
of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice 
(CPVPV) 
 halal (allowed/lawful) foods, 306 

Index | 527
 Hanbali Sunni Muslims, 175 
 handheld electronic games, 330 – 331 
 haram (prayer hall), 344 
 Harrat Khaybar volcano, 3 
 Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (1949), 20 
 Hawaij (spice mix), 310 – 311 
 Health and Environmental Aff airs 
Committee, 93 
 health issues, 368 – 371 
 henna bodily decoration, 337 – 338 
 Higher Education, Ministry of, 234 
 Hijaz (city) architecture, 346 – 349 
 hiking/outdoor recreation, 323 – 324 
 Hinduism, 176 
 history of Saudi Arabia 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman al-
Saud, 42, 43 – 48 
 ‘Abdullah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 
69 – 73 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 62 – 64 
 ﬁ rst Saudi state, 38 – 41 
 Gulf Wars, 64 – 67 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 58 – 62 
 King Faysal, 21, 22, 51, 53 – 58 
 Muslim dynasties, 35 – 38 
 rise of Islam, 32 – 35 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 49 – 53 
 second Sa‘udi realm (1824 – 1891), 
41 – 43 
 timeline, 17 – 28 
 War on Terrorism/Global War on 
Terror, 67 – 69 
 HIV/AIDS, 370 
 Hizballah (terrorist group), 71, 111, 123 
 H1N1 ﬂ u, 370 
 Holmes, Frank, 155 
 homelessness, 376 
 horse racing (equestrian sports), 320 – 322 
 House of al-Shaykh, 82 
 House of Sa‘ud, 82 
 Hudaybiyya, truce of, 34 
 human rights, 376 
 Human Rights Watch data 
 Asian migrant workers, 211 
 capital punishment, 377 – 378 
 foreign worker labor disputes, 145, 162 
 Islamic law, 182 
 Sunni Yemeni refugees, 196 
 torture, 379 
 women’s rights, 225 – 226 
 humanitarian assistance provided by 
Saudi Arabia (2010), 127 – 131 
 hunting and falconry, 324 – 325 
 Hussein, Saddam, 22, 65 – 66, 111 
 I Don’ Wanna movie, 285 
 Ibn Saud.  See ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd 
al-Rahman al-Saud 
 ‘Id al-Adha (feast of the sacriﬁ ce), 80 
 Ikhwan Brotherhood, 19 
 “Illumination ” poem (‘Abdullah al-Faysal 
al Saud), 272 – 273 
 Imam Mohammad Bin Saud Islamic 
University, 376 
 in-group marriage (endogamy), 202 
 industries of Saudi Arabia 
 date production, 139 
 pearl industry, 139 
 inshad and mada’ih (religious music), 301 
 inshad of the mawalid (religious music), 
301 
 Institute of Islamic and Arabic Studies 
(LIPIA), 125 
 Institute of Public Administration, 234 
 “Instruction Concerning the Trade in 
Slaves ” document (1936), 204 – 205 
 Inter-Parliamentary Union (global 
association), 93 
 international aid and loans, 170 – 171 
 International Compact with Iraq, 108 
 International Conference for Dialogue 
(Muslim World League), 72 
 International Court of Justice (The 
Hague), 116 
 International Labor Organization, 376 
 International Monetary Fund (IMF), 168 
 International Olympic Committee, 319, 
322 
 international schools in Saudi Arabia, 
239 

 Index
528 |
 Internet Service Unit (King ‘Abdulaziz 
City for Science and Technology), 
375 – 376 
 investment companies, 157, 167 – 168 
 Iran 
 embargo against, 154 
 GCC concerns about, 61 
 Islamic Revolution (1979), 58, 59 
 Revolutionary Guard, 356 
 Iran-Iraqi Wars, 61 – 62, 109, 117 
 Iran-Saudi relations, 108 – 111 
 Iraq 
 attack against Iran, 61 – 62 
 Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait, 22, 66, 
118, 152 
 International Compact with Iraq, 108 
 threats against Kuwait, 21 
 Treaty of Sèvres and, 19 
 See also Operation Desert Storm; 
Operation Iraqi Freedom 
 Iraq-Saudi relations, 106 – 108 
 Islam 
 birth of Prophet Muhammad, 17 
 green as symbolic of, 2 
 Mecca as religious center, 31 
 as offi  cial religion of Saudi Arabia, 175 
 rise of, 32 – 35 
 Islamic and Judicial Aff airs and Human 
Rights Committee, 93 
 Islamic Corporation for the Development 
of the Private Sector (ICD), 169 
 Islamic Development Bank (IDB), 169 
 Islamic duties 
 charity, 182 
 daily prayers, 181 – 182 
 fasting, 182 
 independent striving of the jurist, 186 
 inheritance rules, 186 
 mandatory pilgrimage, 182 – 184 
 personal modesty, 185 
 testimony of faith, 181 
 Islamic Front for the Liberation of 
Bahrain, 61 
 Islamic law  (shari ‘ ah legal code ), 39, 80, 
94, 180 – 181 
 Islamic Revolution (Iran) (1979), 58, 59, 
108 – 109, 111 
 Islamic Solidarity Games, 319 – 320 
 Islamic University of Medina, 240 
 Islamist opposition and terrorism, 
361 – 367 
 See also terrorist attacks 
 Israel 
 First Arab-Israeli War, 20 
 Haaretz newspaper, 376 
 Palestine relations with, 119 – 121 
 Second Arab-Israeli War, 21 
 Third Arab-Israeli War, 21 
 Israeli Defense Forces, 359 
 Iwan Real Estate Development Company, 
169 
 Janadiriyyah Cultural Festival, 322 
 January 25th Revolution (2011), 113 
 Jarish Bi-Laban (cracked wheat, yogurt), 
312 
 Jeddah Cricket Association, 320 
 Jeddah Preparatory and Grammar, 239 
 Jeddah Rugby Football Club, 320 
 Jeddah United Basketball Team, 318 – 319 
 Jeddah Youth Baseball League, 320 
 Jews/Judaism, 31, 32, 72 
 Arabian peninsula population, 31 
 Muhammad’s agreements with, 34 
 Muhammad’s hope for, 33 
 promise of Jewish state, 19 
 ritual practices, 34 
 three tribes of, 32 
 Johnson, Paul M., 68 – 69, 365 
 jokes,  nawadir, short tales, 330 
 Jordan-Saudi relations, 121 – 122 
 judiciary and legal system, 93 – 94 
 Juhayman ibn Muhammad ibn Sayf 
al-‘Utaybi, 59 – 60 
 Just Words movie, 286 
 Kabsa (chicken dish), 311 
 kalam rijaal (“language of real men ” ), 334 
 Kalb tribal confederation, 36 
 Kayf al-Hal movie, 285 

Index | 529
 Kennedy, John F., 53, 117 
 khadira (nontribal free men), 202 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1975 – 1982), 
58 – 62 
 Grand Mosque takeover during reign 
of, 59 – 60 
 reconciliation with Sadat, 59 
 Second Economic Plan implementation, 
58 
 Ta‘if/Mecca summit participation, 61 
 khaliji (Gulf) music and dance, 288 
 Khawariji (Kharijite) movement, 35 – 36 
 Khobar Towers terrorist attack(1996), 
23, 67 
 Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 59 
 khutbah (sermons), 344 
 King ‘Abdul ‘Aziz City for Science and 
Technology, 153 
 King ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Library (in Riyadh), 
87 
 King Abdulaziz Arabian Horse Center, 
320 
 King Abdullah University of Science and 
Technology (KAUST), 82, 87, 148, 
163, 237 
 King Fahd Complex for the Printing of 
the Holy Qur’an (Medina), 180 
 King Fahd University of Petroleum and 
Minerals, 236 
 King Faisal Specialist Hospital, 369 
 King Khalid Military City, 359 
 King Khalid University, 236 
 King structure of Saudi Arabia, 81 – 88 
 ‘Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd al-Rahman 
al-Saud, 42, 43 – 48 
 ‘Abdullah ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 
69 – 73 
 as Custodian of the Two Holy 
Mosques, 83 
 Fahd ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud, 62 – 64 
 Khalid ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 58 – 62 
 King Faysal, 21, 22, 51, 53 – 58 
 line of succession, 47, 84 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 49 – 53 
 King’s Cup Horse Race, 320 
 Kissinger, Henry, 21, 22, 58 
 kote (male embroidered jacket), 339 
 kuﬁ yya (male skullcap), 339 
 Kuwait-Saudi relations, 115 
 kyokushin karate, 319 
 labor (workforce), 160 – 164 
 ban on strikes, collective bargaining, 
unions, 162 – 163 
 Consultative Council involvement, 162 
 Saudization policy, 163 
 types of employment, 161 
 unemployment, 160 – 161 
 women’s employment, 160 – 161, 163 
 See also foreign workers 
 language (Arabic language), 245 – 256 
 ‘amiyyah (ordinary language), 246 
 Arabic script, 248 
 bedouin dialects, 247 
 common phrases, 254 – 255 
 consonants in diff erent positions, 249 
 features of Arabic, 251 – 254 
 fusha (classical Arabic), 245 – 246 
 numbers, 250 
 pre-Islamic poetry, 246 
 vowels, diacritics, doubled letter 
symbols, 248 – 250 
 large-ensemble music, 296 – 297 
 Last Say movie, 285 
 Law on Foreign Direct Investment, 166 
 Lawrence of Arabia movie, 286 
 Lebanese Civil War, 58, 64, 123 
 Lebanon-Saudi relations, 122 – 124 
 legal and judiciary system, 93 – 94 
 leisure and entertainment 
 media entertainment, 326 – 327 
 restrictions, 326 
 shopping, 326 
 life expectancy data, 368 
 literature, 268 – 279 
 alﬁ yya (poetry form), 271 
 early-modern literature, 272 
 folk/vernacular poetry, lyrics, 271 – 272 
 ghazal poetry, 270 – 271 
 later novels, 278 – 279 

 Index
530 |
 novels (modern), 274 – 275 
 poetry (modern), 272 – 274 
 qasidah (ode form of poetry), 269 
 short stories, 275 – 277 
 theater and drama, 277 
 theater in private spaces, 279 
 liwa (leiwah) (traditional music), 295 
 Lutﬁ yya al-Khateeb (Florence 
Nightingale of Saudi Arabia), 369 
 Mada’in al-Saleh archaeological site 
attack, 365 
 madhhab (legal school) of Ahmad ibn 
Hanbal, 176 
 madrasah (Islamic academies), 232 
 Mahmud Sami al-Barudi, 272 
 Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Council), 
23, 79 – 80, 91 – 93 
 majlis al-Tarab (form of music), 291, 334 
 majlises (public etiquette), 260 
 majrur (form of music), 297 
 male-female etiquette, 265 
 Malik, Monica, 156 
 malnutrition issues (of children), 370 
 Mamluk dynasty, 37 
 manatiq idariyya (emirates/divisions) of 
Saudi Arabia, 13 
 market  (suqlaswaq) architecture, 345 – 346 
 marriage.  See women and marriage 
 martial arts, 319 
 masjid (place of bowing), 343 
 Masjid al-Haram (Holy Mosque), in 
Mecca, 346 
 matrilocal and matrilineal practices, 
218 – 219 
 Mecca’s Maiden novel (Ahmad Rida 
Houhou), 274 
 media, freedom of speech, censorship, 
374 – 376 
 medicine (traditional medicine), 12, 369 
 medicine, tribal and traditional, 332 – 333, 
369 
 men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 merchant status, 203 – 204 
 Message Movement (of Muhammad Taqi 
al-Mudarissi), 240 
 Middle East Broadcasting Corporation 
(MBC), 374 
 mihrama wa mudawara (light-colored head 
scarf), 335 
 Ministry for Islamic Aff airs, 
Endowments, Da‘wah and 
Guidance, 190 
 Ministry of Defense, 91 
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation 
(MODA), 355, 358 
 Ministry of Education, 234 
 Ministry of Higher Education, 234 
 Ministry of Justice, 91, 93 – 94 
 Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral 
Resources, 151 
 Ministry of the Interior, 91 
 Mishaal ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (Meccan 
Prince), 87 
 mizmar (form of music), 297 – 298 
 modern societal studies, 201 
 modernization and society, 209 
 mosque architecture, 343 – 345 
 Movement for Islamic Reform, 66 
 mudandash (highland long dresses), 336 
 Muff alaq (crushed wheat dish), 311 – 312 
 Muhammad Hassan ‘Awwad, 272 
 Muhammad Hayat al-Sindi (scholar), 
39 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, 38 – 41, 
81, 179, 186 – 189 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (Prophet of 
Islam) 
 birth of, in Mecca, 17, 31 
 hope for the Jews, 33 
 Islam conquest under, 13 
 ordering of removal of idols, 34 – 35 
 travel to Medina, 178 
 tribes expelled by, 34 
 Muhammad ibn Li‘bun al-Wayali, 271 
 Muhammad ibn Rashid, 42 – 43 
 Muhammara, Treaty of (1922), 1 
 mujahidin movement 

Index | 531
 attraction for new recruits, 362 
 call for jihad by, 60 
 clerical support for, 96 
 onset of activities, 22 
 Saudi funding for, 110, 125 
 Mulayda, Battle of (1891), 43 
 muralists, 283 
 musallah (place of praying), 343 
 Museum of Science and Technology in 
Islam, 237 
 music 
 as celebration, 289 
 large-ensemble music, 296 – 297 
 majlis al-Tarab form, 291 
 popular music industry, 292 
 religious forms, 289 – 290 
 songs of pilgrimage, 301 – 302 
 wedding celebrations, 289, 291 
 women’s music, 290 
 music, hijaz and asir style 
 majrur, 297 
 mizmar, 297 – 298 
 sahba, 298 
 urban music, 297 
 yanbuwiyya, 298 
 zar, 298 
 music, religious 
 adhan, 299 – 300 
 inshad and mada’ih, 301 
 inshad of the mawalid, 301 
 tajwid and qira’a, 300 
 music, traditional forms 
 aghani al-ghaws and ﬁ jiri, 294 – 295 
 al-Dawsario, 293 
 al-Samri, 294 
 ‘arda, 293 
 dewinih, 292 – 293 
 galith (riddiyih), 293 
 liwa (leiwah), 295 
 sawt, 295 – 296 
 music and dance.  See music; music, hijaz 
and asir style; music, traditional 
forms 
 Muslim Brotherhood, 101, 113 
 Muslim dynasties, 35 – 38 
 mutawa ‘ in (Committee for the 
Promotion of Virtue and the 
Prevention of Vice), 219 – 220 
 mzayyan (popular occasions), 334 
 Nabataean kingdom, 17, 30, 246 
 Najd (city) architecture, 349 – 351 
 Najd region plateau, 3 
 Najran Valley Dam, 13 
 Natana Delong-Bas (scholar), 39 
 National Charitable Institute for Home 
Health Care, 372 
 National Commission for Wildlife 
Conservation and Development 
(1986), 11 
 National Front for the Liberation of 
Saudi Arabia, 195 
 National Meeting for Intellectual 
Dialogue (2011), 94, 100 
 Nayif ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (deputy premier), 
84 
 Nehru, Jawaharlal (India), 50 
 Niblock, Tim, 156 
 9/11 Commission Report, 365 
 Ninth Development Plan (2010 – 2014), 
141 
 niqab (black face veil), 338 
 Nisa’ bila Dhil (Women without Shadow) 
movie, 285 
 Nixon, Richard, 21 
 Nkrumah, Kwame (Ghana), 50 
 “No Women No Play ” campaign, 322 
 non-Saudi Arabian Muslims, 175 
 Nonaligned Movement of Third World 
Nations (1961), 50 
 Northern Border (al-Hudud 
al-Shamaliyyah) region, 14 
 numbers (Arabic numbers), 250 
 nursing in Saudi Arabia, 369 
 Obama, Barack 
 championing of Saudi Arabia, 111 
 meeting with King ‘Abdullah, 88 

 Index
532 |
 visit to Saudi Arabia (2009), 26 
 Offi  ce of Bedouin Aff airs, 90 
 Offi  ce of the Grand Mufti, 96 
 oil (petroleum) industry, 147 – 157 
 Abqaiq oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Anglo-Persian Oil Company, 114 
 Arab Super Light (crude oil), 153 
 Arabian American Oil Company, 148 
 Aramco Mobile Oil, 114 
 California Arabian Standard Oil 
Company, 20, 148 
 California companies, 148 
 discoveries of, 46 
 Ghawar oil ﬁ eld, 6 – 7 
 global percentages of, 138 – 139 
 historical background, 148 
 loss of revenues under King Fahid, 64 
 Ministry of Oil and Petroleum 
Resources, 147 
 Nigeria vs. Saudi Arabia, 139 – 140 
 pipeline inspections, 156 
 Qatif oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Safniyya-Khaﬁ ji oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Saudi Arabian Oil Company, 148 
 Saudi Aramco Mobile Oil, 114, 
149 – 150 
 Seven Sisters (oil companies), 52 
 Seven Sisters companies, 52 
 supertankers, 155 
 tanks in Durham, Saudi Arabia, 139 
 Trans-Arabian Pipeline, 57 
 Zuluf oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Okruhlik, Gwenn, 156 
 Olympic sports participation, 319 
 Oman-Saudi relations, 114 
 Operation Desert Shield (1991), 107, 359 
 Operation Desert Storm (1991), 65, 107, 
108, 359 
 Operation Enduring Freedom (2001), 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003), 24, 118 
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Companies (OPEC) 
 boycott of, 154 
 cooperation from Iran, 67 
 crude oil production discussions, 142 
 formation (1960), 21, 52, 141, 152 
 Saudi Arabia production quota, 139 
 support for Saudi withdrawal, 57 
 Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC), 67, 85, 125 
 Ottoman Empire, 18, 19, 37 – 38, 41, 115
 
 Pablo Pérez Alfonzo, Juan, 152 
 painting and graphic design, 282 – 283 
 Palestine/Israel-Saudi relations, 119 – 121 
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 
59, 66, 107, 119 
 Palestine National Authority, 120 
 Palestinian  inﬁ tadhah, 364 
 Pasha, Midhat, 200 
 Peninsula Lions Brigades, 115 
 “People of the Book ” (Jews and Chris-
tians), 176 
 Permanent Committee for Scientiﬁ c 
Research and Legal Opinion, 96 
 Petraeus, David, 360 
 petroleum geology, 5 – 7, 46 
 Petroleum Preparatory Committee, 151 
 photograph etiquette, 267 
 photographic arts, 283 
 photography, 283 
 pilgrimage songs, 301 – 302 
 plants (ﬂ ora) and plant names, 11 – 12 
 Point Four economic aid (of the U.S.), 50 
 pollution issues, 12 
 polygyny practice, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 popular culture, 328 – 339 
 amthal, 329 – 330 
 children and men’s clothing, 338 – 339 
 clothing and historic costume, 334 – 337 
 games, 330 – 331 
 henna bodily decoration, 337 – 338 
 jokes,  nawadir, short tales, 330 
 medicine, tribal and traditional, 
332 – 333, 369 
 modern niqab and covering, 338 
 popular occasions, 334 
 practical weaving, 339 
 superstitions, 330 
 tribal law and mediation, 331 – 332 

Index | 533
 Popular Democratic Front, 195 
 Popular Literature in the Arabian Penin-
sula (‘Abdullah ibn Khamis), 274 
 poverty in Saudi Arabia, 212 
 The Price of Sacriﬁ ce (Damanhouri), 274 
 Prince Salman Center for Disability 
Research, 170 
 Prince Sultan College for Tourist and 
Hotel Management, 325 
 Princess Amira al-Taweel, 372 
 Princess Moodi bint ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 372 
 Princess Nouf bint Bandar al-Sa‘ud, 372 
 Princess Sarah bint Talal ibn ‘Abd al-
‘Aziz, 373 
 private sector and the state (economy) 
 Arabian Business 2009 Rich List, 158 
 crafts, 159 
 pilgrimage income and tourism, 160 
 Public Administration, Institute of, 234 
 public health issues, 369 
 Public Investment Fund (PIF), 167 
 Qabyala (tribal status), 202 
 Qadhdhaﬁ , Mu‘ammar (of Libya), 57 
 Qahwa Arabiyya (Arabic coff ee), 308 
 Qasim region, 14 
 Qatar-Saudi relations, 114 
 Qatif Girl rape case, 26, 71, 94 
 Qatif oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 qiblah (direction of prayer), 344 
 Qur’an, 29 
 as basis of government, 80 
 beliefs about Christianity, 177 
 fatawa based on, 176 
 impact on literature, 270 
 jihad-based revelations, 33 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah’s revelation, 
32 
 on racial relations, 205 – 206 
 theological importance of, 178 – 179 
 Qur’anic schools  (kuttab), 232 
 Quraysh clan, 35 
 racial relations, 205 – 206 
 Ramadan, 80 
 Ramadan War (1973), 112 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif, ” 26, 71, 94, 229 
 Rashidun (Rightly Guided) Caliphate, 17 
 Reagan, Ronald, 123 
 The Red Devils (al-Faraj), 275 
 Red Sea, 1, 3, 8, 9, 10 – 11 
 religion and law, 175 – 195 
 Buddhism, 72, 176 
 competing ideologies, 194 – 195 
 Council of Senior ‘Ulama, 190 
 fatawa (legal responses), 82, 176, 178 
 government religious departments, 
190 – 193 
 Hinduism, 176 
 Islamic duties, 181 – 186 
 Islamic law, 39, 80, 94, 180 – 181 
 Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, 
38 – 41, 81, 179, 186 – 189 
 Suﬁ  Muslim traditions, 175, 179, 187, 
189, 195, 301 
 Sunni Muslims, 102, 175 – 176, 304 
 the  ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96, 
189 – 190, 203 
 Wahhabism, 39, 95, 128, 143, 180, 189, 
367 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims, 176 
 See also Christianity; Jews/Judaism; 
Qur’an; Shi‘a Muslims 
 religious feasts, 80 
 religious forms of music, 289 – 290 
 religious minorities, 204 
 Religious Research, Missionary Activities 
and Guidance Department, 90 
 respect/care for the family etiquette, 258 
 restrictions on women, 222 – 223 
 Revolutionary Guard (Iran), 356 
 Rice, Condoleezza, 71, 120 
 Ridda, Wars of, 35 
 “Rights and Duties ” of Basic Law, 80 – 81 
 Riyadh region, 14 
 Al-Masmak Fort, 38 
 Cricket Association, 320 
 International School, 239 
 Rugby Football Club, 320 
 Television network, 375 

 Index
534 |
 terrorist attacks, 23, 24, 25, 118 
 Rogers Plan (of U.S.), 56 
 Royal Decree No. 91 (March, 1992), 92 
 Royal Diwan, 89 – 90 
 Royal Family, 212 – 213 
 Royal Saudi Air Defense, 355 
 Royal Saudi Land Forces (RSLF), 355, 
356, 357 – 358 
 Royal Saudi Navy, 355 
 Rub ‘al-Khali Desert (Empty Quarter), 1, 
7 – 8, 23, 40 
 rugby, 320 
 rules and expectations for women, 
224 – 225 
 Rumsfeld, Donald, 24, 365 
 Russia-Saudi relations, 126 
 Sabaean civilization, 17 
 SABIC (Saudi Arabian Basic Industries 
Corporation), 150, 157, 273 
 Sadat, Anwar, 59, 62 
 Safniyya-Khaﬁ ji oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 SAGIA (Saudi Arabian General 
Investment Authority), 166, 167 
 sahba (form of music), 298 
 sahwa (Islamic Awakening), 95, 101, 362 
 salaﬁ  movement, 59 – 60 
 salaﬁ yya (religious purists), 80 
 Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (Saladin), 37 
 Saleh terrorist attacks (2007), 26 
 Sassanid Empire (Sassanians), 30 – 31, 35 
 Sa‘ud ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (1953 – 1964) (son 
of ‘Abd al-Aziz), 49 – 53 
 Saudi Arabia Equestrian Federation, 320 
 Saudi Arabian Airlines Corporation, 167 
 Saudi Arabian Basic Industries Corpora-
tion (SABIC), 150, 157, 273 
 Saudi Arabian Basketball Federation, 
318 
 Saudi Arabian ﬂ ag, 2 
 Saudi Arabian General Investment Au-
thority (SAGIA), 166, 167 
 Saudi Arabian Maritime International 
Transport Company, 151 
 Saudi Arabian Mining Company, 151 
 Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency 
(SAMA), 27, 91, 168 
 Saudi Arabian National Commercial 
Bank, 168 
 Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG), 
87, 91, 163, 242, 355, 356, 357 – 358 
 Saudi Arabian Oil Company, 148 
 Saudi Arabian Riyal Interbank Express 
(SARIE) system, 169 
 Saudi Aramco Mobile Oil, 114, 149 – 150 
 Saudi Cancer Registry, 371 
 Saudi Chevron Petrochemical, 151 
 Saudi Commission for Tourism and An-
tiquities, 323 
 Saudi Communications Commission, 376 
 Saudi Cricket Center (in Jeddah), 320 
 Saudi Development Fund (SDF), 170 – 171 
 Saudi Fund for Development, 112 
 Saudi Geological Survey, 151 
 Saudi-girl.blog, 376 
 Saudi National Day, 80 
 Saudi Public Transportation Company, 
157 
 Saudi Revolution Facebook page, 27 
 Saudi Royal Air Force, 358 
 Saudi Royal Guard, 355 
 Saudi War College, 107 
 SAUDIA national airline, 157 – 158 
 Saudization policy, of labor, 163 
 sawt (traditional music), 295 – 296 
 Schwarzkopf, Norman, 104 
 script (Arabic language), 248 
 Second Arab-Israeli War (1967), 21 
 Second Development Plan (1975 – 1980), 
140 
 Second Economic Plan implementation 
(1958), 58 
 Security Aff airs Committee, 93 
 segregation of women, 219 
 Selim I (Ottoman sultan), 37 
 separate gender education, 238 – 239 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, 23, 
118, 237 
 servants employed by women, 230 
 Seven Sisters (oil companies), 52 

Index | 535
 Sèvres, Treaty of (1920), 19 
 Shadow movie, 285 
 Shakespear, William Henry Irvine, 45 
 Shammar tribe, 87, 200 
 Sharab Al-Na’Na (hot mint drink), 
314 – 315 
 Shari ‘ ah compliant bonds  (sukuk), 142 
 shari ‘ ah legal code.  See Islamic law 
 (shari ‘ ah legal code ) 
 Shayba oil ﬁ eld, 7 
 Shi‘a Muslims, 36, 60, 100 
 ‘Ashura religious holiday, 36 
 attacks on, 110 
 in Bahrain, 115 
 and higher education, 240 
 Iran activism and, 109 
 population data, 175 
 religious practices, 300 
 in Saudi Arabia, 193 – 194 
 social status of, 204 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims, 176 
 shillahat (male body shirt), 338 
 shotokan karate, 319 
 Shura Council of the Hijaz (1927), 92 
 The Silk Road (Raja ‘al-Alim), 278 
 Six-Day (June War) War (1967), 56, 112 
 Sixth Development Plan (1996 – 2000), 
141 
 The Slave Trade Today (Le Schiave 
Esistona Accora) movie, 286 
 slaves and slavery (‘ ubudiyya ) 
 abolishment of (1962), 21 
 Faysal’s help in abolition of, 52 
 historical background, 31, 34 
 Islam and, 204 – 205 
 pearl ﬁ shing by, 8, 52 
 A Slit in the Night’s Attire (Ibrahim 
al-Nasser), 274 – 275 
 soccer (football), 318 
 Social, Family, and Youth Aff airs 
Committee, 93 
 social classes and ethnicity, 199 – 213 
 age, 207 – 208 
 bias in social information, 200 – 201 
 endogamy, 202 
 endogamy (in-group marriage), 202, 
226, 370 
 ethnicity vs. nationality, 201 – 202 
 foreign workers, 209 – 212 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 merchants, 203 – 204 
 modern societal studies, 201 
 modernization and society, 209 
 poverty, 212 
 racial relations, 205 – 206 
 religious elite, 203 
 religious minorities, 204 
 the Royal Family, 212 – 213 
 slavery, 204 – 205 
 traditional social values, 206 – 207 
 tribal values, 203 
 tribalism, 202 
 social equivalence and women, 227 – 228 
 social information biases, 200 – 201 
 social values, traditional, 206 – 207 
 solitary games, 319 – 320 
 songs of pilgrimage, 301 – 302 
 Soviet Union 
 invasion of Afghanistan, 60 
 withdrawal from Afghanistan, 22 
 sports 
 auto racing, 322 
 basketball, 318 – 319 
 camel racing, 322 
 cricket and baseball, 320 
 golf, 319 
 horse racing, equestrian sports, 
320 – 322 
 hunting and falconry, 324 – 325 
 Islamic solitary games, 319 – 320 
 martial arts, 319 
 Olympic participation, 319 
 rugby, 320 
 soccer (football), 318 
 Third Development Plan, 317 – 318 
 tourism, camping, hiking, outdoor 
recreation, 323 – 324 
 See also leisure and entertainment 
 Standard Oil of California (SOCAL), 148 
 statehood establishment 

 Index
536 |
 ﬁ rst Sa‘udi sate, 38 – 41 
 second Sa‘udi realm, 41 – 43 
 Statute of Principles, Temporary 
Conﬁ nement, and Preventive 
Detention, 93 
 studio art, 282 
 Sudayri Seven (sons of Ibn Sa‘ud and 
Hussah al-Sudayri), 86, 88 
 Suez (Tripartite) War, 21, 49 – 50 
 Suﬁ  Muslim traditions, 175, 179, 187, 189, 
195, 301 
 Sukarno (Indonesia), 50 
 Sultan bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Sa‘ud (Crown 
Prince), 88 – 89 
 Sunni Muslims, 102, 175 – 176, 304 
 Sunrise/Sunset movie, 285 
 superstitions, 330 
 Supreme Committee for Educational 
Policy, 234 
 Supreme Council for Petroleum and 
Mineral Aff airs, 153 
 Supreme Council of Islamic Aff airs 
(al-Majlis al-‘A’la lil-Shu‘un 
Islamiyyah), 96 
 Supreme Economic Council, 167 
 Supreme Judicial Council, 91 
 suqlaswaq (markets), 345 – 346 
 Sykes-Picot Treaty, 19 
 Syria-Saudi relations, 124 – 125 
 Syrian Desert, 1, 7, 48 
 Ta‘if, Treaty of (1934), 20, 58, 64, 123 
 tajwid and qira’a (religious music), 300 
 Taliban (Pakistani Islamic militia group), 
67, 70, 110, 364 
 Tapline (Trans-Arabian Pipeline), 57 
 Taqi al-Din ibn Ahmad Ibn Taymiyya 
(scholar, law teacher), 39 
 tawb aswad (ladies black dress), 336 
 taxation, 166 – 167 
 telecommunications industry, 158 
 The Temperamental Revenge novel 
(Mohammad Nour ‘Abdullah al-
Jawhari), 274 
 Ten-Year Educational Plan, 235, 236 
 terrorist attacks 
 at ABB-Lummus offi  ces (2004), 25 
 al-Khobar suicide bomber (2001), 24 
 American embassies (Kenya and 
Tanzania), 67 
 beheading of Paul M. Johnson, 68 – 69, 
365 
 British Airways, 24 
 French tourists in Saleh (2007), 26, 365 
 Grand Mosque at Mecca, 96, 154, 361 
 Khobar Towers (1996), 23, 67 
 Mada’in al-Saleh attack, 365 
 police arrests (2002), 364 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif, ” 26, 71, 74 
 in Riyadh, 23, 24, 25, 118 
 USS  Cole (2000), 23, 67, 104 
 Vinelli Corporation, 363 
 See also al-Qa‘ida terrorist group; Hiz-
ballah; Taliban 
 Texas Oil Company, 148 
 Thatcher, Margaret, 63 
 theater and drama, 277 
 There Is No Shadow beneath the Mountain 
(Fouad Abd al-Hamid Anqawi), 275 
 Third Arab-Israeli (Ramadan or October) 
War (1973), 21 
 Third Development Plan (1980 – 1985), 
140 – 141, 160 
 Third National Dialogue Meeting (2004), 
25, 100 
 Three Men and a Woman movie, 285 
 tiba nabawi (medicine of the Prophet), 332 
 tourism, camping, hiking, outdoor recre-
ation, 323 – 324 
 trade and ﬁ nance 
 arms purchases, 165 
 export data, 164 – 165 
 public debt, 166 
 stock exchange data, 165 – 166 
 traffi  cking of children, 376 
 Transitional Ruling Council, 87 
 Transportation, Communications, and In-
formation Technology Committee, 93 
 transportation industries, 157 
 tribalism (tribal affi  liation), 202 

Index | 537
 law and mediation, 331 – 332 
 traditional medicine and, 332 – 333 
 values of, 203 
 Tripartite (Suez) War (1956), 21, 49 – 50 
 Twelver Shi‘a, 175 – 176 
 The Twins novel (‘Abd al-Qaddous 
al-Ansary), 274 
 Twitchell, Karl, 155 
 Two Holy Places (Saudi Arabia), 357 
 Uhud, Battle of (625), 17 
 ‘ulama (religious leaders), 95 – 96, 178, 
189 – 190, 203, 222 
 Ummayyad Caliphate, 17, 36, 177 – 178 
 Umm al-Qura University, 240 
 Umm al-Radhuma mountainous forma-
tion, 4 – 5 
 UN Board on Women, 373 
 UN Special Rapporteur on Violence 
against Women, 26 
 unani-tibb (tribal/traditional medicine), 
332 
 Unforgettable Memories (al-Faraj), 275 
 United Arab Emirates-Saudi relations, 
116, 152 
 United Azizia Panda (supermarket man-
agement), 164 
 United Nations Division for the Advance-
ment of Women, 227 
 United Nations Organisation Contre La 
Torture, 377 
 United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA), 373 
 United Nations Relief and Work Agency 
for Palestinian Refugees in the Near 
East (UNRWA), 121 – 122, 170 
 United States 
 Act for International Development, 50 
 American embassy attacks, 67 
 assassination of bin Laden, 28 
 attacks on American embassies, 67 – 68 
 Camp David Accords, 22, 59 
 female students traveling to, 223 
 Operation Enduring Freedom, 23 
 Operation Iraqi Freedom, 24 
 Rogers Plan, 56 
 Rogers Plan proposal, 56 
 sale of ﬁ ghter jets to Saudi Arabia, 58 
 Saudi economic alliances, 138 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attack, 
23 
 USS  Cole terrorist attack, 23, 67, 104 
 United States-Saudi relations, 116 – 119 
 universities of Saudi Arabia, 82, 87, 148, 
163, 236 – 237 
 urban music, 297 
 urbanization outcomes, for Saudi Arabia, 
209 
 ‘urf (tribal law), 331 – 332 
 U.S. Marine Corp Technical Assistance 
Field Team, 242 
 U.S. Military Training Mission, 359, 365 
 U.S. Military Training Mission 
(USMTM), 242 
 U.S.-Saudi Arabian Joint Economic 
Commission (JECOR), 117 
 U.S Army Medical College, 243 
 USS  Cole terrorist attack (2000), 23, 67, 
104 
 Utayba tribe (of Juhayman), 60 
 ‘Utaybi uprising (1979), 362 
 Uyayri network of al-Qa’-ida, 364 – 365 
 video games, 330 – 331 
 Vinelli Corporation terrorist attack, 363 
 virginity, expectations of women, 
224 – 225 
 visual art and ﬁ lm, 281 – 286 
 calligraphic arts, 282 
 ﬁ lm, 284 – 286 
 folk art, 281 – 282 
 muralists, 283 
 painting, graphic design, 282 – 283 
 photography, 283 
 studio art evolution, 282 
 young artists, 283 – 284 
 Voice of Saudi Women (political rights 
group), 376 
 vowel diacritics/double letter symbols 
(Arabic language), 248 

 Index
538 |
 Wahhabism, 39, 95, 128, 143, 180, 189, 
367 
 Wajiha al-Huwaidar, 373 – 374 
 Walid I, 36 
 War College, 243 
 War on Terrorism, 67 – 69 
 See also al-Qa‘ida terrorist group; 
Taliban (Pakistani Islamic militia 
group); terrorist attacks 
 Wars of Ridda, 35 
 water and desalination issues, 9 – 10 
 Water and Public Facilities and Services 
Committee, 93 
 water-boarding (torture) at Guantanamo, 
363 
 water desalinization plants, 157 
 wedding celebration music, 289, 291 
 weddings and funerals etiquette, 267 – 268 
 “When I Am with You ” poem (Ghazi 
al-Gosaibi), 273 
 women 
 age and status, 207 
 business and education rights, 373 
 education and, 221 – 222 
 expectations of virginity, 224 – 225 
 female genital mutilation, 225 
 gender and social status, 208 – 209 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 harassment of, 218 – 220 
 harsh rulings against, 193 
 hijab (Islamic head covering), 208 – 209 
 polygyny and, 185, 219, 227 – 228 
 rape of “Girl from Qatif, ” 26, 71, 94, 
229 
 social transformation and, 372 – 374 
 women and marriage, 218 – 230 
 abuse of women, 229 
 divorce, 228, 267 
 employment, 223 – 224 
 expansion of opportunities, 223 
 gender equity issues, 220 
 guardianship, 225 
 guardianship and marriage, 225 – 227 
 historical role of women, 218 – 219 
 modesty in dress, 229 – 230 
 restrictions, 222 – 223 
 rules and expectations, 224 – 225 
 servants, 230 
 social equivalence and polygyny, 
227 – 228 
 Women without Shadows movie, 286 
 women’s music, 290 
 
yanbuwiyya (form of music), 298 
 yasa legal code, 39 
 Yazid caliphate, 36 
 Yemen 
 Civil War, 53 
 formation of People’s Democratic Re-
public, 55 
 Saudi relations with, 103 – 106 
 Yom Kippur War (1973), 148 
 young artists, 283 – 284 
 Youth Olympics, 319 
 zabun (princess-cut ankle-length dress), 
335 
 zaff at al-shibshib (festive bridal proces-
sion), 337 
 Zahra Breast Cancer Association, 371 
 zar (form of music), 298 
 Zaydi Shi‘a Muslims (in Yemen), 176 
 Zionists (Zionism), 19 
 ziyadah (open space converted to prayer 
area), 344 – 345 
 Zuluf oil ﬁ eld, 7 

