SCHAUM'S. 
outlines 
Feedback and
Control System
Third Edition 
Joseph J. DiStefano III, PhD
Departments of Computer Science and Medicine 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Allen /?. Stubberud, PhD
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of California, Irvine 
Ivan J. Williams, PhD
Space and Technology Group, TRW, Inc. 
Schaum's Outline Series 
New York 
Chicago 
San Francisco Athens 
London Madrid 
Mexico City 
Milan 
New Delhi 
Singapore 
Sydney 
Toronto 

JOSEPH J. DiSTEFANO III received his MS in Control Systems and PhD in Biocybernetics from the University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA) in 1966. He is currently professor of Computer Science and Medicine, director of the Biocybernetics Research Laboratory, and chair 
of the Cybernetics Interdepartmental Program at UCLA. He is also on the Editorial boards of Annals of Biomedical Engineering and Optimal 
Control Applications and Methods, and is Editor and Founder of the Modeling Methodology Forum in the American Jo urnals of Physiology. He 
is author of more than 100 research articles and books and is actively involved in systems modeling theory and software development as well as 
experimental laboratory research in physiology. 
ALLEN R. STUBBERUD was awarded a BS degree from the University of Idaho, and the MS and PhD degrees from the University of 
California, Los Angeles (UCLA). He is presently professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of California, Irvine. 
Dr. Stubberud is the author of over 100 articles and books, and belongs to a number of professional and technical organizations, including the 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA). He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and 
the American Association of the Advancement of Sciences (AAAS). 
IVAN J. WILLIAMS was awarded BS, MS, and PhD degrees by the University of California at Berkeley. He has instructed courses in control 
systems engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and is presently a project manager at the Space and Technology 
Group of TRW, Inc. 
Appendix C is jointly copyrighted © 1995 by McGraw-Hill, Inc. and Mathsoft, Inc. 
Copyright © 2014, 2012 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, 
no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the 
prior written permission of the publisher, with the exception that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, 
but they may not be reproduced for publication. 
ISBN: 978-0-07-183076-8 
MHID: 0-07-183076-6 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-182948-9, 
MHID: 0-07-182948-2. 
eBook conversion by codeMantra 
Version 1.0 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, 
we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where 
such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate 
training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com. 
Trademarks: McGraw-Hill Education, the McGraw-Hill Education logo, Schaum's, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered 
trademarks of McGraw-Hill Education and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without written 
permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. McGraw-Hill Education is not associated with any product or 
vendor mentioned in this book. 
TERMS OF USE 
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these 
terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, 
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or 
sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education's prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and 
personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED "AS IS." McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRAN­
TIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, 
INCLUDING ANY 
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND 
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or 
guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither 
McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the 
work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through 
the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, 
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even i f any of them has been advised of the possibility 
of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or 
otherwise. 

Visit 
www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter 
to view Schaum's 
problem-solving videos 
FREE! 
To access video content, input the ISBN: 0-07-182948-2 
at http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/ 
Watch and hear instructors explain 
problems step-by-step 
Learn valuable problem-solving 
techniques 
Find out how to tackle common 
problem types 
Get the benefits of a real 
classroom experience 
Check out the full range of Schaum's resources available from McGraw-Hill Education @ Schaums.com. 
Learn More. Do More: 
MHPR0FESSI0NAL.COM 

Preface 
Feedback processes abound in nature and, over the last few decades, the word feedback, like 
computer, has found its way into our language far more pervasively than most others of technological 
origin. The conceptual framework for the theory of feedback and that of the discipline in which it is 
embedded—control systems engineering-have developed only since World War II. When our first 
edition was published, in 1967, the subject of linear continuous-time (or analog) control systems had 
already attained a high level of maturity, and it was (and remains) often designated classical control by 
the conoscienti. This was also the early development period for the digital computer and discrete-time 
data control processes and applications, during which courses and books in "sampled-data" control 
systems became more prevalent. Computer-controlled and digital control systems are now the terminol­
ogy of choice for control systems that include digital computers or microprocessors. 
In this second edition, as in the first, we present a concise, yet quite comprehensive, treatment of 
the fundamentals of feedback and control system theory and applications, for engineers, physical, 
biological and behavioral scientists, economists, mathematicians and students of these disciplines. 
Knowledge of basic calculus, and some physics are the only prerequisites. The necessary mathematical 
tools beyond calculus, and the physical and nonphysical principles and models used in applications, are 
developed throughout the text and in the numerous solved problems. 
We have modernized the material in several significant ways in this new edition. We have first of all 
included discrete-time (digital) data signals, elements and control systems throughout the book, 
primarily in conjunction with treatments of their continuous-time (analog) counterparts, rather than in 
separate chapters or sections. In contrast, these subjects have for the most part been maintained 
pedagogically distinct in most other textbooks. Wherever possible, we have integrated these subjects, at 
the introductory level, in a unified exposition of continuous-time and discrete-time control system 
concepts. The emphasis remains on continuous-time and linear control systems, particularly in the 
solved problems, but we believe our approach takes much of the mystique out of the methodologic 
differences between the analog and digital control system worlds. In addition, we have updated and 
modernized the nomenclature, introduced state variable representations (models) and used them in a 
strengthened chapter introducing nonlinear control systems, as well as in a substantially modernized 
chapter introducing advanced control systems concepts. We have also solved numerous analog and 
digital control system analysis and design problems using special purpose computer software, illustrat­
ing the power and facility of these new tools. 
The book is designed for use as a text in a formal course, as a supplement to other textbooks, as a 
reference or as a self-study manual. The quite comprehensive index and highly structured format should 
facilitate use by any type of readership. Each new topic is introduced either by section or by chapter, 
and each chapter concludes with numerous solved problems consisting of extensions and proofs of the 
theory, and applications from various fields. 
Los Angeles, Irvine and 
Redondo Beach, California 
March, 1990 
JOSEPH J . DISTEFANO, I I I 
A L L E N R. S T U B B E R U D 
I V A N J . W I L L I A M S 

Contents 
Chapter 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 
Control Systems: What They Are 
1 
1.2 
Examples of Control Systems 
2 
1.3 
Open-Loop and Closed-Loop Control Systems 
3 
1.4 
Feedback 
4 
1.5 
Characteristics of Feedback 
4 
1.6 
Analog and Digital Control Systems 
4 
1.7 
The Control Systems Engineering Problem 
6 
1.8 
Control System Models or Representations 
6 
Chapter 
2 
CONTROL SYSTEMS TERMINOLOGY 
15 
2.1 
Block Diagrams: Fundamentals 
15 
2.2 
Block Diagrams of Continuous (Analog) Feedback Control Systems 
16 
2.3 
Terminology of the Closed-Loop Block Diagram 
17 
2.4 
Block Diagrams of Discrete-Time (Sampled-Data, Digital) Components, 
Control Systems, and Computer-Controlled Systems 
18 
2.5 
Supplementary Terminology 
20 
2.6 
Servomechanisms 
22 
2.7 
Regulators 
23 
Chapter 
3 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS, DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS, AND 
LINEAR SYSTEMS 
39 
3.1 
System Equations 
39 
3.2 
Differential Equations and Difference Equations 
39 
3.3 
Partial and Ordinary Differential Equations 
40 
3.4 
Time Variability and Time Invariance 
40 
3.5 
Linear and Nonlinear Differential and Difference Equations 
41 
3.6 
The Differential Operator D and the Characteristic Equation 
41 
3.7 
Linear Independence and Fundamental Sets 
42 
3.8 
Solution of Linear Constant-Coefficient Ordinary Differential Equations 
44 
3.9 
The Free Response 
44 
3.10 The Forced Response 
45 
3.11 The Total Response 
46 
3.12 The Steady State and Transient Responses 
46 
3.13 Singularity Functions: Steps, Ramps, and Impulses 
47 
3.14 Second-Order Systems 
48 
3.15 State Variable Representation of Systems Described by Linear 
Differential Equations 
49 
3.16 Solution of Linear Constant-Coefficient Difference Equations 
51 
3.17 State Variable Representation of Systems Described by Linear 
Difference Equations 
54 
3.18 Linearity and Superposition 
56 
3.19 Causality and Physically Realizable Systems 
57 

C O N T E N T S 
Chapter 
4 
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM AND THE z-TRANSFORM 
74 
4.1 
Introduction 
74 
4.2 
The Laplace Transform 
74 
4.3 
The Inverse Laplace Transform 
75 
4.4 
Some Properties of the Laplace Transform and Its Inverse 
75 
4.5 
Short Table of Laplace Transforms 
78 
4.6 
Application of Laplace Transforms to the Solution of Linear 
Constant-Coefficient Differential Equations 
79 
4.7 
Partial Fraction Expansions 
83 
4.8 
Inverse Laplace Transforms Using Partial Fraction Expansions 
85 
4.9 
The z-Transform 
86 
4.10 Determining Roots of Polynomials 
93 
4.11 Complex Plane: Pole-Zero Maps 
95 
4.12 Graphical Evaluation of Residues 
96 
4.13 Second-Order Systems 
98 
Chapter 
5 
STABILITY 
114 
5.1 
Stability Definitions 
114 
5.2 
Characteristic Root Locations for Continuous Systems 
114 
5.3 
Routh Stability Criterion 
115 
5.4 
Hurwitz Stability Criterion 
116 
5.5 
Continued Fraction Stability Criterion 
117 
5.6 
Stability Criteria for Discrete-Time Systems 
117 
Chapter 
6 
TRANSFER FUNCTIONS 
128 
6.1 
Definition of a Continuous System Transfer Function 
128 
6.2 
Properties of a Continuous System Transfer Function 
129 
6.3 
Transfer Functions of Continuous Control System Compensators 
and Controllers 
129 
6.4 
Continuous System Time Response 
130 
6.5 
Continuous System Frequency Response 
130 
6.6 
Discrete-Time System Transfer Functions, Compensators 
and Time Responses 
132 
6.7 
Discrete-Time System Frequency Response 
133 
6.8 
Combining Continuous-Time and Discrete-Time Elements 
134 
Chapter 
7 
BLOCK DIAGRAM ALGEBRA AND TRANSFER FUNCTIONS 
OF SYSTEMS 
154 
7.1 
Introduction 
154 
7.2 
Review of Fundamentals 
154 
7.3 
Blocks in Cascade 
155 
7.4 
Canonical Form of a Feedback Control System 
156 
7.5 
Block Diagram Transformation Theorems 
156 
7.6 
Unity Feedback Systems 
158 
7.7 
Superposition of Multiple Inputs 
159 
7.8 
Reduction of Complicated Block Diagrams 
160 
Chapter 
8 
SIGNAL FLOW GRAPHS 
179 
8.1 
Introduction 
179 
8.2 
Fundamentals of Signal Flow Graphs 
179 

C O N T E N T S 
8.3 
Signal Flow Graph Algebra 
180 
8.4 
Definitions 
181 
8.5 
Construction of Signal Flow Graphs 
182 
8.6 
The General Input-Output Gain Formula 
184 
8.7 
Transfer Function Computation of Cascaded Components 
186 
8.8 
Block Diagram Reduction Using Signal Flow Graphs and the General 
Input-Output Gain Formula 
187 
Chapter 
9 
SYSTEM SENSITIVITY MEASURES AND CLASSIFICATION 
OF FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
208 
9.1 
Introduction 
208 
9.2 
Sensitivity of Transfer Functions and Frequency Response Functions 
to System Parameters 
208 
9.3 
Output Sensitivity to Parameters for Differential and Difference 
Equation Models 
213 
9.4 
Classification of Continuous Feedback Systems by Type 
214 
9.5 
Position Error Constants for Continuous Unity Feedback Systems 
215 
9.6 
Velocity Error Constants for Continuous Unity Feedback Systems 
216 
9.7 
Acceleration Error Constants for Continuous Unity Feedback Systems 
217 
9.8 
Error Constants for Discrete Unity Feedback Systems 
217 
9.9 
Summary Table for Continuous and Discrete-Time Unity Feedback Systems . . 
217 
9.10 Error Constants for More General Systems 
218 
Chapter 
10 
ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS: 
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
230 
10.1 
Introduction 
230 
10.2 
Objectives of Analysis 
230 
10.3 
Methods of Analysis 
230 
10.4 
Design Objectives 
231 
10.5 
System Compensation 
235 
10.6 
Design Methods 
236 
10.7 
The vv-Transform for Discrete-Time Systems Analysis and Design Using 
Continuous System Methods 
236 
10.8 
Algebraic Design of Digital Systems, Including Deadbeat Systems 
238 
Chapter 
11 
NYQUIST ANALYSIS 
246 
11.1 
Introduction 
246 
11.2 
Plotting Complex Functions of a Complex Variable 
246 
11.3 
Definitions 
247 
11.4 
Properties of the Mapping P{s) or P(z) 
249 
11.5 
Polar Plots 
250 
11.6 
Properties of Polar Plots 
252 
11.7 
The Nyquist Path 
253 
11.8 
The Nyquist Stability Plot 
256 
11.9 
Nyquist Stability Plots of Practical Feedback Control Systems 
256 
11.10 The Nyquist Stability Criterion 
260 
11.11 Relative Stability 
262 
11.12 M - and N-Circles 
263 

C O N T E N T S 
Chapter 12 
NYQUIST DESIGN 
299 
12.1 
Design Philosophy 
299 
12.2 
Gain Factor Compensation 
299 
12.3 
Gain Factor Compensation Using M-Circles 
301 
12.4 
Lead Compensation 
302 
12.5 
Lag Compensation 
304 
12.6 
Lag-Lead Compensation 
306 
12.7 
Other Compensation Schemes and Combinations of Compensators 
308 
Chapter 
13 
ROOT-LOCUS ANALYSIS 
319 
13.1 
Introduction 
319 
13.2 
Variation of Closed-Loop System Poles: The Root-Locus 
319 
13.3 
Angle and Magnitude Criteria 
320 
13.4 
Number of Loci 
321 
13.5 
Real Axis Loci 
321 
13.6 
Asymptotes 
322 
13.7 
Breakaway Points 
322 
13.8 
Departure and Arrival Angles 
323 
13.9 
Construction of the Root-Locus 
324 
13.10 The Closed-Loop Transfer Function and the Time-Domain Response 
326 
13.11 Gain and Phase Margins from the Root-Locus 
328 
13.12 Damping Ratio from the Root-Locus for Continuous Systems 
329 
Chapter 
14 
ROOT-LOCUS DESIGN 
343 
14.1 
The Design Problem 
343 
14.2 
Cancellation Compensation 
344 
14.3 
Phase Compensation: Lead and Lag Networks 
344 
14.4 
Magnitude Compensation and Combinations of Compensators 
345 
14.5 
Dominant Pole-Zero Approximations 
348 
14.6 
Point Design 
352 
14.7 
Feedback Compensation 
353 
Chapter 
15 
BODE ANALYSIS 
364 
15.1 
Introduction 
364 
15.2 
Logarithmic Scales and Bode Plots 
364 
15.3 
The Bode Form and the Bode Gain for Continuous-Time Systems 
365 
15.4 
Bode Plots of Simple Continuous-Time Frequency Response Functions 
and Their Asymptotic Approximations 
365 
15.5 
Construction of Bode Plots for Continuous-Time Systems 
371 
15.6 
Bode Plots of Discrete-Time Frequency Response Functions 
373 
15.7 
Relative Stability 
375 
15.8 
Closed-Loop Frequency Response 
376 
15.9 
Bode Analysis of Discrete-Time Systems Using the w-Transform 
377 
Chapter 
16 
BODE DESIGN 
387 
16.1 
Design Philosophy 
387 
16.2 
Gain Factor Compensation 
387 
16.3 
Lead Compensation for Continuous-Time Systems 
388 
16.4 
Lag Compensation for Continuous-Time Systems 
392 
16.5 
Lag-Lead Compensation for Continuous-Time Systems 
393 
16.6 
Bode Design of Discrete-Time Systems 
395 

C O N T E N T S 
Chapter 
17 
NICHOLS CHART ANALYSIS 
411 
17.1 
Introduction 
411 
17.2 db Magnitude-Phase Angle Plots 
411 
17.3 
Construction of db Magnitude-Phase Angle Plots 
411 
17.4 
Relative Stability 
416 
17.5 
The Nichols Chart 
417 
17.6 
Closed-Loop Frequency Response Functions 
419 
Chapter 
18 
NICHOLS CHART DESIGN 
433 
18.1 
Design Philosophy 
433 
18.2 
Gain Factor Compensation 
433 
18.3 
Gain Factor Compensation Using Constant Amplitude Curves 
434 
18.4 
Lead Compensation for Continuous-Time Systems 
435 
18.5 
Lag Compensation for Continuous-Time Systems 
438 
18.6 
Lag-Lead Compensation 
440 
18.7 
Nichols Chart Design of Discrete-Time Systems 
443 
Chapter 
19 
INTRODUCTION TO NONLINEAR CONTROL SYSTEMS 
453 
19.1 
Introduction 
453 
19.2 
Linearized and Piecewise-Linear Approximations of Nonlinear Systems 
454 
19.3 
Phase Plane Methods 
458 
19.4 
Lyapunov's Stability Criterion 
463 
19.5 
Frequency Response Methods 
466 
Chapter 
20 
INTRODUCTION TO ADVANCED TOPICS IN CONTROL SYSTEMS 
ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 
480 
20.1 
Introduction 
480 
20.2 
Controllability and Observability 
480 
20.3 
Time-Domain Design of Feedback Systems (State Feedback) 
481 
20.4 
Control Systems with Random Inputs 
483 
20.5 
Optimal Control Systems 
484 
20.6 
Adaptive Control Systems 
485 
APPENDIX A 
486 
Some Laplace Transform Pairs Useful for Control Systems Analysis 
APPENDIX B 
488 
Some r-Transform Pairs Useful for Control Systems Analysis 
REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 
489 

C O N T E N T S 
APPENDIX C 
491 
S A M P L E Screens from the Companion Interactive Outline 
INDEX 
507 

Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 
CONTROL SYSTEMS: WHAT THEY ARE 
In modern usage the word system has many meanings. So let us begin by defining what we mean 
when we use this word in this book, first abstractly then slightly more specifically in relation to scientific 
literature. 
Definition 1.1a: 
A system is an arrangement, set, or collection of things connected or related in such 
a manner as to form an entirety or whole. 
Definition 1.1b: 
A system is an arrangement of physical components connected or related in such a 
manner as to form and/or act as an entire unit. 
The word control is usually taken to mean regulate, direct, or command. Combining the above 
definitions, we have 
Definition 1.2: 
A control system is an arrangement of physical components connected or related in 
such a manner as to command, direct, or regulate itself or another system. 
In the most abstract sense it is possible to consider every physical object a control system. 
Everything alters its environment in some manner, if not actively then passively—like a mirror directing 
a beam of light shining on it at some acute angle. The mirror (Fig. 1-1) may be considered an 
elementary control system, controlling the beam of light according to the simple equation "the angle of 
reflection a equals the angle of incidence a." 
In engineering and science we usually restrict the meaning of control systems to apply to those 
systems whose major function is to dynamically or actively command, direct, or regulate. The system 
shown in Fig. 1-2, consisting of a mirror pivoted at one end and adjusted up and down with a screw at 
the other end, is properly termed a control system. The angle of reflected light is regulated by means of 
the screw. 
It is important to note, however, that control systems of interest for analysis or design purposes 
include not only those manufactured by humans, but those that normally exist in nature, and control 
systems with both manufactured and natural components. 
1 
Fig. 1-1 
Fig. 1-2 

2 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
1.2 
EXAMPLES OF CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Control systems abound in our environment. But before exemplifying this, we define two terms: 
input and output, which help in identifying, delineating, or defining a control system. 
Definition 1.3: 
The input is the stimulus, excitation or command applied to a control system, 
typically from an external energy source, usually in order to produce a specified 
response from the control system. 
Definition 1.4: 
The output is the actual response obtained from a control system. It may or may not 
be equal to the specified response implied by the input. 
Inputs and outputs can have many different forms. Inputs, for example, may be physical variables, 
or more abstract quantities such as reference, setpoint, or desired values for the output of the control 
system. 
The purpose of the control system usually identifies or defines the output and input. If the output 
and input are given, it is possible to identify, delineate, or define the nature of the system components. 
Control systems may have more than one input or output. Often all inputs and outputs are well 
defined by the system description. But sometimes they are not. For example, an atmospheric electrical 
storm may intermittently interfere with radio reception, producing an unwanted output from a 
loudspeaker in the form of static. This "noise" output is part of the total output as defined above, but 
for the purpose of simply identifying a system, spurious inputs producing undesirable outputs are not 
normally considered as inputs and outputs in the system description. However, it is usually necessary to 
carefully consider these extra inputs and outputs when the system is examined in detail. 
The terms input and output also may be used in the description of any type of system, whether or 
not it is a control system, and a control system may be part of a larger system, in which case it is called 
a subsystem or control subsystem, and its inputs and outputs may then be internal variables of the larger 
system. 
EXAMPLE 1.1. 
A n electric switch is a manufactured control system, controlling the flow of electricity. By 
definition, the apparatus or person nipping the switch is not a part of this control system. 
Flipping the switch on or off may be considered as the input. That is, the input can be in one of two states, on 
or off. The output is the flow or nonflow (two states) of electricity. 
The electric switch is one of the most rudimentary control systems. 
EXAMPLE 1.2. A thermostatically controlled heater or furnace automatically regulating the temperature of a room or 
enclosure is a control system. The input to this system is a reference temperature, usually specified by appropriately 
setting a thermostat. The output is the actual temperature of the room or enclosure. 
When the thermostat detects that the output is less than the input, the furnace provides heat until the 
temperature of the enclosure becomes equal to the reference input. Then the furnace is automatically turned off. 
When the temperature falls somewhat below the reference temperature, the furnace is turned on again. 
EXAMPLE 1.3. 
The seemingly simple act of pointing at an object with a finger requires a biological control system 
consisting chiefly of the eyes, the arm, hand and finger, and the brain. The input is the precise direction of the 
object (moving or not) with respect to some reference, and the output is the actual pointed direction with respect to 
the same reference. 
EXAMPLE 1.4. 
A part of the human temperature control system is the perspiration system. When the temperature 
of the air exterior to the skin becomes too high the sweat glands secrete heavily, inducing cooling of the skin by 
evaporation. Secretions are reduced when the desired cooling effect is achieved, or when the air temperature falls 
sufficiently. 
The input to this system may be "normal" or comfortable skin temperature, a "setpoint," or the air 
temperature, a physical variable. The output is the actual skin temperature. 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
3 
EXAMPLE 1.5. 
The control system consisting of a person driving an automobile has components which are clearly 
both manufactured and biological. The driver wants to keep the automobile in the appropriate lane of the roadway. 
He or she accomplishes this by constantly watching the direction of the automobile with respect to the direction of 
the road. In this case, the direction or heading of the road, represented by the painted guide line or lines on either 
side of the lane may be considered as the input. The heading of the automobile is the output of the system. The 
driver controls this output by constantly measuring it with his or her eyes and brain, and correcting it with his or 
her hands on the steering wheel. The major components of this control system are the driver's hands, eyes and 
brain, and the vehicle. 
1.3 
OPEN-LOOP AND CLOSED-LOOP CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Control systems are classified into two general categories: open-loop and closed-loop systems. The 
distinction is determined by the control action, that quantity responsible for activating the system to 
produce the output. 
The term control action is classical in the control systems literature, but the word action in this 
expression does not always directly imply change, motion, or activity. For example, the control action in 
a system designed to have an object hit a target is usually the distance between the object and the target. 
Distance, as such, is not an action, but action (motion) is implied here, because the goal of such a 
control system is to reduce this distance to zero. 
Definition 1.5: 
A n open-loop control system is one in which the control action is independent of the 
output. 
Definition 1.6: 
A closed-loop control system is one in which the control action is somehow 
dependent on the output. 
Two outstanding features of open-loop control systems are: 
1. 
Their ability to perform accurately is determined by their calibration. To calibrate means to 
establish or reestablish the input-output relation to obtain a desired system accuracy. 
2. 
They are not usually troubled with problems of instability, a concept to be subsequently 
discussed in detail. 
Closed-loop control systems are more commonly called feedback control systems, and are consid­
ered in more detail beginning in the next section. 
To classify a control system as open-loop or closed-loop, we must distinguish clearly the compo­
nents of the system from components that interact with but are not part of the system. For example, the 
driver in Example 1.5 was defined as part of that control system, but a human operator may or may not 
be a component of a system. 
EXAMPLE 1.6. 
Most automatic toasters are open-loop systems because they are controlled by a timer. The time 
required to make "good toast" must be estimated by the user, who is not part of the system. Control over the 
quality of toast (the output) is removed once the time, which is both the input and the control action, has been set. 
The time is typically set by means of a calibrated dial or switch. 
EXAMPLE 1.7. 
A n autopilot mechanism and the airplane it controls is a closed-loop (feedback) control system. Its 
purpose is to maintain a specified airplane heading, despite atmospheric changes. It performs this task by 
continuously measuring the actual airplane heading, and automatically adjusting the airplane control surfaces 
(rudder, ailerons, etc.) so as to bring the actual airplane heading into correspondence with the specified heading. 
The human pilot or operator who presets the autopilot is not part of the control system. 

4 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
1.4 
FEEDBACK 
Feedback is that characteristic of closed-loop control systems which distinguishes them from 
open-loop systems. 
Definition 1.7: 
Feedback is that property of a closed-loop system which permits the output (or 
some other controlled variable) to be compared with the input to the system (or an 
input to some other internally situated component or subsystem) so that the 
appropriate control action may be formed as some function of the output and input. 
More generally, feedback is said to exist in a system when a closed sequence of cause-and-effect 
relations exists between system variables. 
EXAMPLE 1.8. 
The concept of feedback is clearly illustrated by the autopilot mechanism of Example 1.7. The 
input is the specified heading, which may be set on a dial or other instrument of the airplane control panel, and the 
output is the actual heading, as determined by automatic navigation instruments. A comparison device continu­
ously monitors the input and output. When the two arc in correspondence, control action is not required. When a 
difference exists between the input and output, the comparison device delivers a control action signal to the 
controller, the autopilot mechanism. The controller provides the appropriate signals to the control surfaces of the 
airplane to reduce the input-output difference. Feedback may be effected by mechanical or electrical connections 
from the navigation instruments, measuring the heading, to the comparison device. In practice, the comparison 
device may be integrated within the autopilot mechanism. 
1.5 
CHARACTERISTICS OF FEEDBACK 
The presence of feedback typically imparts the following properties to a system. 
1. 
Increased accuracy. For example, the ability to faithfully reproduce the input. This property is 
illustrated throughout the text. 
2. 
Tendency toward oscillation or instability. This all-important characteristic is considered in 
detail in Chapters 5 and 9 through 19. 
3. 
Reduced sensitivity of the ratio of output to input to variations in system parameters and other 
characteristics (Chapter 9). 
4. 
Reduced effects of nonlinearities (Chapters 3 and 19). 
5. 
Reduced effects of external disturbances or noise (Chapters 7, 9, and 10). 
6. 
Increased bandwidth. The bandwidth of a system is a frequency response measure of how well 
the system responds to (or filters) variations (or frequencies) in the input signal (Chapters 6, 10, 
12, and 15 through 18). 
1.6 
ANALOG AND DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 
The signals in a control system, for example, the input and the output waveforms, are typically 
functions of some independent variable, usually time, denoted 
Definition 1.8: 
A signal dependent on a continuum of values of the independent variable t is called 
a continuous-time signal or, more generally, a continuous-data signal or (less fre­
quently) an analog signal. 
Definition 1.9: 
A signal denned at, or of interest at, only discrete (distinct) instants of the 
independent variable / (upon which it depends) is called a discrete-time, a discrete-
data, a sampled-data, or a digital signal. 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
5 
We remark that digital is a somewhat more specialized term, particularly in other contexts. We use 
it as a synonym here because it is the convention in the control systems literature. 
EXAMPLE 1.9. 
The continuous, sinusoidally varying voltage v(t) or alternating current i(t) available from an 
ordinary household electrical receptable is a continuous-time (analog) signal, because it is defined at each and every 
instant of time t electrical power is available from that outlet. 
EXAMPLE 1.10. 
If a lamp is connected to the receptacle in Example 1.9, and it is switched on and then 
immediately off every minute, the light from the lamp is a discrete-time signal, on only for an instant every minute. 
EXAMPLE 1.11. 
The mean temperature T in a room at precisely 8 A.M. (08 hours) each day is a discrete-time 
signal. This signal may be denoted in several ways, depending on the application; for example T(8) for the 
temperature at 8 o'clock—rather than another time; r(l), T(2),... for the temperature at 8 o'clock on day 1, day 2, 
etc., or, equivalently, using a subscript notation, TltT2, etc. Note that these discrete-time signals are sampled values 
of a continuous-time signal, the mean temperature of the room at all times, denoted 
T(t). 
EXAMPLE 1.12. 
The signals inside digital computers and microprocessors are inherently discrete-time, or 
discrete-data, or digital (or digitally coded) signals. At their most basic level, they are typically in the form of 
sequences of voltages, currents, light intensities, or other physical variables, at either of two constant levels, for 
example, +15 V ; light-on, light-off; etc. These binary signals are usually represented in alphanumeric form 
(numbers, letters, or other characters) at the inputs and outputs of such digital devices. On the other hand, the 
signals of analog computers and other analog devices are continuous-time. 
Control systems can be classified according to the types of signals they process: continuous-time 
(analog), discrete-time (digital), or a combination of both (hybrid). 
Definition 1.1 (k 
Continuous-time control systems, also called continuous-data control systems, or 
analog control systems, contain or process only continuous-time (analog) signals and 
components. 
Definition 1.11: 
Discrete-time control systems, also called discrete-data control systems, or sampled-
data control systems, have discrete-time signals or components at one or more points 
in the system. 
We note that discrete-time control systems can have continuous-time as well as discrete-time 
signals; that is, they can be hybrid. The distinguishing factor is that a discrete-time or digital control 
system must include at least one discrete-data signal. Also, digital control systems, particularly of 
sampled-data type, often have both open-loop and closed-loop modes of operation. 
EXAMPLE 1.13. 
A target tracking and following system, such as the one described in Example 1.3 (tracking and 
pointing at an object with a finger), is usually considered an analog or continuous-time control system, because the 
distance between the "tracker" (finger) and the target is a continuous function of time, and the objective of such a 
control system is to continuously follow the target. The system consisting of a person driving an automobile 
(Example 1.5) falls in the same category. Strictly speaking, however, tracking systems, both natural and manufac­
tured, can have digital signals or components. For example, control signals from the brain are often treated as 
"pulsed" or discrete-time data in more detailed models which include the brain, and digital computers or 
microprocessors have replaced many analog components in vehicle control systems and tracking mechanisms. 
EXAMPLE 1.14. 
A closer look at the thermostatically controlled heating system of Example 1.2 indicates that it 
is actually a sampled-data control system, with both digital and analog components and signals. If the desired room 
temperature is, say, 68°F (22°C) on the thermostat and the room temperature falls below, say, 66°F, the thermostat 
switching system closes the circuit to the furnace (an analog device), turning it on until the temperature of the room 
reaches, say, 70°F. Then the switching system automatically turns the furnace off until the room temperature again 
falls below 66°F. This control system is actually operating open-loop between switching instants, when the 
thermostat turns the furnace on or off, but overall operation is considered closed-loop. The thermostat receives a 

6 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
continuous-time signal at its input, the actual room temperature, and it delivers a discrete-time (binary) switching 
signal at its output, turning the furnace on or off. Actual room temperature thus varies continuously between 66° 
and 70°F, and mean temperature is controlled at about 68°F, the setpoint of the thermostat. 
The terms discrete-time and discrete-data, sampled-data, and continuous-time and continuous-data 
are often abbreviated as discrete, sampled, and continuous in the remainder of the book, wherever the 
meaning is unambiguous. Digital or analog is also used in place of discrete (sampled) or continuous 
where appropriate and when the meaning is clear from the context. 
1.7 
T H E CONTROL SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PROBLEM 
Control systems engineering consists of analysis and design of control systems configurations. 
Analysis is the investigation of the properties of an existing system. The design problem is the 
choice and arrangement of system components to perform a specific task. 
Two methods exist for design: 
1. 
Design by analysis 
2. 
Design by synthesis 
Design by analysis is accomplished by modifying the characteristics of an existing or standard 
system configuration, and design by synthesis by defining the form of the system directly from its 
specifications. 
1.8 
CONTROL SYSTEM MODELS OR REPRESENTATIONS 
To solve a control systems problem, we must put the specifications or description of the system 
configuration and its components into a form amenable to analysis or design. 
Three basic representations (models) of components and systems are used extensively in the study 
of control systems: 
1. 
Mathematical models, in the form of differential equations, difference equations, and/or other 
mathematical relations, for example, Laplace- and z-transforms 
2. 
Block diagrams 
3. 
Signal flow graphs 
Mathematical models of control systems are developed in Chapters 3 and 4. Block diagrams and 
signal flow graphs are shorthand, graphical representations of either the schematic diagram of a system, 
or the set of mathematical equations characterizing its parts. Block diagrams are considered in detail in 
Chapters 2 and 7, and signal flow graphs in Chapter 8. 
Mathematical models are needed when quantitative relationships are required, for example, to 
represent the detailed behavior of the output of a feedback system to a given input. Development of 
mathematical models is usually based on principles from the physical, biological, social, or information 
sciences, depending on the control system application area, and the complexity of such models varies 
widely. One class of models, commonly called linear systems, has found very broad application in 
control system science. Techniques for solving linear system models are well established and docu­
mented in the literature of applied mathematics and engineering, and the major focus of this book is 
linear feedback control systems, their analysis and their design. Continuous-time (continuous, analog) 
systems are emphasized, but discrete-time (discrete, digital) systems techniques are also developed 
throughout the text, in a unifying but not exhaustive manner. Techniques for analysis and design of 
nonlinear control systems are the subject of Chapter 19, by way of introduction to this more complex 
subject. 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
7 
In order to communicate with as many readers as possible, the material in this book is developed 
from basic principles in the sciences and applied mathematics, and specific applications in various 
engineering and other disciplines are presented in the examples and in the solved problems at the end of 
each chapter. 
Solved Problems 
INPUT AND OUTPUT 
1.1. 
Identify the input and output for the pivoted, adjustable mirror of Fig. 1-2. 
The input is the angle of inclination of the mirror 8, varied by turning the screw. The output is the 
angular position of the reflected beam 6 + a from the reference surface. 
1.2. 
Identify a possible input and a possible output for a rotational generator of electricity. 
The input may be the rotational speed of the prime mover (e.g., a steam turbine), in revolutions per 
minute. Assuming the generator has no load attached to its output terminals, the output may be the 
induced voltage at the output terminals. 
Alternatively, the input can be expressed as angular momentum of the prime mover shaft, and the 
output in units of electrical power (watts) with a load attached to the generator. 
1.3. 
Identify the input and output for an automatic washing machine. 
Many washing machines operate in the following manner. After the clothes have been put into the 
machine, the soap or detergent, bleach, and water are entered in the proper amounts. The wash and spin 
cycle-time is then set on a timer and the washer is energized. When the cycle is completed, the machine 
shuts itself off. 
If the proper amounts of detergent, bleach, and water, and the appropriate temperature of the water 
are predetermined or specified by the machine manufacturer, or automatically entered by the machine 
itself, then the input is the time (in minutes) for the wash and spin cycle. The timer is usually set by a 
human operator. 
The output of a washing machine is more difficult to identify. Let us define clean as the absence of 
foreign substances from the items to be washed. Then we can identify the output as the percentage of 
cleanliness. At the start of a cycle the output is less than 100%, and at the end of a cycle the output is 
ideally equal to 100% (clean clothes are not always obtained). 
For most coin-operated machines the cycle-time is preset, and the machine begins operating when the 
coin is entered. In this case, the percentage of cleanliness can be controlled by adjusting the amounts of 
detergent, bleach, water, and the temperature of the water. We may consider all of these quantities as 
inputs. 
Other combinations of inputs and outputs are also possible. 
1.4. 
Identify the organ-system components, and the input and output, and describe the operation of 
the biological control system consisting of a human being reaching for an object. 
The basic components of this intentionally oversimplified control system description are the brain, arm 
and hand, and eyes. 
The brain sends the required nervous system signal to the arm and hand to reach for the object. This 
signal is amplified in the muscles of the arm and hand, which serve as power actuators for the system. The 
eyes are employed as a sensing device, continuously "feeding back" the position of the hand to the brain. 
Hand position is the output for the system. The input is object position. 

8 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
The objective of the control system is to reduce the distance between hand position and object position 
to zero. Figure 1-3 is a schematic diagram. The dashed lines and arrows represent the direction of 
information flow. 
Fig. 1-3 
OPEN-LOOP AND CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEMS 
1.5. 
Explain how a closed-loop automatic washing machine might operate. 
Assume all quantities described as possible inputs in Problem 1.3, namely cycle-time, water volume, 
water temperature, amount of detergent, and amount of bleach, can be adjusted by devices such as valves 
and heaters. 
A closed-loop automatic washer might continuously or periodically measure the percentage of 
cleanliness (output) of the items being washing, adjust the input quantities accordingly, and turn itself off 
when 100% cleanliness has been achieved. 
1.6. 
H o w are 
the 
following 
open-loop 
systems 
calibrated", 
(a) 
automatic 
washing 
machine, 
(b) automatic toaster, (c) voltmeter? 
(a) 
Automatic washing machines are calibrated by estimating any combination of the following input 
quantities: (1) amount of detergent, (2) amount of bleach or other additives, (3) amount of water, 
(4) temperature of the water, (5) cycle-time. 
On some washing machines one or more of these inputs is (are) predetermined. The remaining 
quantities must be estimated by the user and depend upon factors such as degree of hardness of the 
water, type of detergent, and type or strength of the bleach or other additives, Once this calibration 
has been determined for a specific type of wash (e.g., all white clothes, very dirty clothes), it docs not 
normally have to be redetermined during the lifetime of the machine. If the machine breaks down and 
replacement parts are installed, recalibration may be necessary, 
(b) 
Although the timer dial for most automatic toasters is calibrated by the manufacturer (e.g., light-
medium-dark), the amount of heat produced by the heating element may vary over a wide range. In 
addition, the efficiency of the heating element normally deteriorates with age. Hence the amount of 
time required for "good toast" must be estimated by the user, and this setting usually must be 
periodically readjusted. At first, the toast is usually too light or too dark. After several successively 
different estimates, the required toasting time for a desired quality of toast is obtained. 
(c) 
In general, a voltmeter is calibrated by comparing it with a known-voltage standard source, and 
appropriately marking the reading scale at specified intervals. 
1.7. 
Identify the control action in the systems of Problems 1.1, 1.2, and 1.4. 
For the mirror system of Problem 1.1 the control action is equal to the input, that is, the angle of 
inclination of the mirror 8. For the generator of Problem 1.2 the control action is equal to the input, the 
rotational speed or angular momentum of the prime mover shaft. The control action of the human reaching 
system of Problem 1.4 is equal to the distance between hand and object position, 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
9 
1.8. 
Which of the control systems in Problems 1.1, 1.2, and 1.4 are open-loop? Closed-loop? 
1.9. 
Identify the control action in Examples 1.1 through 1.5. 
The control action for the electric switch of Example 1.1 is equal to the input, the on or off command. 
The control action for the heating system of Example 1.2 is equal to the difference between the reference 
and actual room temperatures. For the finger pointing system of Example 1.3, the control action is equal to 
the difference between the actual and pointed direction of the object. The perspiration system of Example 
1.4 has its control action equal to the difference between the "normal" and actual skin surface temperature. 
The difference between the direction of the road and the heading of the automobile is the control action for 
the human driver and automobile system of Example 1.5. 
1.10. 
Which of the control systems in Examples 1.1 through 1.5 are open-loop? Closed-loop? 
The electric switch of Example 1.1 is open-loop because the control action is equal to the input, and 
therefore independent of the output. For the remaining Examples 1.2 through 1.5 the control action is 
clearly a function of the output. Hence they are closed-loop systems. 
FEEDBACK 
Fig. 1-4 
(a) 
Write an equation for v2 as a function of vv 
Rv 
and R2. That is, write an equation for v2 
which yields an open-loop system. 
(b) 
Write an equation for v2 in closed-loop form, that is, v2 as a function of vx, v2, Rx, 
and 
R2. 
This problem illustrates how a passive network can be characterized as either an open-loop 
or a closed-loop system. 
(a) 
From Ohm's law and Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws we have 
Since the control action is equal to the input for the systems of Problems 1.1 and 1.2, no feedback 
exists and the systems are open-loop. The human reaching system of Problem 1.4 is closed-loop because the 
control action is denendent imon the ontnut. hand nosition 
1.11. 
Consider the voltage divider network of Fig. 1-4. The output is v2 and the input is 
vv 
Therefore 
(b) 
Writing the current i in a slightly different form, we have 
Hence 

10 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
1.12. 
Explain how the classical economic concept known as the Law of Supply and Demand can be 
interpreted as a feedback control system. Choose the market price (selling price) of a particular 
item as the output of the system, and assume the objective of the system is to maintain price 
stability. 
The Law can be stated in the following manner. The market demand for the item decreases as its price 
increases. The market supply usually increases as its price increases. The Law of Supply and Demand says 
that a stable market price is achieved if and only if the supply is equal to the demand. 
The manner in which the price is regulated by the supply and the demand can be described with 
feedback control concepts. Let us choose the following four basic elements for our system: the Supplier, the 
Demander, the Pricer, and the Market where the item is bought and sold. (In reality, these elements 
generally represent very complicated processes.) 
The input to our idealized economic system is price stability the "desired" output. A more convenient 
way to describe this input is zero price fluctuation. The output is the actual market price. 
The system operates as follows: The Pricer receives a command (zero) for price stability. It estimates a 
price for the Market transaction with the help of information from its memory or records of past 
transactions. This price causes the Supplier to produce or supply a certain number of items, and the 
Demander to demand a number of items. The difference between the supply and the demand is the control 
action for this system. If the control action is nonzero, that is, if the supply is not equal to the demand, the 
Pricer initiates a change in the market price in a direction which makes the supply eventually equal to the 
demand. Hence both the Supplier and the Demander may be considered the feedback, since they determine 
the control action. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
PROBLEMS 
1.13. 
(a) Explain the operation of ordinary traffic signals which control automobile traffic at roadway 
intersections, (b) Why are they open-loop control systems? (c) How can traffic be controlled 
more efficiently? (d) Why is the system of (c) closed-loop? 
(a) 
Traffic lights control the flow of traffic by successively confronting the traffic in a particular direction 
(e.g., north-south) with a red (stop) and then a green (go) light. When one direction has the green 
signal, the cross traffic in the other direction (east-west) has the red. Most traffic signal red and green 
light intervals are predetermined by a calibrated timing mechanism. 
(b) 
Control systems operated by preset timing mechanisms are open-loop. The control action is equal to 
the input, the red and green intervals. 
(c) 
Besides preventing collisions, it is a function of traffic signals to generally control the volume of 
traffic. For the open-loop system described above, the volume of traffic does not influence the preset 
red and green timing intervals. In order to make traffic flow more smoothly, the green light timing 
interval must be made longer than the red in the direction containing the greater traffic volume. Often 
a traffic officer performs this task. 
The ideal system would automatically measure the volume of traffic in all directions, using 
appropriate sensing devices, compare them, and use the difference to control the red and green time 
intervals, an ideal task for a computer. 
(d) 
The system of (c) is closed-loop because the control action (the difference between the volume of 
traffic in each direction) is a function of the output (actual traffic volume flowing past the intersection 
in each direction). 
1.14. 
(a) Describe, in a simplified way, the components and variables of the biological control system 
involved in walking in a prescribed direction, (b) Why is walking a closed-loop operation? 
(c) Under what conditions would the human walking apparatus become an open-loop system? A 
sampled-data system? Assume the person has normal vision. 
(a) 
The major components involved in walking are the brain, eyes, and legs and feet. The input may be 
chosen as the desired walk direction, and the output the actual walk direction. The control action is 
determined by the eyes, which detect the difference between the input and output and send this 
information to the brain. The brain commands the legs and feet to walk in the prescribed direction. 
(b) 
Walking is a closed-loop operation because the control action is a function of the output. 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
11 
(c) 
If the eyes are closed, the feedback loop is broken and the system becomes open-loop. If the eyes are 
opened and closed periodically, the system becomes a sampled-data one, and walking is usually more 
accurately controlled than with the eyes always closed. 
1.15. 
Devise a control system to fill a container with water after it is emptied through a stopcock at the 
bottom. The system must automatically shut off the water when the container is 
filled. 
The simplified schematic diagram (Fig. 1-5) illustrates the principle of the ordinary toilet tank filling 
system. 
Fig. 1-5 
The ball floats on the water. As the ball gets closer to the top of the container, the stopper decreases 
the flow of water. When the container becomes full, the stopper shuts off the flow of water. 
1.16. 
Devise a simple control system which automatically turns on a room lamp at dusk, and turns it 
off i n daylight. 
A simple system that accomplishes this task is shown in Fig. 1-6. 
At dusk, the photocell, which functions as a light-sensitive switch, closes the lamp circuit, thereby 
lighting the room. The lamp stays lighted until daylight, at which time the photocell detects the bright 
outdoor light and opens the lamp circuit. 
Fig. 1-6 
1.17. 
Devise a closed-loop automatic toaster. 
Assume each heating element supplies the same amount of heat to both sides of the bread, and toast 
quality can be determined by its color. A simplified schematic diagram of one possible way to apply the 
feedback principle to a toaster is shown in Fig. 1-7. Only one side of the toaster is illustrated. 
Fig. 1-7 

12 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
The toaster is initially calibrated for a desired toast quality by means of the color adjustment knob. 
This setting never needs readjustment unless the toast quality criterion changes. When the switch is closed, 
the bread is toasted until the color detector "sees" the desired color. Then the switch is automatically 
opened by means of the feedback linkage, which may be electrical or mechanical. 
1.18. 
Is the voltage divider network in Problem 1.11 an analog or digital device? Also, are the input 
and output analog or digital signals? 
It is clearly an analog device, as are all electrical networks consisting only of passive elements such as 
resistors, capacitors, and inductors. The voltage source v1 is considered an external input to this network. If 
it produces a continuous signal, for example, from a battery or alternating power source, the output is a 
continuous or analog signal. However, if the voltage source vl is a discrete-time or digital signal, then so is 
the output v2 = v1R2/(R1 
+ R2). Also, if a switch were included in the circuit, in series with an analog 
voltage source, intermittent opening and closing of the switch would generate a sampled waveform of the 
voltage source vl and therefore a sampled or discrete-time output from this analog network. 
1.19. 
Is the system that controls the total cash value of a bank account a continuous or a discrete-time 
system? Why? Assume a deposit is made only once, and no withdrawals are made. 
If the bank pays no interest and extracts no fees for maintaining the account (like putting your money 
"under the mattress"), the system controlling the total cash value of the account can be considered 
continuous, because the value is always the same. Most banks, however, pay interest periodically, for 
example, daily, monthly, or yearly, and the value of the account therefore changes periodically, at discrete 
times. In this case, the system controlling the cash value of the account is a discrete system. Assuming no 
withdrawals, the interest is added to the principle each time the account earns interest, called compounding, 
and the account value continues to grow without bound (the "greatest invention of mankind," a comment 
attributed to Einstein). 
1.20. 
What type of control system, open-loop or closed-loop, continuous or discrete, is used by an 
ordinary stock market investor, whose objective is to profit from his or her investment. 
Stock market investors typically follow the progress of their stocks, for example, their prices, 
periodically. They might check the bid and ask prices daily, with their broker or the daily newspaper, or 
more or less often, depending upon individual circumstances. In any case, they periodically sample the 
pricing signals and therefore the system is sampled-data, or discrete-time. However, stock prices normally 
rise and fall between sampling times and therefore the system operates open-loop during these periods. The 
feedback loop is closed only when the investor makes his or her periodic observations and acts upon the 
information received, which may be to buy, sell, or do nothing. Thus overall control is closed-loop. The 
measurement (sampling) process could, of course, be handled more efficiently using a computer, which also 
can be programed to make decisions based on the information it receives. In this case the control system 
remains discrete-time, but not only because there is a digital computer in the control loop. Bid and ask 
prices do not change continuously but are inherently discrete-time signals. 
Supplementary Problems 
1.21. 
Identify the input and output for an automatic temperature-regulating oven. 
1.22. 
Identify the input and output for an automatic refrigerator. 
1.23. 
Identify an input and an output for an electric automatic coffeemaker. Is this system open-loop or 
closed-loop? 

C H A P . 1] 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
13 
1.24. 
Devise a control system to automatically raise and lower a lift-bridge to permit ships to pass. N o 
continuous human operator is permissible. The system must function entirely automatically. 
1.25. 
Explain the operation and identify the pertinent quantities and components of an automatic, radar-con­
trolled antiaircraft gun. Assume that no operator is required except to initially put the system into an 
operational mode. 
1.26. 
How can the electrical network of Fig. 1-8 be given a feedback control system interpretation? Is this system 
analog or digital? 
1.27. 
Devise a control system for positioning the rudder of a ship from a control room located far from the 
rudder. The objective of the control system is to steer the ship in a desired heading. 
1.28. 
What inputs in addition to the command for a desired heading would you expect to find acting on the 
system of Problem 1.27? 
1.29. 
Can the application of "laissez faire capitalism" to an economic system be interpreted as a feedback control 
system? Why? How about "socialism" in its purest form? Why? 
1.30. 
Does the operation of a stock exchange, for example, buying and selling equities, fit the model of the Law 
of Supply and Demand described in Problem 1.12? How? 
1.31. 
Does a purely socialistic economic system fit the model of the Law of Supply and Demand described in 
Problem 1.12? Why (or why not)? 
1.32. 
Which control systems in Problems 1.1 through 1.4 and 1.12 through 1.17 are digital or sampled-data and 
which are continuous or analog? Define the continuous signals and the discrete signals in each system. 
1.33. 
Explain why economic control systems based on data obtained from typical accounting procedures are 
sampled-data control systems? Are they open-loop or closed-loop? 
1.34. 
Is a rotating antenna radar system, which normally receives range and directional data once each 
revolution, an analog or a digital system? 
1.35. 
What type of control system is involved in the treatment of a patient by a doctor, based on data obtained 
from laboratory analysis of a sample of the patient's blood? 
Fig. 1-8 

14 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
[CHAP. 1 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
1.21. 
The input is the reference temperature. The output is the actual oven temperature. 
1.22. 
The input is the reference temperature. The output is the actual refrigerator temperature. 
1.23. 
One possible input for the automatic electric coffeemaker is the amount of coffee used. In addition, most 
coffeemakers have a dial which can be set for weak, medium, or strong coffee. This setting usually regulates 
a timing mechanism. The brewing time is therefore another possible input. The output of any coffeemaker 
can be chosen as coffee strength. The coffeemakers described above are open-loop. 

Chapter 2 
Control Systems Terminology 
2.1 
BLOCK DIAGRAMS: FUNDAMENTALS 
A block diagram is a shorthand, pictorial representation of the cause-and-effect 
relationship 
between the input and output of a physical system. It provides a convenient and useful method for 
characterizing the functional relationships among the various components of a control system. System 
components are alternatively called elements of the system. The simplest form of the block diagram is 
the single block, with one input and one output, as shown in F i g . 2-1. 
The interior of the rectangle representing the block usually contains a description of or the name of 
the element, or the symbol for the mathematical operation to be performed on the input to yield the 
output. The arrows represent the direction of information or signal flow. 
EXAMPLE 2.1 
(a) 
Fig. 2-2 
The operations of addition and subtraction have a special representation. The block becomes a 
small circle, called a summing point, with the appropriate plus or minus sign associated with the arrows 
entering the circle. The output is the algebraic sum of the inputs. A n y number of inputs may enter a 
summing point. 
(b) 
(e) 
Fig. 2-3 
15 
Fig. 2-1 
0>) 
EXAMPLE 2.2 

16 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
Some authors put a cross in the circle: (Fig. 2-4) 
Fig. 2-4 
This notation is avoided here because it is sometimes confused with the multiplication operation. 
In order to have the same signal or variable be an input to more than one block or summing point, 
a takeoff point is used. This permits the signal to proceed unaltered along several different paths to 
several destinations. 
EXAMPLE 2.3 
(a) 
Fig. 2-5 
2.2 
BLOCK DIAGRAMS OF CONTINUOUS (ANALOG) FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS 
The blocks representing the various components of a control system are connected in a fashion 
which characterizes their functional relationships within the system. The basic configuration of a simple 
closed-loop (feedback) control system with a single input and a single output (abbreviated SISO) is 
illustrated in Fig. 2-6 for a system with continuous signals only. 
Fig. 2-6 
We emphasize that the arrows of the closed loop, connecting one block with another, represent the 
direction of flow of control energy or information, which is not usually the main source of energy for the 
system. For example, the major source of energy for the thermostatically controlled furnace of Example 
(b) 

C H A P . 2] 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
17 
1.2 is often chemical, from burning fuel oil, coal, or gas. But this energy source would not appear in the 
closed control loop of the system. 
2.3 
TERMINOLOGY OF THE CLOSED-LOOP BLOCK DIAGRAM 
It is important that the terms used in the closed-loop block diagram be clearly understood. 
Lowercase letters are used to represent the input and output variables of each element as well as the 
symbols for the blocks gY, g 2, and h. These quantities represent functions of time, unless otherwise 
specified. 
EXAMPLE 2.4. 
r=r(t) 
In subsequent chapters, we use capital letters to denote Laplace transformed or z-transformed 
quantities, as functions of the complex variable s, or z, respectively, or Fourier transformed quantities 
(frequency functions), as functions of the pure imaginary variable jcc. Functions of s or z are often 
abbreviated to the capital letter appearing alone. Frequency functions are never abbreviated. 
EXAMPLE 2.5. 
R(s) may be abbreviated as R, or F(z) as F. R(joi) is never abbreviated. 
The letters r, c, e, etc., were chosen to preserve the generic nature of the block diagram. This 
convention is now classical. 
Definition 2.1: 
The plant (or process, or controlled system) g2 is the system, subsystem, process, or 
object controlled by the feedback control system. 
Definition 2.2: 
The controlled output c is the output variable of the plant, under the control of the 
feedback control system. 
Definition 2.3: 
The forward path is the transmission path from the summing point to the controlled 
output c. 
Definition 2.4: 
The feedforward (control) elements gr are the components of the forward path that 
generate the control signal u or m applied to the plant. Note: Feedforward elements 
typically include controller(s), compensator(s) (or equalization elements), and/or 
amplifiers. 
Definition 2.5: 
The control signal u (or manipulated variable m) is the output signal of the 
feedforward elements gx applied as input to the plant g2. 
Definition 2.6: 
The feedback path is the transmission path from the controlled output c back to the 
summing point. 
Definition 2.7: 
The feedback elements h establish the functional relationship between the con­
trolled output c and the primary feedback signal b. Note: Feedback elements 
typically include sensors of the controlled output c, compensators, and/or con­
troller elements. 
Definition 2.8: 
The reference input r is an external signal applied to the feedback control system, 
usually at the first summing point, in order to command a specified action of the 
plant. It usually represents ideal (or desired) plant output behavior. 

18 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
Definition 2.9: 
The primary feedback signal b is a function of the controlled output c, algebraically 
summed with the reference input r to obtain the actuating (error) signal e, that is, 
r ± b = e. Note: A n open-loop system has no primary feedback signal. 
Definition 2.10: 
The actuating (or error) signal is the reference input signal r plus or minus the 
primary feedback signal b. The control action is generated by the actuating (error) 
signal in a feedback control system (see Definitions 1.5 and 1.6). Note: In an 
open-loop system, which has no feedback, the actuating signal is equal to r. 
Definition 2.11: 
Negative feedback means the summing point is a subtractor, that is, e = r — b. 
Positive feedback means the summing point is an adder, that is, e = r + b. 
2.4 
BLOCK DIAGRAMS OF DISCRETE-TIME (SAMPLED-DATA, DIGITAL) COMPONENTS, 
CONTROL SYSTEMS, AND COMPUTER-CONTROLLED SYSTEMS 
A discrete-time (sampled-data or digital) control system was defined in Definition 1.11 as one having 
discrete-time signals or components at one or more points in the system. We introduce several common 
discrete-time system components first, and then illustrate some of the ways they are interconnected in 
digital control systems. We remind the reader here that discrete-time is often abbreviated as discrete in 
this book, and continuous-time as continuous, wherever the meaning is unambiguous. 
EXAMPLE 2.6. 
A digital computer or microprocessor is a discrete-time (discrete or digital) device, a common 
component in digital control systems. The internal and external signals of a digital computer are typically 
discrete-time or digitally coded. 
EXAMPLE 2.7. 
A discrete system component (or components) with discrete-time input u(tk) 
and discrete-time 
output y(tk) 
signals, where tk are discrete instants of time, k = l,2,..., 
etc., may be represented by a block 
diagram, as shown in Fig. 2-7. 
Many digital control systems contain both continuous and discrete components. One or more 
devices known as samplers, and others known as holds, are usually included in such systems. 
Definition 2.12: 
A sampler is a device that converts a continuous-time signal, say u(t), into a 
discrete-time signal, denoted u*(t), consisting of a sequence of values of the signal 
at the instants tl712,..., 
that is, »(?,), u(t2),• • •, etc. 
Ideal samplers are usually represented schematically by a switch, as shown in Fig. 2-8, where the 
switch is normally open except at the instants r l 51 2, etc., when it is closed for an instant. The switch also 
may be represented as enclosed in a block, as shown in Fig. 2-9. 
Fig. 2-7 

19 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
Fig. 2-8 
Fig. 2-9 
EXAMPLE 2.8. 
The input signal of an ideal sampler and a few samples of the output signal are illustrated in Fig. 
2-10. This type of signal is often called a sampled-data signal. 
Fig. 2-10 
Discrete-data signals u(tk) are often written more simply with the index k as the only argument, 
that is, u(k), 
and the sequence u(tl),u(t2),..., 
etc., becomes u(l), w(2),..., etc. This notation is 
introduced in Chapter 3. Although sampling rates are in general nonuniform, as in Example 2.8, 
uniform sampling is the rule in this book, that is, tk + 1 — tk = T for all k. 
Definition 2.13: 
A hold, or data hold, device is one that converts the discrete-time output of a 
sampler into a particular kind of continuous-time or analog signal. 
EXAMPLE 2.9. 
A zero-order hold (or simple hold) is one that maintains (i.e., holds) the value of u(tk) 
constant 
until the next sampling time tk + l , as shown in Fig. 2-11. Note that the output y,I0(t) of the zero-order hold is 
continuous, except at the sampling times. This type of signal is called a piecewise-continuous signal. 
Definition 2.14: 
A n anaiog-to-digital ( A / D ) converter is a device that converts an analog or 
continuous signal into a discrete or digital signal. 
Fig. 2-12 

20 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
Definition 2.15: 
A digital-to-analog ( D / A ) converter is a device that converts a discrete or digital 
signal into a continuous-time or analog signal. 
EXAMPLE 2.10. 
The sampler in Example 2.8 (Figs. 2-9 and 2-10) is an A / D converter. 
EXAMPLE 2.11. 
The zero-order hold in Example 2.9 (Figs. 2-11 and 2-12) is a D / A converter. 
Samplers and zero-order holds are commonly used A / D and D / A converters, but they are not the 
only types available. Some D / A converters, in particular, are more complex. 
EXAMPLE 2.12. 
Digital computers or microprocessors are often used to control continuous plants or processes. 
A / D and D / A converters are typically required in such applications, to convert signals from the plant to digital 
signals, and to convert the digital signal from the computer into a control signal for the analog plant. The joint 
operation of these elements is usually synchronized by a clock and the resulting controller is sometimes called a 
digital filter, as illustrated in Fig, 2-13. 
Fig. 2-13 
Definition 2.16: 
A computer-controlled system includes a computer as the primary control element. 
The most common computer-controlled systems have digital computers controlling analog or 
continuous processes. In this case, A / D and D / A converters are needed, as illustrated in Fig. 2-14. 
Fig. 2-14 
The clock may be omitted from the diagram, as it synchronizes but is not an explicit part of signal 
flow in the control loop. Also, the summing junction and reference input are sometimes omitted from 
the diagram, because they may be implemented in the computer. 
2.5 
SUPPLEMENTARY TERMINOLOGY 
Several other terms require definition and illustration at this time. Others are presented in 
subsequent chapters, as needed. 

21 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
Definition 2.17: 
A transducer is a device that converts one energy form into another. 
For example, one of the most common transducers in control systems applications is the poten­
tiometer, which converts mechanical position into an electrical voltage (Fig, 2-15). 
Fig. 2-15 
Fig. 2-16 
(a) 
(6) 
Definition 2.19: 
When the feedback element consists of a transducer, and a transducer is required at 
the input, that part of the control system illustrated in F i g . 2-\i>{b) is called the 
error detector. 
Definition 2.20: 
A stimulus, or test input, is any externally (exogenously) introduced input signal 
affecting the controlled output c. Note: The reference input r is an example of a 
stimulus, but it is not the only kind of stimulus. 
Definition 2.21: 
A disturbance n (or noise input) is an undesired stimulus or input signal affecting 
the value of the controlled output c. It may enter the plant with u or m, as shown in 
the block diagram of Fig. 2-6, or at the first summing point, or via another 
intermediate point. 
Definition 2.22: 
The time response of a system, subsystem, or element is the output as a function of 
time, usually following application of a prescribed input under specified operating 
conditions. 
Definition 2.23: 
A multivariable system is one with more than one input (multiinput. Ml-), more than 
one output (multioutput, -MO), or both (multiinput-muitioutput, MIMO). 

22 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
Definition 2.24: 
The term controller in a feedback control system is often associated with the 
elements of the forward path, between the actuating (error) signal e and the control 
variable u. But it also sometimes includes the summing point, the feedback 
elements, or both, and some authors use the term controller and compensator 
synonymously. The context should eliminate ambiguity. 
The following five definitions are examples of control laws, or control algorithms. 
Definition 2.25: 
A n on-off controller (two-position, binary controller) has only two possible values at 
its output «, depending on the input e to the controller. 
EXAMPLE 2.13. 
A binary controller may have an output u = +1 when the error signal is positive, that is, e > 0, 
and u = — 1 when e < 0. 
Definition 2.26: 
A proportional (P) controller has an output u proportional to its input e, that is, 
u = KPe, where KP is a proportionality constant. 
Definition 2.27: 
A derivative (D) controller has an output proportional to the derivative of its input 
e, that is, u = KD de/dt, where KD is a proportionality constant. 
Definition 2.28: 
A n integral (/) controller has an output « proportional to the integral of its input e, 
that is, u = KTJe(t) 
dt, where Kr is a proportionality constant. 
Definition 2.29: 
PD, PI, DI, and PID controllers are combinations of proportional (P), derivative 
(D), and integral (/) controllers. 
EXAMPLE 2.14. 
The output u of a PD controller has the form: 
The output of a PID controller has the form: 
2.6 
SERVOMECHANISMS 
The specialized feedback control system called a servomechanism deserves special attention, due to 
its prevalence in industrial applications and control systems literature. 
Definition 2.30: 
A servomechanism is a power-amplifying feedback control system in which the 
controlled variable c is mechanical position, or a time derivative of position such as 
velocity or acceleration. 
EXAMPLE 2.15. 
A n automobile power-steering apparatus is a servomechanism. The command input is the 
angular position of the steering wheel. A small rotational torque applied to the steering wheel is amplified 
hydraulically, resulting in a force adequate to modify the output, the angular position of the front wheels. The 
block diagram of such a system may be represented by Fig. 2-17. Negative feedback is necessary in order to return 
the control valve to the neutral position, reducing the torque from the hydraulic amplifier to zero when the desired 
wheel position has been achieved. 

23 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
Fig. 2-17 
2.7 
REGULATORS 
Definition 2.31: 
A regulator or regulating system is a feedback control system in which the reference 
input or command is constant for long periods of time, often for the entire time 
interval during which the system is operational. Such an input is often called a 
setpoint. 
A regulator differs from a servomechanism in that the primary function of a regulator is usually to 
maintain a constant controlled output, while that of a servomechanism is most often to cause the output 
of the system to follow a varying input. 
Solved Problems 
BLOCK DIAGRAMS 
2.1. 
Consider the following equations in which 
variables, and a1,a2,...,an 
are 
general coefficients or mathematical operators: 
(a) 
x3 = a1xl + a2x2 — 5 
(b) 
xn = axxx + a2x2 + ••• 
+an_1xn_1 
Draw a block diagram for each equation, identifying all blocks, inputs, and outputs. 
(a) 
In the form the equation is written, x 3 is the output., The terms on the right-hand side of the equation 
are combined at a summing point, as shown in Fig. 2-18. 
The a,*! term is represented by a single block, with xl as its input and alx1 as its output. 
Therefore the coefficient a, is put inside the block, as shown in Fig. 2-19. al may represent any 
mathematical operation. For example, if a, were a constant, the block operation would be "multiply 
the input xl by the constant a1." It is usually clear from the description or context of a problem what 
is meant by the symbol, operator, or description inside the block. 
Fig. 2-18 
Fig. 2-19 

24 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
The a2x2 term is represented in the same manner. 
The block diagram for the entire equation is therefore shown in Fig. 2.20. 
(b) 
Following the same line of reasoning as in part (a), the block diagram for 
is shown in Fig. 2-21. 
Fig. 2-20 
Fig. 2-21 
2.2. 
D r a w block diagrams for each of the following equations: 
(b) 
(<0 
(a) 
Two operations are specified by this equation, a1 and differentiation d/dt. 
Therefore the block 
diagram contains two blocks, as shown in Fig. 2-22. Note the order of the blocks. 
Fig. 2-23 
Now, if a, were a constant, the ai block could be combined with the d/dt block, as shown in 
Fig. 2-23, since no confusion about the order of the blocks would result. But, if a1 were an unknown 
operator, the reversal of blocks d/dt and Uj would not necessarily result in an output equal to x2, as 
shown in Fig. 2-24. 
Fig. 2-24 
(b) 
The + and - operations indicate the need for a summing point. The differentiation operation can be 
treated as in part (a), or by combining two first derivative operations into one second derivative 
operator block, giving two different block diagrams for the equation for x 3 , as shown in Fig. 2-25. 

25 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
Fig. 2-25 
(c) 
The integration operation can be represented in block diagram form as Fig. 2-26. 
Fig. 2-26 
2.3. 
D r a w a block diagram for the pivoted, adjustable mirror mechanism of Section 1.1 with the 
output identified as in Problem 1.1. Assume that each 360° rotation of the screw raises or lowers 
the mirror k degrees. Identify all the signals and components of the control system in the 
diagram. 
The schematic diagram of the system is repeated in Fig. 2-27 for convenience. 
Fig. 2-27 
Whereas the input was defined as 8 in Problem 1.1, the specifications for this problem imply an input 
equal to the number of rotations of the screw. Let n be the number of rotations of the screw such that n = 0 
when 6 = 0°. Therefore n and 8 can be related by a block described by the constant k, since 8 = kn, as 
shown in Fig. 2-28. 
Fig. 2-28 
Fig. 2-29 

26 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
The output of the system was determined in Problem 1.1 as 8 + a. But since the light source is directed 
parallel to the reference surface, then a — 8. Therefore the output is equal to 26, and the mirror can be 
represented by a constant equal to 2 in a block, as shown in Fig. 2-29. 
The complete open-loop block diagram is given by Fig. 2-30. For this simple example we also note that 
the output 26 is equal to 2kn rotations of the screw. This yields the simpler block diagram of Fig. 2-31. 
Fig. 2-30 
Fig. 2-31 
2.4. 
Draw an open-loop and a closed-loop block diagram for the voltage divider network of Problem 
1.11. 
The open-loop equation was determined in Problem 1.11 as v2 = (R2/(RT 
+ R2))V[, 
where r;, is the 
input and th is the output. Therefore the block is represented by RT/{R] 
+ R2) 
(Fig. 2-32), and clearly the 
operation is multiplication. 
The closed-loop equation is 
The actuating signal is vt - v2. The closed-loop negative feedback block diagram is easily constructed with 
the only block represented by R2/RX, 
as shown in Fig. 2-33. 
Fig. 2-32 
Fig. 2-33 
2.5. 
D r a w a block diagram for the electric switch of Example 1.1 (see Problems 1.9 and 1.10). 
Both the input and output are binary (two-state) variables. The switch is represented by a block, and 
the electrical power source the switch controls is not part of the control system. One possible open-loop 
block diagram is given by Fig. 2-34. 
Fig. 2-34 
For example, suppose the power source is an electrical current source. Then the block diagram for the 
switch might take the form of Fig. 2-35, where (again) the current source is not part of the control system, 
the input to the switch block is shown as a mechanical linkage to a simple "knife" switch, and the output is 
a nonzero current only when the switch is closed (on). Otherwise it is zero (off). 

27 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
Fig. 2-35 
2.6. 
D r a w simple block diagrams for the control systems in Examples 1.2 through 1.5. 
From Problem 1.10 wc note that these systems are closed-loop, and from Problem 1.9 the actuating 
signal (control action) for the system in each example is equal to the input minus the output. Therefore 
negative feedback exists in each system. 
For the thermostatically controlled furnace of Example 1.2, the thermostat can be chosen as the 
summing point, since this is the device that determines whether or not the furnace is turned on. The 
enclosure environment (outside) temperature may be treated as a noise input acting directly on the 
enclosure. 
The eyes may be represented by a summing point in both the human pointing system of Example 1.3 
and the driver-automobile system of Example 1.5. The eyes perform the function of monitoring the input 
and output. 
For the perspiration system of Example 1.4, the summing point is not so easily defined. For the sake of 
simplicity let us call it the nervous system. 
The block diagrams are easily constructed as shown below from the information given above and the 
list of components, inputs, and outputs given in the examples. 
The arrows between components in the block diagrams of the biological systems in Examples 1.3 
through 1.5 represent electrical, chemical, or mechanical signals controlled by the central nervous system. 
Example 
1.2 
Example 1.3 

[CHAP. 2 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
28 
Example 1.4 
Example 1.5 
BLOCK DIAGRAMS OF FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS 
2.7. 
Draw a block diagram for the water-filling system described in Problem 1.15. Which component 
or components comprise the plant? The controller? The feedback? 
The container is the plant because the water level of the container is being controlled (see Definition 
2.1). The stopper valve may be chosen as the control element; and the ball-float, cord, and associated 
linkage as the feedback elements. The block diagram is given in Fig. 2-36. 
Fig. 2-36 
The feedback is negative because the water flow rate to the container must decrease as the water level 
rises in the container. 
2.8. 
Draw a simple block diagram for the feedback control system of Examples 1.7 and 1.8, 
the 
airplane with an autopilot. 
The plant for this system is the airplane, including its control surfaces and navigational instruments. 
The controller is the autopilot mechanism, and the summing point is the comparison device. The feedback 
linkage may be simply represented by an arrow from the output to the summing point, as this linkage is not 
well defined in Example 1.8. 
The autopilot provides control signals to operate the control surfaces (rudder, flaps, etc.). These signals 
may be denoted ux, u2,... . 

29 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
The simplest block diagram for this feedback system is given in Fig. 2-37. 
Fig. 2-37 
SERVOMECHAMSMS 
2.9. 
Draw a schematic and a block diagram from the following description of a position servomecha­
nism whose function is to open and close a water valve. 
A t the input of the system there is a rotating-type potentiometer connected across a battery 
voltage source. Its movable (third) terminal is calibrated i n terms of angular position (in 
radians). This output terminal is electrically connected to one terminal of a voltage amplifier 
called a servoamplifter. The servoamplifier supplies enough output power to operate an electric 
motor called a servomotor. The servomotor is mechanically linked with the water valve in a 
manner which permits the valve to be opened or closed by the motor. 
Assume the loading effect of the valve on the motor is negligible; that is. it does not "resist" 
the motor. A 360° rotation of the motor shaft completely opens the valve. In addition, the 
movable terminal of a second potentiometer connected in parallel at its fixed terminals with the 
input potentiometer is mechanically connected to the motor shaft. It is electrically connected to 
the remaining input terminal of the servoamplifier. The potentiometer ratios are set so that they 
are equal when the valve is closed. 
When a command is given to open the valve, the servomotor rotates in the appropriate 
direction. A s the valve opens, the second potentiometer, called the feedback potentiometer, 
rotates in the same direction as the input potentiometer. It stops when the potentiometer ratios 
are again equal. 
A schematic diagram (Fig. 2-38) is easily drawn from the preceding description. Mechanical connec­
tions are shown as dashed lines. 
Fig. 2-38 
The block diagram for this system (Fig. 2-39) is easily drawn from the schematic diagram. 

30 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
I he potentiometer is a rotatmg-type, calibrated in radians per seconds, and the prime-mover 
speed, motor field winding, and input potentiometer currents are constant functions of time. N o 
load is attached to the motor shaft. 
Fig. 2-41 
Fig. 2-39 
Fig. 2-40 
2.10. 
Draw a block diagram for the elementary speed control system (velocity servomechanism) given 
in Fig. 2-40. 

C H A P . 2] 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
31 
The battery voltage sources for both the input potentiometer and motor field winding, and the 
prime-mover source for the generator are not part of the control loop of this servomechanism. The output 
of each of these sources is a constant function of time, and can be accounted for in the mathematical 
description of the input potentiometer, generator, and motor, respectively. Therefore the block diagram for 
this system is given in Fig. 2-41. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
PROBLEMS 
2.11. 
Draw a block diagram for the photocell light switch system described in Problem 1.16. The light 
intensity in the room must be maintained at a level greater than or equal to a prespecified level. 
One way of describing this system is with two inputs, one input chosen as minimum reference 
room-light intensity rx, and the second as room sunlight intensity r2. The output c is actual room-light 
intensity. 
The room is the plant. The manipulated variable (control signal) is the amount of light supplied to the 
room from both the lamp and the sun. The photocell and the lamp are the control elements because they 
control room-light intensity. Assume the minimum reference room-light intensity r, is equal to the intensity 
of room-light supplied by the lighted lamp alone. A block diagram for this system is given in Fig. 2-42. 
The system is clearly open-loop. The actuating signal e is independent of the output c, and is equal to 
the difference between the two inputs: rx - r2. When e < 0, / = 0 (the light is off). When e > 0, / = r{ (the 
light is on). 
2.12. 
Draw a block diagram for the closed-loop traffic signal system described in Problem 1.13. 
Fig. 2-43 
Fig. 2-42 

32 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
This system has two outputs, the volume of traffic passing the intersection in one direction (the A 
direction), and the volume passing the intersection in the other direction (the B direction). The input is the 
command for equal traffic volumes in directions A and B; that is, the input is zero volume difference, 
Suppose we call the mechanism for computing the appropriate red and green timing intervals the 
Red-Green Time Interval Computer. This device, in addition to the traffic signal, makes up the control 
elements. The plants are the roadway in direction A and the roadway in direction B. The block diagram of 
this traffic regulator is given in Fig. 2-43. 
2.13. 
Draw a block diagram illustrating the economic Law of Supply and Demand, as described in 
Problem 1.12. 
The block diagram is given by Fig. 2-44. 
Fig. 2-44 
2.14. 
The following very simplified model of the biological mechanism regulating human arterial blood 
pressure is an example of a feedback control system. 
A well-regulated pressure must be maintained in the blood vessels (arteries, arterioles, and 
capillaries) supplying the tissues, so that blood flow is adequately maintained. This pressure is 
usually measured in the aorta (an artery) and is called the blood pressure p. It is not constant and 
normally has a range of 70-130 mm of mercury (mm Hg) in adults. Let us assume that p is 
equal to 100 mm Hg (on the average) in a normal individual. 
A fundamental model of circulatory physiology is the following equation for arterial blood 
pressure: 
p = Qp 
where Q is the cardiac output, or the volume flow rate of blood from the heart to the aorta, and p 
is the peripheral resistance offered to blood flow by the arterioles. Under normal conditions, p is 
approximately inversely proportional to the fourth power of the diameter d of the vessels 
(arterioles). 
Now d is believed to be controlled by the vasomotor center (VMC) of the brain, with 
increased activity of the V M C decreasing d, and vice versa. Although several factors affect V M C 
activity, the baroreceptor cells of the arterial sinus are believed to be the most important. 
Baroreceptor activity inhibits the V M C , and therefore functions in a negative feedback mode. 
According to this theory, if p increases, the baroreceptors send signals along the vagus and 
glossopharyngeal nerves to the V M C , decreasing its activity. This results in an increase in 
arteriole diameter d, a decrease in peripheral resistance p, and (assuming constant cardiac output 
Q) a corresponding drop in blood pressure p. This feedback network probably regulates, at least 
in part, blood pressure in the aorta. 
Draw a block diagram of this feedback control system, identifying all signals and compo­
nents. 

C H A P . 2] 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
33 
Let the aorta be the plant, represented by Q (cardiac output); the V M C and arterioles may be chosen 
as the controller; the barorcceptors are the feedback elements. The input p{) is the average normal 
(reference) blood pressure, 100 mm Hg. The output p is the actual blood pressure. Since p = 
k(l/d)
4, 
where k is a proportionality constant, the arterioles can be represented in the block by k(-)
i. The block 
diagram is given in Fig. 2-45. 
Fig. 2-45 
2.15. 
The thyroid gland, an endocrine (internally secreting) gland located in the neck in the human, 
secretes thyroxine into the bloodstream. The bloodstream is the signal transmission system for 
most of the endocrine glands, just as conductive wires are the transmission system for the flow of 
electrical current, or pipes and tubes may be the transmission system for hydrodynamic fluid 
flow. 
Like most human physiological processes, the production of thyroxine by the thyroid gland 
is automatically controlled. The amount of thyroxine in the bloodstream is regulated in part by a 
hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary, an endocrine gland suspended from the base of the 
brain. This "control" hormone is appropriately called thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). In a 
simplified view of this control system, when the level of thyroxine in the circulatory system is 
higher than that required by the organism, T S H secretion is inhibited (reduced), causing a 
reduction in the activity of the thyroid. Hence less thyroxine is released by the thyroid. 
Draw a block diagram of the simplified system described, identifying all components and 
signals. 
Let the plant be the thyroid gland, with the controlled variable the level of thyroxine in the 
bloodstream. The pituitary gland is the controller, and the manipulated variable is the amount of T S H it 
secretes. The block diagram is given in Fig. 2-46. 
Fig. 2-46 
We recmphasize that this is a very simplified view of this biological control system, as was that in the 
previous problem. 

[CHAP. 2 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
34 
2.16. 
What type of controller is included in the more realistic thermostatically controlled heating 
system described in Example 1.14? 
The thermostat-furnace controller has a binary output: furnace (full) on, or furnace off. Therefore it is 
an on-off controller. But it is not as simple as the sign-sensing binary controller of Example 2.13. The 
thermostat switch turns the furnace on when room temperature falls to 2° below its setpoint of 68°F 
(22° C), and turns it off when it rises to 2° above its setpoint. 
Graphically, the characteristic curve of such a controller has the form given in Fig. 2-47. 
Fig. 2-47 
This is called a hysteresis characteristic curve, because its output has a "memory"; that is, the 
switching points depend on whether the input e is rising or falling when the controller switches states from 
on to off, or off to on. 
2.17. 
Sketch the error, control, and controlled output signals as functions of time and discuss how the 
on-off controller of Problem 2.16 maintains the average room temperature specified by 
the 
setpoint (68°F) of the thermostat? 
The signals e(r), u(t), and c(t) typically have the form shown in Fig. 2-48, assuming the temperature 
was colder than 66°F at the start. 
Fig. 2-48 

C H A P . 2] 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
35 
The room temperature c(t) is constantly varying,. In each switching interval of the controller, it rises at 
an approximately constant rate, from 66° to 70°, or falls at an approximately constant rate, from 70° to 
66°. The average temperature of the room is the mean value of this function c(t), which is approximately 
68°F. 
2.18. 
What major advantage does a computer-controlled system have over an analog system? 
The controller (control law) in a computer-controlled system is typically implemented by means of 
software, rather than hardware. Therefore the class of control laws that can be implemented conveniently is 
substantially increased. 
Supplementary Problems 
2.19. 
The schematic diagram of a semiconductor voltage amplifier called an emitter follower is given in Fig. 2-49. 
A n equivalent circuit for this amplifier is shown in Fig. 2-50, where r„ is the internal resistance of, and 
/x is a parameter of the particular semiconductor. Draw both an open-loop and a closed-loop block diagram 
for this circuit with an input vin and an output (:>m. 
2.20. 
Draw a block diagram for the human walking system of Problem 1.14. 
2.21. 
Draw a block diagram for the human reaching system described in Problem 1.4. 
2.22. 
Draw a block diagram for the automatic temperature-regulated oven of Problem 1.21. 
2.23. 
Draw a block diagram for the closed-loop automatic toaster of Problem 1.17. 
2.24. 
State the common dimensional units for the input and output of the following transducers: (u) accelerome-
ter, (b) generator of electricity, (r) thermistor (temperature-sensitive resistor), (d) thermocouple. 
2.25. 
Which systems in Problems 2.1 through 2.8 and 2.11 through 2,21 are servomeehanisms? 
2.26. 
The endocrine gland known as the adrenal cortex is located on top of each kidney (two parts). It secretes 
several hormones, one of which is Cortisol. Cortisol plays an important part in regulating the metabolism of 
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats, particularly in times of stress. Cortisol production is controlled by 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary gland. High blood Cortisol inhibits 
A C T H production. Draw a block diagram of this simplified feedback control system. 
Fig. 2-49 
Fig. 2-50 

36 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
2.27. 
Draw block diagrams for each of the following elements, first with voltage v as input and current i as 
output, and then vice versa: (a) resistance R, (b) capacitance C. (c) inductance L, 
2.28. 
Draw block diagrams for each of the following mechanical systems, where force is the input and position 
the output: (a) a dashpot, (b) a spring, (c) a mass, (d) a mass, spring, and dashpot connected in scries and 
fastened at one end (mass position is the output). 
2.29. 
Draw a block diagram of a (a) parallel, (b) series R-L-C network. 
2.30. 
Which systems described in the problems of this chapter arc regulators? 
2.31. 
What type of sampled-data system described in this chapter might be used in implementing a device or 
algorithm for approximating the integral of a continuous function u(t), using the well-known rectangular 
rule, or rectangular integration technique? 
2.32. 
Draw a simple block diagram of a computer-controlled system in which a digital computer is used to 
control an analog plant or process, with the summing point and reference input implemented in software in 
the computer. 
2.33. 
What type of controller is the stopper valve of the water-filling system of Problem 2.7? 
2.34. 
What types of controllers are included in: (a) each of the servomechanisms of Problems 2.9 and 2.10, (b) 
the traffic regulator of Problem 2.127 
2.19. 
The equivalent circuit for the emitter follower has the same form as the voltage divider network of Problem 
1.11. Therefore the open-loop equation for the output is 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
and the open-loop block diagram is given in fig. 2-51. 
The closed-loop output equation is simply 
and the closed-loop block diagram is given in Fig. 2-52. 
Fig. 2-52 
Fig. 2-51 

37 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
C H A P . 2] 
2.20. 
2.21. 
2.22. 
2.23. 
2.24. 
(a) 
The input to an accelerometer is acceleration. The output is displacement of a mass, voltage, or 
another quantity proportional to acceleration. 
(b) 
See Problem 1.2. 
(c) 
The input to a thermistor is temperature. The output is an electrical quantity measured in ohms, volts, 
or amperes. 
(d) 
The input to a thermocouple is a temperature difference. The output is a voltage. 
2.25. 
The following problems describe servomechanisms: Examples 1.3 and 1.5 in Problem 2.6, and Problems 2.7, 
2.8, 2.17, and 2.21. 

38 
C O N T R O L SYSTEMS T E R M I N O L O G Y 
[CHAP. 2 
2.30. 
The systems of Examples 1.2 and 1.4 in Problem 2.6, and the systems of Problems 2.7, 2.8, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 
2.15, 2.22, 2.23, and 2.26 are regulators. 
2.31. 
The sampler and zero-order hold device of Example 2.9 performs part of the process required for 
rectangular integration. For this simplest numerical integration algorithm, the "area under the curve" (i.e., 
the integral) is approximated by small rectangles of height u(tk) and width tk + 1 - tk. This result could be 
obtained by first multiplying the output of the hold device u*(t) by the width of the interval tk + l — tk, 
when u*(t) is on the interval between tk and tk + l . The sum of these products is the desired result. 
2.32. 
2.33. 
If the stopper valve is a simple one of the type that can be only fully open or fully closed, it is an on-off 
controller. But if it is that type that closes gradually as the tank fills, it is a proportional controller. 
2.26. 

Chapter 3 
Differential Equations, Difference Equations, 
and Linear Systems 
3.1 
SYSTEM EQUATIONS 
A property common to all basic laws of physics is that certain fundamental quantities can be 
denned by numerical values. The physical laws define relationships between these fundamental 
quantities and are usually represented by equations. 
EXAMPLE 3.1. The scalar version of Newton's second law states that, if a force of magnitude /' is applied to a 
mass of M units, the acceleration a of the mass is related to / by the equation / = Ma. 
EXAMPLE 3.2. Ohm's law states that, if a voltage of magnitude v is applied across a resistor of R units, the 
current 
through the resistor is related to v by the equation v = Ri. 
Many nonphysical laws can also be represented by equations. 
EXAMPLE 3.3. 
The compound interest law states that, if an amount P(0) is deposited for n equal periods of time 
at an interest rate / for each time period, the amount will grow to a value of P{n) = /
>(0)(1 + /)", 
3.2 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS 
Two classes of equations with broad application in the description of systems are differential 
equations and difference equations. 
Definition 3.1: 
A differential equation is any algebraic or transcendental equality which involves 
either differentials or derivatives. 
Differential equations are useful for relating rates of change of variables and other parameters. 
EXAMPLE 3.4. 
Newton's second law (Example 3.1) can be written alternatively as a relationship between force / . 
mass A/, and the rate of change of tb. velocity v of the mass with respect to time t, that is, / = M(dv/dt). 
EXAMPLE 3.5. Ohm's law (Example 3.2) can be written alternatively as a relationship between voltage v, 
resistance R, and the time rate of passage of charge through the resistor, that is, u = R{dq/dt). 
EXAMPLE 3.6. The diffusion equation in one dimension describes the relationship between the time rate of 
change of a quantity T in an object (e.g., heat concentration in an iron bar} and the positional rate of change of T: 
dT/dx = k(dT/dt), 
where k is a proportionality constant, x is a position variable, and t is time. 
Definition 3.2: 
A difference equation is an algebraic or transcendental equality which involves more 
than one value of the dependent variable(s) corresponding to more than one value 
of at least one of the independent variable(s). The dependent variables do not 
involve either differentials or derivatives. 
Difference equations are useful for relating the evolution of variables (or parameters) from one 
discrete instant of time (or other independent variable) to another. 
39 

40 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
EXAMPLE 3.7. The compound interest law of Example 3.3 can be written alternatively as a difference equation 
relationship between P{k), the amount of money after k periods of time, and P(k + 1), the amount of money after 
k + 1 periods of time, that is, P(k + !) = (!+ I)P(k). 
3.3 
PARTIAL AND ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
Definition 3.3: 
A partial differential equation is an equality involving one or more dependent and 
two or more independent variables, together with partial derivatives of the depen­
dent with respect to the independent variables. 
Definition 3.4: 
A n ordinary (total) differential equation is an equality involving one or more 
dependent variables, one independent variable, and one or more derivatives of the 
dependent variables with respect to the independent variable. 
EXAMPLE 3.8. The diffusion equation dT/dx = k(dT/dt) is a partial differential equation. T = T(x, t) is the 
dependent variable, which represents the concentration of some quantity at some position and some time in the 
object. The independent variable x defines the position in the object, and the independent variable t defines the 
time. 
EXAMPLE 3.9. Newton's second law (Example 3.4) is an ordinary differential equation: / = M(dv/dt). The 
velocity v = v(t) and the force / = /(/) arc dependent variables, and the time t is the independent variable. 
EXAMPLE 3.10. Ohm's law (Example 3.5) is an ordinary differential equation; v = R(dq/dt). The charge 
q = q(t) and the voltage v = v(t) are dependent variables, and the time t is the independent variable. 
i - o
 
a
l 
where a„, ax,...,an 
are constants, is an ordinary differential equation. y(t) and u(i) arc dependent variables, and 
t is the independent variable. 
3.4 
TIME VARIABILITY AND TIME INVARIANCE 
In the remainder of this chapter, time is the only independent variable, unless otherwise specified. 
This variable is normally designated t. except that in difference equations the discrete variable k is 
often used, as an abbreviation for the time instant tk (see Example 1.11 and Section 2.5); that is, y(k) 
is used instead of y{tk). etc. 
A term of a differential or difference equation consists of products a n d / o r quotients of explicit 
functions of the independent variable, the dependent variables, and, for differential equations, deriva­
tives of the dependent variables. 
In the definitions of this and the next section, the term equation refers to either a differential 
equation or a difference equation. 
Definition 3.5: 
A time-variable equation is an equation in which one or more terms depend 
explicitly on the independent variable time. 
Definition 3.6: 
A time-invariant equation is an equation in which none of the terms depends 
explicitly on the independent variable time. 
EXAMPLE 3.11. 
A differential equation of the form: 
or, more compactly. 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
41 
EXAMPLE 3.12. 
The difference equation ky(k + 2) + y(k) = u(k), where u and y are dependent variables, is 
time-variable because the term ky(k + 2) depends explicitly on the coefficient k, which represents the time th. 
EXAMPLE 3.13. 
Any differential equation of the form: 
3.5 
LINEAR AND NONLINEAR DIFFERENTIAL AND DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS 
Definition 3.7: 
A linear term is one which is first degree in the dependent variables and their 
derivatives. 
Definition 3.8: 
A linear equation is an equation consisting of a sum of linear terms. A l l others are 
nonlinear equations. 
If any term of a differential equation contains higher powers, products, or transcendental functions 
of the dependent variables, it is nonlinear. Such terms include (dy/drf, 
u(dy/dt), and sin u, respec­
tively. For example, (5/cos t)(d
2y/dt
2) 
is a term of first degree in the dependent variable y, and 
2uy
3(dy/dt) 
is a term of fifth degree in the dependent variables u and y. 
EXAMPLE 3.14. 
The ordinary differential equations (dy/dt)
2 +y = 0 and d
2y/dt
2 + cos y = 0 are nonlinear 
because (dy/dt)
1 is second degree in the first equation, and cos^ in the second equation is not first degree, which 
is true of all transcendental functions. 
EXAMPLE 3.15. 
The difference equation y(k + 2) + u(k + l)y(k + 1) + y(k) = u(k), in which u and y are 
dependent variables, is a nonlinear difference equation because u(k + V)y(k + 1) is second degree in u and y. This 
type of nonlinear equation is sometimes called bilinear in u and v. 
3.6 
T H E DIFFERENTIAL OPERATOR D AND THE CHARACTERISTIC EQUATION 
Consider the «th-order linear constant-coefficient differential equation 
(3.2) 
where the coefficients a0, ax,..., a„, b0, bl,..., b„, are constants, is time-invariant. The equation depends implicitly 
on t, via the dependent variables u and y and their derivatives. 
EXAMPLE 3.16. 
Any difference equation 
(3.3) 
in which the coefficients a,(A:) and bt(k) depend only upon the independent variable k, is a linear difference 
equation. 
EXAMPLE 3.17. 
Any ordinary differential equation 
(3.4) 
where the coefficients a,-(r) and />,(?) depend only upon the independent variable t, is a linear differential equation. 
(3.5) 

42 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
It is convenient to define a differential operator 
and more generally an nth-order differential operator 
The differential equation can now be written as 
or 
Definition 3.9: 
The polynomial in D: 
is called the characteristic polynomial. 
(3.6) 
Definition 3.10: 
The equation 
is called the characteristic equation. 
(3.7) 
The fundamental theorem of algebra states that the characteristic equation has exactly n solutions 
D = D}, D = D2 
D = Dtl. These « solutions (also called roots) are not necessarily distinct. 
EXAMPLE 3.18. 
Consider the differential equation 
The characteristic polynomial is D
2 + 3D + 2. The characteristic equation is D
2 + 3D+2 = 0, 
which has the two distinct roots: D = — 1 and D— —2. 
3.7 
LINEAR INDEPENDENCE AND FUNDAMENTAL SETS 
Definition 3.11: 
A set of n functions of time fA[t), f2(t) 
fn(t) is called linearly independent if the 
only set of constants c\, c 2,..., c„ for which 
cjl{t) 
+ c2f1(t)+ 
• • • + c „ / „ ( r ) = o 
for all t are the constants c\ = c2 = - • • = cn = 0. 
EXAMPLE 3.19. 
The functions t and t
2 arc linearly independent functions since 
c{t + c2t
2 = ?(<?, + c2t) = 0 
implies that c1/c1 = - / . There are no constants that satisfy this relationship. 
A homogeneous /?th-order linear differential equation of the form: 
has at least one set of n linearly independent solutions. 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
43 
Definition 3.12: 
A n y set of n linearly independent solutions of a homogeneous 
rtth-order 
linear 
differential equation is called a fundamental set. 
There is no unique fundamental set. F r o m a given fundamental set other fundamental sets can be 
generated by the following technique. Suppose that >',(/), y2(t),..., 
yn(t) is a fundamental set for an 
wth-order linear differential equation. Then a set of n functions z , ( f ) , z2(t),..., 
' , , ( 0 can be formed: 
(3.8) 
where the aj: are a set of n
2 constants. Each z,-(r) is a solution of the differential equation. This set of n 
solutions is a fundamental set if the determinant 
EXAMPLE 3,20. 
The equation for simple harmonic motion, d
2v/dt
2 
+ OJ
2J' = 0, has as a fundamental set 
EXAMPLE 3.22. 
The equation 
*The complex exponential function <?*', where iv = u t jv for real u and v, and / = / - 1 , 
c"' • e"(cos c l / sin r). Therefore t ' >•" = cos uf 1 j sin wf. 
is defined in complex variable theorv by 
A second fundamental set is* 
Distinct Roots 
If the characteristic equation 
has distinct roots Dv D2...., 
Dn, then a fundamental set for the homogeneous equation 
is the set of functions 
has the characteristic equation D
1 + 3D + 2 = 0 whose roots are D = D, = —1 and D = D, = — 2. A fundamental 
set for this equation is j j = e"' and y2 = e~
2'. 
Repeated Roots 
If the characteristic equation has repeated roots, then for each root Dt of multiplicity 
H , (i.e., n, 
roots equal to D:) there are n, elements of the fundamental set e
D<', te
D,t 
t"<
 le
D<'. 
EXAMPLE 3.21. 
The differential equation 

44 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
with characteristic equation D
2 + 2D + 1 = 0, has the repeated root D = — 1, and a fundamental set consisting of 
e~' and te~'. 
3.8 
SOLUTION OF LINEAR CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT ORDINARY 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
Consider the class of differential equations of the form: 
(3.10) 
A problem defined over this interval and with these initial conditions is called an initial value problem. 
The solution of a differential equation of this class can be divided into two parts, a free response 
and a forced response. The sum of these two responses constitutes the total response, or solution y(t), of 
the equation. 
3.9 
THE FREE RESPONSE 
The free response of a differential equation is the solution of the differential equation when the 
input u(t) is identically zero. 
If the input u(t) is identically zero, then the differential equation has the form: 
(3.9) 
where the coefficients at and bt are constant, u = u(t) (the input) is a known time function, and y =y(t) 
(the output) is the unknown solution of the equation. If this equation describes a physical system, then 
generally m <n, and n is called the order of the differential equation. To completely specify the 
problem so that a unique solution y(t) can be obtained, two additional items must be specified: (1) the 
interval of time over which a solution is desired and (2) a set of n initial conditions for y(t) and its first 
n — 1 derivatives. The time interval for the class of problems considered is defined by 0 < t < + oo. This 
interval is used in the remainder of this book unless otherwise specified. The set of initial conditions is 
(3.11) 
The solution y(t) of such an equation depends only on the n initial conditions in Equation (3.10). 
EXAMPLE 3.23. The solution of the homogeneous first-order differential equation dy/dt+y = 0 with initial 
condition ^(0) = c, is y(t) = ce~'. This can be verified by direct substitution. ce~' is the free response of any 
differential equation of the form dy/dt + y = u with the initial condition y(0) = c. 
The free response of a differential equation can always be written as a linear combination of the 
elements of a fundamental set. That is, if yx(t), y2(t),..., 
yn(t) is a fundamental set, then any free 
response ya(t) of the differential equation can be represented as 
(3.12) 
where the constants c, are determined in terms of the initial conditions 

45 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 3] 
(3.13) 
The linear independence of the >',-(0 guarantees that a solution to these equations can be obtained for 
EXAMPLE 3.24. The free response y„(t) of the differential equation 
with initial conditions v(O) = 0, (dy/dt)\f_n = 1 is determined by letting 
where cl and c2 are unknown coefficients and e ' and e
 
2 f are a fundamental set for the equation (Example 3.21). 
Since ya(t) must satisfy the initial conditions, that is, 
then c 
The free response is therefore given by 
3.10 
T H E FORCED RESPONSE 
The forced response yb(t) of a differential equation is the solution of the differentia! equation when 
all the initial conditions 
are identically zero. 
The implication of this definition is that the forced response depends only on the input u{t). The 
forced response for a linear constant-coefficient ordinary differential equation can be written in terms of 
a convolution integral (see Example 3.38): 
(3.14) 
where w(f — T ) is the weighting function (or kernel) of the differential equation. This form of the 
convolution integral assumes that the weighting function describes a causal system (see Definition 3.22). 
This assumption is maintained below. 
The weighting function of a linear constant-coefficient ordinary differential equation can be written 
as 
(3.15) 
where c , , . . . , cn are constants and the set of functions y\(t), y2(t),- • -, > ' „ ( ' ) '
s 
a fundamental set of the 
differential equation. It should be noted that w(t) is a free response of the differential equation and 
therefore requires n initial conditions for complete specification. These conditions fix the values of the 
constants c\,c2,....cn. 
The initial conditions which all weighting functions oT linear differential 
equations must satisfy are 
(3.16) 

46 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.11 
THE TOTAL RESPONSE 
The total response of a linear constant-coefficient differential equation is the sum of the free 
response and the forced response. 
EXAMPLE 3.27. 
The total response y(t) of the differential equation 
3.12 
THE STEADY STATE AND TRANSIENT RESPONSES 
The steady state response and transient response are another pair of quantities whose sum is equal to 
the total response. These terms are often used for specifying control system performance. They are 
defined as follows. 
Definition 3.13: 
The steady state response is that part of the total response which does not approach 
zero as time approaches infinity. 
Definition 3.14: 
The transient response is that part of the total response which approaches zero as 
time approaches infinity. 
EXAMPLE 3.28. 
The total response for the differential equation in Example 3.27 was determined as y = \ — \ e '. 
Clearly, the steady state response is given by v H = i . Since l i m f ^ x [ - \e '] = 0, the transient response is 
EXAMPLE 3.25. 
The weighting function of the differential equation 
is a linear combination of e ' and e
 2 ' (a fundamental set of the equation). That is, 
c\ and c. are determined from the two algebraic equations 
The solution is c, =1, c : = - 1, and the weighting function 
EXAMPLE 3.26. 
For the differential equation of Example 3.25, if u{t) = 1, then the forced response y,,(t) of the 
equation is 
with initial conditions y(0) = 0 and (dy/dt)\t_n = 1 is the sum of the free response ya(t) determined in Example 
3.24 and the forced response »,(f) determined in Example 3.26. Thus 

47 
C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
3.13 
S I N G U L A R I T Y FUNCTIONS: STEPS, R A M P S , A N D I M P U L S E S 
In the study of control systems and the equations which describe them, a particular family of 
functions called singularity functions is used extensively. Each member of this family is related to the 
others by one or more integrations or differentiations. The three most widely used singularity functions 
are the unit step, the unit impulse, and the unit ramp. 
Definition 3.15: 
A unit step function 
is defined by 
{3.17) 
The unit step function is illustrated in Fig. 3-1. 
Fig. 3-1 
Fig. 3-2 
Frg. 3-3 
Definition 3.16: 
A unit ramp function is the integral of a unit step function 
(3.18) 
The unit ramp function is illustrated in Fig. 3-2. 
Definition 3.17: 
A unit impulse function 8(t) may be defined by 
(3.19)* 
where 1(f) is the unit step function. 
The pair 
nay be abbreviated by 
meaning that 
approaches zero from the 
right. The quotient in brackets represents a rectangle of height 1/Af and width At as shown in Fig. 3-3. 
The limiting process produces a function whose height approaches infinity and width approaches zero. 
The area under the curve is equal to 1 for all values of At. That is, 
The unit impulse function has the following very important property: 
Screening Property: 
The integral of the product of a unit impulse function S(t — t0) and a function 
/(f). continuous at t — f0 over an interval which includes tQ, is equal to the function 
*ln a formal sense. Equation (3.10) defines the one-sided derivative of the unit step function. Bui neither the limit nor the 
derivative exist in the ordinary mathematical sense. However, Definition 3.17 is satisfactory for the purposes of this book, and 
many others. 

48 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
f(t) evaluated at t0, that is, 
(3.20) 
Definition 3.18: 
The unit impulse response of a system is the output y(t) of the system when the 
input u(t) = 8(t) and all initial conditions are zero. 
EXAMPLE 3.29. 
If the input-output relationship of a linear system is given by the convolution integral 
then the unit impulse response ys(t) of the system is 
since w(t — T) = 0 for T > t, 8(T) = 0 for T < 0 , and the screening property of the unit impulse has been used to 
evaluate the integral. 
Definition 3.19: 
The unit step response is the output y(t) when the input u(t) = 1(7) and all initial 
conditions are zero. 
Definition 3.20: 
The unit ramp response is the output y(t) when the input u(t) = t for t > 0, 
u(t) = 0 for / < 0, and all initial conditions are zero. 
3.14 
SECOND-ORDER SYSTEMS 
In the study of control systems, linear constant-coefficient second-order differential equations of the 
form: 
(3.21) 
(3.22) 
are important because higher-order systems can often be approximated by second-order systems. The 
constant f is called the damping ratio, and the constant un is called the undamped natural frequency of 
the system. The forced response of this equation for inputs u belonging to the class of singularity 
functions is of particular interest. That is, the forced response to a unit impulse, unit step, or unit ramp 
is the same as the unit impulse response, unit step response, or unit ramp response of a system 
represented by this equation. 
Assuming that 0 < f < 1, the characteristic equation for Equation (3.22) is 
Hence the roots are 
where a = fccn is called the damping coefficient, and ud = ujl 
- f
2 
is called the damped natural 
frequency, a is the inverse of the time constant T of the system, that is, T = 
I/a. 
The weighting function of Equation (3.22) is w(t) = (\/ud)e~
m 
sinw^r. The unit step response is 
given by 
(3.23) 
where 4> = 
tan~
1(cod/a). 
Figure 3-4 is a parametric representation of the unit step response. Note that the abscissa of this 
family of curves is normalized time ccnt, and the parameter defining each curve is the damping ratio f. 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
49 
Fig. 3-4 
3.15 
STATE VARIABLE REPRESENTATION OF SYSTEMS DESCRIBED BY LINEAR 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
In some problems of feedback and control, it is more convenient to describe a system by a set of 
first-order differential equations rather than by one or more nth-order differential equations. One 
reason is that quite general and powerful results from vector-matrix algebra can then be easily applied 
in deriving solutions for the differential equations. 

50 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
EXAMPLE 3.30. 
Consider the differential equation form of Newton's second law, / = M(d
2x/dt
1). 
It is clear 
from the meanings of velocity v and acceleration a that this second-order equation can be replaced by two 
first-order equations, v = dx/dt and f= M(dv/dt). 
There are numerous ways to transform «th-order differential equations into n first-order equations. 
One of these is quite prevalent in the literature, and straightforward, and we introduce only this 
transformation here, to illustrate the approach. Consider the nth-order, single-input linear constant-
coefficient differential equation 
This equation can always be replaced by the following n first-order differential equations: 
(3.24a) 
where we have chosen x1 = y. Using vector-matrix notation, this set of equations can be written as 
or, more compactly, as 
(3.24b) 
(3.24c) 
In Equation (3.24c) x = x(t) is called the state vector, with n time functions xy(t), x2(t),..., 
xn(t) 
as its 
elements, called the state variables of the system. The scalar input of the system is u(t). 
More generally, multitnput-multioutput (MIMO) systems described by one or more linear constant-
coefficient differential equations can be represented by a vector-matrix differential equation of the form: 
(3.25a) 

51 
C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
or, more compactly, as 
(3.25b) 
In Equation (3.25b) x is denned as in Equation (3.24c). A is the n X n matrix of constants a,-., and B is 
the n X r matrix of constants 
each given in Equation (3.25a), and u is an r-vector of input 
functions. 
The Transition Matrix 
The matrix equation 
where <v is an n X n matrix of time functions, called the transition matrix of the differential equation 
(3.24c) or (3.25b). has a special role in the solution of vector-matrix differential equations like Equation 
(3.25b). If / is the nXn 
identity or unit matrix, and <f>(0) = / is the initial condition of this 
homogeneous equation, the transition matrix has the special solution: $ ( 0 = e
At. In this case e
Al is an 
« x n matrix function defined by the infinite series: 
also has the properly, called the transition property, that for all 
To solve the differential equation (3.24) or (3.25), the time interval of interest must be specified, for 
example, 0 < / < +oc, and an initial condition vector x(0) is also needed. In this case, the general 
solution of Equation (3.25) is 
(3.26) 
The initial condition x(0) is sometimes referred to as the state of the system at time t = 0. From 
Equation (3.26) we see that knowledge of x(0), and the input u(t) on the interval 0 < t < + x . are 
adequate to completely determine the state variables for all time / > 0. Actually, knowledge of the state 
of the system at any time t',0 < t' < + oc, and knowledge of the input «(/), t' < t < + oo, are adequate 
to completely define the state vector \(l) at all subsequent times / > 
3.16 
SOLUTION OF LINEAR CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS 
Consider the class of difference equations 
(3.27) 
where k is the integer-valued discrete-time variable, the coefficients a: and bt are constant, a0 and an 
are nonzero, the input u(k) is a known time sequence, and the output y(k) is the unknown sequence 
solution of the equation. Since y(k + n) is an explicit function of y(k). y(k + 1),..., y(k + n - 1). then 
n is the order of the difference equation. To obtain a unique solution for y(k), 
two additional items 
must be specified, the time sequence over which a solution is desired, and a set of n initial conditions 
for y(k). 
The time sequence for the class of problems treated in this book is the set of nonnegative 
integers, that is, k — 0,1,2,... . The set of initial conditions is 
(3.28) 
A problem defined over this time sequence and with these initial conditions is called an initial value 
problem. 

52 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
Consider the n th-order linear constant-coefficient difference equation 
(3.29) 
It is convenient to define a shift operator Z by the equation 
B y repeated application of this operation, we obtain 
Similarly, a unity operator / is defined by 
and Z = I. The operator Z has the following important algebraic properties: 
The difference equation can thus be written as 
or 
The equation 
(3.30) 
is called the characteristic equation of the difference eauation, and, bv the fundamental theorem of 
algebra, it has exactly n solutions: 
EXAMPLE 3.31. 
Consider the difference equation 
The characteristic equation is 
with two solutions. 
A homogeneous n th-order linear difference equation has at least one set of n linearly independent 
solutions. A n y such set is called a fundamental set. A s with differential equations, fundamental sets are 
not unique. 
If the characteristic equation has distinct roots Zv 
Z
2 , Z „ , a fundamental set for the homoge­
neous eauation 
(3.31) 
EXAMPLE 3.32. 
The difference equation 
has the characteristic eauation 
A fundamental set of 
this equation is 
If the characteristic eauation has reDeated roots, then for each root Z , of multiplicity «,-, there are 
nt elements of the fundamental set 
EXAMPLE 3.33. 
The equation 
with the repeated root 
has a fundamen­
ts set consistine o 
The free response of a difference equation of the form of Equation (3.27) is the solution when the 
input sequence is identically zero. The equation then has the form of Equation (3.31) and its solution 
1. 
F o r constant c, 
is the set of functions 
with roots 
and 
and 
and 

53 
C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
where the constants cf are determined in terms of the initial conditions v,(0) from the set of n algebraic 
equations: 
(3.32) 
The linear independence of the 
guarantees a solution for 
depends only on the n initial conditions (3.28). If 
is a fundamental set, then 
any free response of the difference equation (3.27) can be represented as 
EXAMPLE 3.34. 
The free response of the difference equation 
with initial 
conditions 
is determined by letting 
where c, and c2 are unknown coefficients and 
and 
are a fundamental set for the equation (Example 
Since v,(k) must satisfy the initial conditions, that is, 
then 
and 
The free response is therefore given by 
The forced resoonse vJk) 
of a difference eauation is its solution when all initial conditions 
are zero. It can be written in terms of a convolution sum: 
(3.33) 
where w(k —j) is the weighting sequence of the difference equation. Note that >',,(0) = 0 by definition of 
the forced response, and w(k — j) - 0 for k <j (see Section 3.19). If «(./) = 8(j) = 1 for / = 0, and 
^ ( i )
 
= 0 f °
r . / ^ 0- t
n e special input called the Kronecker delta sequence, then the forced response 
yh(k) = ys(k) 
is called the Kronecker delta response. 
The weighting sequence of a linear constant-coefficient difference equation can be written as 
(3.34) 
where 
is a fundamental set of the difference equation. M(l) is the determinant: 
and 
is the cofactor of the last element in the /th column of 

54 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
EXAMPLE 3,35. 
Consider the difference eauation 
The weighting sequence 
is given by 
where 
Therefore 
As for continuous systems, the total response of a difference equation is the sum of the free and 
forced responses of the equation. The transient response of a difference equation is that part of the total 
response which approaches zero as time approaches infinity. That part of the total response which does 
not approach zero is called the steady state response. 
3.17 
STATE VARIABLE REPRESENTATION OF SYSTEMS DESCRIBED BY LINEAR 
DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS 
As with differential equations in Section 3.15, it is often useful to describe a system by a set of 
first-order difference equations, rather than by one or more »th-order difference equations. 
EXAMPLE 3.36. 
The second-order difference equation 
can be written as the two first-order equations: 
where we have chosen 
Consider the n th-order, single-input, linear constant-coefficient difference equation 
This equation can always be replaced by the following n first-order difference equations: 
(3.35a) 
where we have chosen 
Using vector-matrix notation, this set of equations can be written 

55 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 3] 
as the vector-matrix difference equation 
or, more compactly, as 
(3.35c) 
In these equations, \(k) is an n-vector element of a time sequence called the state vector, made up of 
scalar elements x{(k). x2(k), 
xn(k) called the state variables of the system at time k. 
In general, multiinput-multioutput (MIMO) systems described by one or more linear constant-coef­
ficient difference equations can be represented by 
(3.36) 
where \(k) is the state vector of the system, as above, A is an n X n matrix of constants aif, and B is 
an n X r matrix of constants b:i, each defined as in Equation (3.25a), and u(k) is an /--vector element 
of a (multiple) input sequence. Given a time sequence of interest k = 0,1,2,..., and an initial condition 
vector x(0), the solution of Equation (3.36) can be written as 
(3.37) 
Note that Equation (3.37) has a form similar to Equation (3.26). In general, however, A
k need not have 
the properties of a transition matrix of a differential equation. But there is one very important case 
when A
k does have such properties, that is, where A
k is a transition matrix. This case provides the basis 
for discretization of differential equations, as illustrated next. 
Discretization of Differential Equations 
Consider a differential system described by Equation (3.26). Suppose it is only necessary to have 
knowledge of the state variables at periodic time instants t = 0, T,IT,..., kT,..., . In this case, the 
following sequence of state vectors can be written as 
If we suppress the parameter 
jse the abbreviation 
and define a new input sequence by 
then the set of solution eauations above can be replaced bv the single vector-matrix difference equation 
(3-38) 
Note that 
is a transition matrix in Equation (3.38). 

56 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.18 
LINEARITY AND SUPERPOSITION 
The concept of linearity has been presented in Definition 3.8 as a property of differential and 
difference equations. In this section, linearity is discussed as a property of general systems, with one 
independent variable, time t. In Chapters 1 and 2, the concepts of system, input, and output were 
defined. The following definition of linearity is based on these earlier definitions. 
Definition 3.21: 
If all initial conditions in the system are zero, that is, if the system is completely at 
rest, then the system is a linear system if it has the following property: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
[f an input u^t) produces an output 
and 
an input 
produces an output 
then input 
produces an output 
for all pairs 
of inputs 
and all pairs of constants 
and 
Linear systems can often be represented by linear differential or difference equations 
EXAMPLE 3.37. 
A system is linear if its input-output relationship can be described by the linear differential 
equation 
(3.39) 
where y = y(t) is the system output and u = u(t) is the system input. 
EXAMPLE 3.38. 
A system is linear if its input-output relationship can be described by the convolution integral 
(3.40) 
where 
is the weighting function, which embodies the internal physical properties of the system. 
is the 
output, and 
is the input. 
The relationship between the systems of Examples 3.37 and 3.38 is discussed in Section 3.10. 
The concept of linearity is often expressed by the principle of superposition. 
Principle 
of 
Superposition: The response 
y(t) 
of a linear system 
due 
to 
several 
inputs 
acting simultaneously is equal to the sum of the responses of each input 
acting alone, when all initial conditions in the system are zero. That is, it y,(t) is the response due 
to the input ut(t), then 
EXAMPLE 3.39. 
A linear system is described by the linear algebraic equation 
The principle of superposition follows directly from the definition of linearity (Definition 3.21). Any 
system which satisfies the principle of superposition is linear. 
where 
and 
are inputs, and 
is the output. When 
and 
then 
When 
then 
The total output resulting trom 
and 
is then equal to 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
57 
3.19 
CAUSALITY AND PHYSICALLY REALIZABLE SYSTEMS 
The properties of a physical system restrict the form of its output. This restriction is embodied in 
the concept of causality. 
Definition 3.22: 
A system in which time is the independent variable is called causal if the output 
depends only on the present and past values of the input. That is, if y(t) is the 
output, then y(t) depends only on the input M ( T ) for values of T < t. 
The implication of Definition 3.22 is that a causal system is one which cannot anticipate what its 
future input will be. Accordingly, causal systems are sometimes called physically realizable systems. A n 
important consequence of causality (physical realizability) is that the weighting function w(t, T ) of a 
causal linear continuous system is identically zero for T > t; that is, future values of the input are 
weighted zero. F o r causal discrete systems, the weighting sequence w(k — j) = 0 for j > k. 
Solved Problems 
SYSTEM EQUATIONS 
3.1. 
Faraday's law states that the voltage v induced between the terminals of an inductor is equal to 
the time rate of change of flux linkages. ( A flux linkage is defined as one line of magnetic flux 
linking one turn of the winding of the inductor.) Suppose it is experimentally determined that 
the number of flux linkages A is related to the current i i n the inductor as shown i n F i g . 3-5. The 
curve is approximately a straight line for —I0<i< 
I0. Determine a differential equation, valid 
for —I0<i< 
I0, which relates the induced voltage v and current /. 
Fig. 3-5 
Faraday's law can be written as 
It is seen from the graph that 
where 
is called the inductance of the inductor The equation relating v and i is obtained by 
substituting 

58 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.2. 
Determine a differential equation relating the voltage v(t) and the current i(t) for / > 0 for the 
electrical network given in Fig. 3-6. Assume the capacitor is uncharged at t = 0. the current i is 
zero at / = 0, and the switch S closes at t = 0. 
Fig. 3-6 
To eliminate the integral, both sides of the equation arc differentiated with respect to time, resulting in the 
desired differential equation: 
3.3. 
Kepler's first two laws of planetary motion state that: 
1. 
The orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the sun at a focus of the ellipse. 
2. 
The radius vector drawn from the sun to a planet sweeps over equal areas in equal times. 
F i n d a pair of differential equations that describes the motion of a planet about the sun, using 
Kepler's first two laws. 
From Kepler's first law, the motion of a planet satisfies the equation of an ellipse: 
where 
are defined in Fig. 
Fig. 3-7 
In an infinitesimal time dl the angle 9 increases by an amount dB. The area swept out by r over the 
period dt is therefore equal to dA = \ r
2 d&. The rate at which the area is swept out by r is constant 
and 
By KirchhofFs voltage law, the applied voltage v{t) is equal to the sum of the voltage drops vK, vL< 
and vc across the resistor R, the inductor L, and the capacitor C, respectively. Thus 
and 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
59 
(Kepler's second law). Hence 
constant 
The first differential equation is obtained by differentiating this result with respect to time: 
The second equation is obtained by differentiating the equation of the ellipse: 
Using the results that 
can be rewritten as 
Differentiating again and replacing 
yields 
But 
Hence 
Substituting 
we obtain the required second differential equation: 
3.4. 
A mathematical model for a feature of nervous system organization called lateral inhibition has 
been produced as a result of the work of several authors [2, 3, 4]. Lateral inhibitory phenomena 
can be simply described as inhibitory electrical interaction among laterally spaced, neighboring 
neurons (nerve cells). Each neuron in this model has a response c, measured by the frequency of 
discharge of pulses in its axon (the connection "cable" or "wire"). The response is determined by 
an excitation r supplied by an external stimulus, and is diminished by whatever inhibitory 
influences are acting on the neurons as a result of the activity of neighboring neurons. In a 
system of n neurons, the steady state response of the fcth neuron is given by 
where the constant ak_t 
is the inhibitory coefficient of the action of neuron / on k. It depends 
only on the separation of the kth and ith neurons, and can be interpreted as a spatial weighting 
function. In addition, am = a_m 
(symmetrical spatial interaction). 
(a) 
If the effect of neuron i on k is not immediately felt, but exhibits a small time lag At, how 
should this model be modified? 
(b) 
If the input rk(t) 
is determined only by the output ck, 
At seconds prior to / [i"k{t) = 
ck(t 
— At)], determine an approximate differential equation for the system of part 
(a). 
(a) 
The equation becomes 

60 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
(b) 
Substituting 
Dividing both sides by 
The left-hand side is approximately equal to dck/dt for small 
If we additionally assume that 
for small At, then we get the approximate differential equation 
3.5. 
Determine a mathematical equation describing the sampled-data output of the ideal sampler 
described in Definition 2.12 and Example 2.8. 
A convenient representation of the output of an ideal sampler is based on an extension of the concept 
of the unit impulse function S(t) into an impulse train, defined for t > 0 as the function 
where 
The sampled signal 
is then given by 
The utility of this representation is developed beginning in Chapter 4, following the introduction of 
transform methods. 
3.6. 
Show how the simple R-C network given in Fig. 3-8 can be used to approximate the sample and 
(zero-order) hold function described in Example 2.9. 
This system element operates as follows. When the sampling switch S is closed, the capacitor C is 
charged through the resistor R, and the voltage across C approaches the input u(t). When S is opened, the 
capacitor cannot release its charge, because the current (charge) has nowhere to dissipate, so it holds its 
voltage until the next time S is closed. If we describe the opening and closing of the switch by the simple 
Fig. 3-8 
function: 
we can say the current through R and C is modulated by ms(t). In these terms, we can write 
if S is closed 
if S is open 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
61 
and, since
 
: 
the differential equation for this circuit is 
Wc note that this is a time-varying differential equation, due to the multiplicative function ms(t) on the 
right-hand side. Also, as RC becomes smaller, that is, l/RC becomes larger, dylla/dt becomes larger and 
the capacitor charges faster. Thus a smaller RC in this circuit creates a better approximation of the sample 
and hold function. 
3.7. 
If the sampler in the previous problem is ideal, and the sampling rate is uniform, with period T, 
what is the differential equation? 
The ideal sampler impulse train modulating function mvr(t) was defined in Problem 3.5. Thus the 
differential equation of the sample and hold becomes 
In this idealization, impulses replace current pulses. 
CLASSIFICATIONS OF DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
3.8. 
Classify the following differential equations according to whether they are ordinary or partial. 
Indicate the dependent and independent variables. 
(a) 
(b) 
(<') 
(d) 
(fl) 
(ft) 
(c) 
(d) 
Ordinary; independent variable t; dependent variables x and y. 
Partial; independent variables x and y; dependent variable / . 
Since df/dx = 2x, then (d/dt)[df/dx\ = 2(dx/dt) = Q, which is an ordinary
7 differential equation; 
independent variable t; dependent variable x. 
df/dx = 2y(dy/dx) + d
2y/dx
2 = x, which is an ordinary differential equation: independent variable 
x; dependent variable y. 
3.9. 
Classify the following linear differential equations according to whether they are time-variable or 
time-invariant. Indicate any time-variable terms. 
(a) 
(c) 
(d) 
(a) 
Time-invariant. 
(b) 
Dividing through by 
which is time-variable. 
The time-variable term is 
(c) 
Multiplying through by t + 1, we obtair 
which is time-invariant. 
(d) 
Time-variable. The time-variable term is 

62 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.10. 
Classify the following differential equations according to whether they are linear or nonlinear. 
Indicate the dependent and independent variables and any nonlinear terms. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(/) 
(a) 
Linear; independent variable /; dependent variable y. 
(b) Nonlinear; independent variable t\ dependent variable y; nonlinear term y(dy/dt). 
(c) 
Nonlinear; independent variable t; dependent variable y; nonlinear term y
2. 
(d) 
Linear; independent variable V, dependent variable y. 
(e) 
Nonlinear; independent variable t; dependent variable y; nonlinear terms (cos y) d
2y/dt
2 and sinly. 
(/) 
Nonlinear; independent variable t; dependent variables x and y; nonlinear terms (cos x) d
2y/dt
2 
and sin2x. 
3.11. 
Why are all transcendental functions not of first degree? 
Transcendental functions, such as the logarithmic, trigonometric, and hyperbolic functions and their 
corresponding inverses, are not of first degree because they are either defined by or can be written as infinite 
series. Hence their degree is in general equal to infinity. For example, 
where the first term is first degree, the second is third degree, and so on. 
T H E CHARACTERISTIC 
EQUATION 
3.12. 
Find the characteristic oolvnomial and characteristic eauation for each svstem: 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
Putting D" = d"/dt" for rc = 2 and n = 4, the characteristic polynomial is D
4 4- 9D
2 + 7; and the 
characteristic equation is D
A + 9D
2 + 7 = 0. 
(b) 
Although the equation given in part (b) is nonlinear by Definition 3.8 (the term sin u is not first 
degree in u), we can treat it as a linear equation if we arbitrarily put sin u = x, and treat x as a second 
dependent variable representing the input. In this case, part (b) has the same answer as 
part (a). 
3.13. 
Determine the solution of the characteristic equation of the preceding problem. 
Let D
2 = E. Then D
4 = E
2, and the characteristic equation becomes quadratic: 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
63 
LINEAR INDEPENDENCE AND FUNDAMENTAL SETS 
3.14. 
Show that a sufficient condition for a set of n functions fu 
f2,..., 
/„ to be linearly independent 
is that the determinant 
be nonzero. This determinant is called the Wronskian of the functions fx, /,,..., 
/„. 
Assuming the /, are differentiable at least n - 1 times, let n - 1 derivatives of 
be formed as follows, where the ct are unknown constants: 
These equations may be considered as n simultaneous linear homogeneous equations in the n unknown 
constants cx,c2, 
c„, with coefficients given by the elements of the Wronskian. It is well known that these 
equations have a nonzero solution for ct,c2,...,cn 
(i.e., not all c, are equal to zero) if and only if the 
determinant of the coefficients (the Wronskian) is equal to zero. Hence if the Wronskian is nonzero, then 
the only solution for t \ , c
2 , c „ is the degenerate one, c, = c2 = • • • = c„ = 0. Clearly, this is equivalent 
to saying that if the Wronskian is nonzero the functions /,, f2,..., 
/„ are linearly independent, since the 
only solution to clfl + c2f2 + • • • +c„f„ 
= 0 is then c\ = c2 = c3 = • • • = c„ = 0. Hence a sufficient condi­
tion for the linear independence of f\,f2, 
• • • , / „ is that the Wronskian be nonzero. This condition is not 
necessary; that is, there exist sets of linearly independent functions for which the Wronskian is zero. 
3.15. 
Show that the function 1, t, t
2 are linearly independent. 
The Wronskian of these three functions (see Problem 3.14) is 
Since the Wronskian is nonzero, the functions are linearly independent. 
3.16. 
Determine a fundamental set for the differential equations: 
(a) 
[a) The characteristic polynomial is Z)
3 + 5Z>
2 + 8D + 4, which can be written in factored form as 
(D + 2)(D 4- 2)(D + 1). Corresponding to the root 
Dl = 
1 there is a solution e~', and 

64 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
corresponding to the repeated root D2 = A = - 2 arc the two solutions e -' and te ''. The three 
solutions constitute a fundamental set. 
The characteristic polynomial is D
3 + 4D
2 + 6D + 4, which can be written in factored form as 
(D + l+j)(D+l-j)(D 
+ 2), 
A fundamental set is then e< ' 
<?'
 
1 
and e
 
21 • 
(b) 
3.17. 
For the differential equations of Problem 3.16, find fundamental sets different from those found 
in Problem 3.16. 
(a) 
Choose any 3 X 3 nonzero determinant, say 
Using the elements of the first row as coefficients au for the fundamental set e 
e "', te
 
2' found in 
Problem 3.16, form 
Usine the second row, form 
From the third row, form 
The functions z,, z-,, and z, constitute a fundamental set. 
(b) 
For this equation generate the second fundamental set by letting 
The coefficient determinant in this case is 

C H A P . 31 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
65 
SOLUTION OF LINEAR CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT ORDINARY 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
3.18. 
Show that any free response 
By the definition of a fundamental set. 
satisfies 
Substituting 
into this dillerential equation yields 
The last equality is obtained because the term in the brackets is zero for all k. 
3.19. 
Show that the forced response given by Equation (3.14) 
satisfies the differential equation 
For simplification, let 
Then 
and 
Similarly, 
since, by Equation (3.16), 
The n\h derivative is 
since, by Equation (3.16), 
The summation of the n derivatives is 
Finally, making the change of variables t - T = 8 in the bracketed term yields 
because 
is a free response (see Section 3.10 and Problem 3.18). Hence 

66 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.20. 
F i n d the free response of the differential equation 
with initial conditions 
and 
From the results of Problems 3.16 and 3.17, a fundamental set for this cauation 
Hence the free response can be written as 
The initial conditions provide the following set of algebraic equations for c\. c 2, c\: 
from which 
Therefore the free response is 
3,21. 
F i n d the weighting function of the differential equation 
The characteristic equation 
with the repeated root 
A funda­
mental set is therefore given by 
and the weighting function has the form 
with the initial conditions 
Thus 
3.22. 
Find the forced response of the differential equation (Problem 3.21): 
where 
The forced response is given by Equation (3.14) as 
Integrating the first integral by parts, 
But w(0) = 0; hence the forced response can be written as 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
67 
From Problem 3.21, 
hence 
and the forced response is 
3.23. 
F i n d the output y of a system described by the differential equation 
with initial conditions 
and 
Let 
The response y due to «j alone was determined in Example 3.27 as 
The free response 
for the differential equation was found in Example 3.24 to be 
The 
forced response due to u2 is given by Equation (3.14). Using the weighting function determined in 
Example 3.25, the forced response due to u, is 
Thus the forced response is 
and the total response is 
3.24. 
F i n d the transient and steady state responses of a system described by the differentia! equation 
with the initial conditions 
The total response for this equation was determined in Problem 3.23 as 
Since 
the transient response 
The steadv state re­
sponse is 
SINGULARITY FUNCTIONS 
3.25. 
Evaluate: (a) 
\ 
(b) 
(a) 
Using the screening propcrtv of the unit impulse function 
(b) 
Since the interval of integration 
does not include the position of the unit impulse function 

68 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
3.26. 
Show that the unit step response v , ( 0 of a causal linear system described by the convolutior 
integral 
is related to the unit impulse response ys(t) 
by the equation 
The unit step response is given by 
where 
is a unit step function. In 
Example 3.29 it was shown that 
Hence 
Now make the cbanee of variable 
Then 
implies 
implies 
and 
the integral becomes 
3.27. 
Show that the unit ramp response 
of a causal linear system described by the convolution 
integral (see Problem 3.26) is related to the unit impulse response yJt) 
and the unit step 
response 
by the equation 
Proceeding as in Problem 3.26 with 
we get 
From Problem 3.26, the first term can be written as 
The second term can be 
integrated by parts, yielding 
where 
Therefore 
Again using the result of Problem 3.26, we obtain the required equation. 
SECOND-ORDER SYSTEMS 
3.28. 
Show that the weighting function of the second-order differential equation 
is given by 
where 
The characteristic equation 
has the roots 
One fundamental set 
and the weighting function can be written as 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
69 
A'here c\ and c2 are, as yet, unknown coefficients. w(l) can be rewritten as 
where 
are unknown coefficients determined from the initial conditions given 
by Equation (3.16). That is, 
and 
Hence 
3.29. 
Determine the damping ratio f, undamped natural frequency un, damped natural frequency w ; /, 
damping coefficient a, and time constant r for the following second-order system: 
Dividing both sides of the equation by 
Comparing the coefficients 
of this equation with those of Equation 
we obtain 
with the solutions 
ana 
3.30. 
The overshoot of a second-order system in response to a unit step input is the difference between 
the maximum value attained by the output and the steady state solution. Determine the 
overshoot for the system of Problem 3.29 using the normalized familv of curves given in Section 
3.14. 
Since the damping ratio of this system is 
the normalized curve corresponding to 
is used. 
This curve has its maximum value (peak) at 
From Problem 
hence the time 
at 
which the peak occurs is 
the value attained at this tunc is 1 
and the 
overshoot is 
STATE VARIABLE REPRESENTATION OF SYSTEMS DESCRIBED BY LINEAR 
DIFFERENTIAL AND DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS 
3.31. 
Put the differential equation 
with initial conditions 
into state variable form. Then develop a 
solution for the resulting vector-matrix equation in the form of Equation (3.26) and, from this 
specify the free response and the forced response. Also, for u(t) = 1, specify the transient and 
steady state responses. 
Letting 
the state variable representation is 
and 
The matrices A and B in the general equation form (3.25) are 
Since 
the transition matrix is 
and 
and 
and 
with 
with 
sec. 

70 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS. A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
and the solution of the state variable equation can be written as 
or, after multiplying the matrices in each term, 
The free responses are 
and the forced responses are 
For u(t) = 1, Xi(t) = 1 - t + r
2 / 2 and x2(t) = - 1 + t. The transient responses are xIT(t) = 0 and x2T(t) 
= 0 and the steady state responses arc x l s s(;) = 1 - t + t
2/2 and 
=—!+/. 
3.32. 
Show that the weighting sequence of the difference equation {3.29) has the form of Equation 
(3.34). 
The technique used to solve this problem is called variation of parameters. It is assumed that the forced 
response of Equation (3.29) has the form: 
where y}(k)...., 
yn(k) is a fundamental set of solutions and c](k),...,cll(k) 
is a set of unknown 
time-variable parameters to be determined. Since Vj,(0) = 0 for any forced response of a difference equation, 
then ^(O) = 0,..., c„(0) = 0. The parameter c.(A- + 1) is written as cf(k + 1) = c^k) + Ac,(A). Thus 
The increments Acx(k),..., Acn(k) are chosen such that the term in the brackets is zero. This process is 
then repeated for yh(k + 2) so that 
Again the bracketed term is made zero by choice of the increments Acv(k),..., 
Ac„(A:). Similar expressions 
are generated for yh(k + 3), yh(k + 4),..., yh(k + n - 1). Finally, 
In this last expression, the bracketed term is not set to zero. Now the summation in Equation (3.29) is 
Since each clement of the fundamental set is a free response, then 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
71 
for each /. A set of n linear algebraic equations in « unknowns has thus been generated: 
Now Ac (A) can be written as 
where M(k) is the determinant 
M (k) 
is the cofactor of the last clement in the /'th column of this determinant. The parameters 
Ci(k), 
c„(k) arc thus given by 
The forced response then becomes 
This last equation is in the form of a convolution sum with weighting sequence 
LINEARITY AND SUPERPOSITION 
3.33. 
Using the definition of linearity. Definition 3.21, show that any differential equation of the form: 
where y is the output and u is the input, is linear. 
Let 
M, and «, be two arbitrary inputs, and let \\ and y2 be the corresponding outputs. Then, with all 
initial conditions equal to zero. 

72 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E EQUATIONS, A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 3 
Now form 
Since this equation holds for all c, and c 2, the equation is linear. 
3.34. 
Show that a system described by the convolution integral 
is linear, y is the output and u the input. 
Let 
and 
be two arbitrary inputs and let 
Now let 
be a third input and form 
Since this relationship holds for all c\ and c2, 
the convolution integral is a linear operation (or 
transformation). 
3.35. 
Use the Principle of Superposition to determine the output y of Fig. 3-9. 
Fig. 3-9 
For 
Therefore 
For 
For 
3.36. 
A linear system is described by the weighting function 
for all 
Suppose the system is excited by an input 
for all 
F i n d the output 

C H A P . 3] 
D I F F E R E N T I A L A N D D I F F E R E N C E E Q U A T I O N S , A N D L I N E A R SYSTEMS 
73 
The output is given by the convolution integral (Example 3.38): 
CAUSALITY 
3.37. 
T w o systems are denned by the relationships between their inputs and outputs as follows: 
System 1: The input is u(t) and at the same instant of time the output is 
System 2: The input is u(t) and at the same instant of time the output is 
Are either of these systems causal? 
In System 1, the output depends only on the input T seconds in the future. Thus it is not eausai. A n 
operation of this type is called prediction. 
In System 2, the output depends only on the input T seconds in the past. Thus it is causal. An 
operation of this type is called a time delay. 
Supplementary Problems 
3.38. 
Which of the following terms arc first degree in the dependent variable 
3.39. 
Show that a system defined by the equation y = mu + h, where y is the output, u is the input, and m and b 
are nonzero constants, is nonlinear according to Definition 3.21. 
3.40. 
Show that any differential equation of the form 
satisfies Definition 3.21. (See Example 3.37 and Problem 3.33). 
3.41. 
Show that the functions cos / and sin / are linearly independent. 
3.42. 
Show that the functions sin nt and sin/a, where n and A' are integers, are linearly independent if n + k. 
3.43. 
Show that the functions t and t
2 constitute a fundamental set for the differential equation 
3.44. 
Find a fundamental set for 

74 
Chapter 4 
The Laplace Transform and the z-Transform 
4.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Several techniques used in solving engineering problems are based on the replacement of functions 
of a real variable (usually time or distance) by certain frequency-dependent 
representations, or by 
functions of a complex variable dependent upon frequency. A typical example is the use of Fourier 
series to solve certain electrical problems. One such problem consists of finding the current in some part 
of a linear electrical network in which the input voltage is a periodic or repeating waveform. The 
periodic voltage may be replaced by its Fourier series representation, and the current produced by each 
term of the series can then be determined. The total current is the sum of the individual currents 
(superposition). This technique often results in a substantial savings in computational effort. 
T w o very important transformation techniques for linear control system analysis are presented in 
this chapter: the Laplace transform and the z-transform. The Laplace transform relates time functions to 
frequency-dependent 
functions of a complex variable. The z-transform relates time sequences to a 
different, but 
related, type of frequency-dependent 
function. Applications of these mathematical 
transformations 
to solving linear constant-coefficient differential and difference equations are also 
discussed here. Together these methods provide the basis for the analysis and design 
techniques 
developed in subsequent chapters. 
4.2 
THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM 
The Laplace transform is defined in the following manner: 
Definition 4.1: 
Let fit) 
be a real function of a real variable t defined for t > 0. Then 
is called the Laplace transform of 
is a complex variable defined by 
where a and « are real variables • and 
Note that the lower limit on the integral is / = c > 0. This definition of the lower limit is sometimes 
useful in dealing with functions that are discontinuous at t = 0. When explicit use is made of this limit, 
it will be abbreviated / = lim £_^ 0e = CT, as shown above in the integral on the right. 
The real variable t always denotes time. 
Definition 4.2: 
If f{t) 
is defined and single-valued for / > 0 and F(c) 
is absolutely convergent for 
some real number CT„, that is, 
then 
is Laplace transformable for 
*Thc real part a of a complex variable s is often written as Re{.0 (the real part of s) and the imaginary pari u as Im(j-) (the 
imaginary part of s). Parentheses are placed around s only when there is a possibility of confusion. 

75 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
EXAMPLE 4.1. The function 
is Laplace transformable since 
EXAMPLE 4.2. The Laplace transform of 
is 
4.3 
T H E INVERSE LAPLACE TRANSFORM 
The Laplace transform transforms a problem from the real variable time domain into the complex 
variable .s-domain. After a solution of the transformed problem has been obtained in terms of s, it is 
necessary to "invert" this transform to obtain the time domain solution. The transformation from the 
.s-domain into the r-domain is called the inverse Laplace transform. 
Definition 43: 
Let F(s) be the Laplace transform of a function 
The contour integral 
where 
and 
as given in Definition 4.2), is called the inverse 
Laplace transform of F(s). 
It is seldom necessary in practice to perform the contour integration defined in Definition 4.3. For 
applications of the Laplace transform in this book, it is never necessary. A simple technique for 
evaluating the inverse transform for most control system problems is presented in Section 4.8. 
4.4 
SOME PROPERTIES OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM AND ITS INVERSE 
The Laplace transform and its inverse have several important properties which can be used 
advantageously in the solution of linear constant-coefficient differential equations. They are: 
1. The Laplace transform is a linear transformation between functions defined in the f-domain 
and functions defined in the s-domain. That is. if Fx(s) and F2(s) are the Laplace transforms 
of /j(f) and f2(t), 
respectively, then aiF1(s) + a2F2(s) 
is the Laplace transform of a1f1(t) + 
^ 2 / 2 ( 0 ? where al and a2 are arbitrary constants. 
2. 
The inverse Laplace transform is a linear transformation between functions defined in the 
s-domain and functions defined i n the /-domain. That is, if fx(t) and f2(t) are the inverse 
Laplace transforms of F^s) and F2(s), 
respectively, then blfl(t) + b2f2(t) 
is the inverse 
Laplace transform of btFx(s) + b2F2(s), 
where b: and b2 are arbitrary constants. 
3. 
The Laplace transform of the derivative df/dt of a function f(t) whose Laplace transform is 
F(s) is 
where 
is the initial value of 
evaluated as the one-sided limit of 
as t 
approaches zero from positive values. 

76 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E . - - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4. 
The Laplace transform of the integral 
of a function 
whose Laplace transform is 
is 
5. 
The initial value 
j 
of the functior 
whose Laplace transform is 
is 
This relation is called the Initial Value Theorem. 
6. 
The final value 
of the function 
whose Laplace transform is 
is 
exists. This relation is called the Final Value Theorem. 
7. 
The Laplace transform of a function 
Time Scaling) is 
where 
8. 
The inverse Laplace transform of the function 
(Frequency Scaling) is 
where 
9. 
The Laplace transform of the function 
(Time Delay), where 
for 
where 
10. 
The Laplace transform of the function e 
is given by 
where 
(Complex Translation) 
11. 
The Laplace transform of the product of two functions 
and 
is given by the complex 
convolution integral 
where 
12. 
The inverse Lanlace transform of the product of the two transforms 
and 
is given by 
the convolution integrals 
where 
EXAMPLE 4.3. 
The Laplace transforms of the functions 
and 
arc 
Then, by Property 1, 

C H A P . 4] 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
77 
EXAMPLE 4.4. 
The inverse Laplace transforms of the functions 
are 
Then, by Property 2, 
EXAMPLE 4.5. 
rhe Laplace transform of 
can be determined by application of Property 3. Since 
and 
then 
EXAMPLE 4.6. 
The Laplace transform of 
can be determined by application of Property 4. Since 
then 
EXAMPLE 4.7. 
The Laplace transform of 
The initial value of 
can be 
determined by the Initial Value Theorem as 
EXAMPLE 4.8. 
The Laplace transform of the function 
The final value of this function 
can be determined trom the Final Value theorem as 
EXAMPLE 4.9. 
The Laplace transform of 
The Laplace transform of 
can be determined by 
application of Property 7 (Time Scaling), where 
EXAMPLE 4.10. 
The inverse transform of 
The inverse transform of 
can be 
determined by application of Property 8 (Frequency Scaling): 
EXAMPLE 4.11. 
The Laplace transform of the functior 
The Laplace transform of the function 
defined as 
can be determined by Property 9, with 
T=2: 
EXAMPLE 4.12. 
The Laplace transform of cosr is 
The Laplace transform 
can be 
determined from Property 
with 
and 

78 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
EXAMPLE 4.13. 
The Laplace transform of the product 
cos t can be determined by application of Property 
11 (Complex Convolution). That is, since 
then 
The details of this contour integration are not carried out here because they are too complicated (see, e.g., 
Reference [1]) and unnecessary. The Laplace transform of e~
2'cos/ was very simply determined in Example 4.12 
using Property 10. There are, however, many instances in more advanced treatments of automatic control in which 
complex convolution can be used effectively. 
EXAMPLE 4.14. 
The inverse Laplace transform of the function 
can be determined by 
application ot Property 12. ;>mce 
and 
then 
4.5 
SHORT TABLE OF LAPLACE TRANSFORMS 
Table 4.1 is a short table of Laplace transforms. It is not complete, but when used in conjunction 
with the properties of the Laplace transform described in Section 4.4 and the partial fraction expansion 
techniques described in Section 4.7, it is adequate to handle all of the problems in this book. A more 
complete table of Laplace transform pairs is found in Appendix A . 
TABLE 4.1 
Time Function 
Laplace Transform 
Unit Impulse 
§(/) 
1 
Unit Step 
1(0 
1 
s 
Unit Ramp 
t 
1 
Polynomial 
t" 
n\ 
s"
 + 1 
Exponential 
e'"' 
1 
s + a 
Sine Wave 
sin co t 
to 
s
2 + co
2 
Cosine Wave 
cos tor 
s 
s
2 + co
2 
Damped Sine Wave 
e~
a' sin co? 
CO 
(s + a)
2 + co
2 
Damped Cosine Wave 
e~
at cos tor 
s + a 
(s + a)
2 + u
2 
Table 4.1 can be used to find both Laplace transforms and inverse Laplace transforms. To find the 
Laplace transform of a time function which can be represented by some combination of the elementary 
functions given in Table 4.1, the appropriate transforms are chosen from the table and are combined 
using the properties in Section 4.4. 

79 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
EXAMPLE 4.15. 
The Laplace transform of the function 
is determined as 
follows. The Laplace transforms of 
and 
are given in the table as 
Application of Properties 9 and 10, respectively, yields 
Then Property 1 (Linearity) gives 
T o find the inverse of the transform of a combination of those in Table 4.1, the corresponding time 
functions (inverse transforms) are determined from the table and combined appropriately using the 
properties in Section 4.4. 
EXAMPLE 4.16. 
The inverse Laplace transform of 
can be determined as follows. 
is first rewritten as 
Now 
Application of Property 9 for 
yields 
Then Property 2 (Linearity) gives 
4.6 
APPLICATION OF LAPLACE TRANSFORMS TO THE SOLUTION OF LINEAR 
CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
The 
application of Laplace transforms to the solution of linear constant-coefficient differential 
equations is of major importance in linear control system problems. T w o classes of equations of general 
interest are treated in this section. The first of these has the form: 
(4.1) 
where y is the output, u is the input, the coefficients « 0 , a1 
, an_1, 
are constants, and a„ — 1. The 
initial conditions for this equation are written as 
where 
are constants. The Laplace transform of Equation (4.1) is given by 
(4.2) 

80 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP, i 
and the transform of the output is 
(4.3) 
Note that the right side of Equation (4.3) is the sum of two terms: a term dependent only on the input 
transform, and a term dependent only on the initial conditions. In addition, note that the denominator 
of both terms in Equation (4.3), that is, 
is the characteristic polynomial of Equation (4.1) (see Section 3.6). 
The time solution y(t) of Equation (4.1) is the inverse Laplace transform of Y(s), that is. 
(4.4) 
The first term on the right is the forced response and the second term is the free response of the system 
represented by Equation (4.1). 
Direct substitution into Equations (4.2), (4.3), and (4.4) yields the transform of the differential 
equation, the solution transform Y(s), or the time solution y(t), respectively. But it is often easier to 
directly apply the properties of Section 4.4 to determine these quantities, especially when the order of 
the differential equation is low. 
EXAMPLE 4.17. 
The Laplace transform of the differential equation 
unit step 
with initial conditions 
can be written directly from Equation (4.2) by first 
identifvine: 
and 
Substitution of these values into 
Equation 
yields 
It should be noted that when / = 0 in Equation (4.2), the summation interior to the brackets is, by definition. 
The Laplace transform of the differential equation can also be determined in the following manner. The 
transform of 
is given by 
This equation is a direct consequence of Property 3, Section 4.4 (see Problem 4.17). With this information the 
transform of the differential equation can be determined by applying Property 1 (Linearity) of Section 4.4; that is, 

C H A P . 4] 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
81 
The output transform Y(s) is determined by rearranging the previous equation and is 
The output time solution y(t) is the inverse transform of Y(s). A method for determining the inverse transform of 
functions like Y(s) above is presented in Sections 4.7 and 4.8. 
Now consider constant-coefficient equations of the form: 
(4.5) 
where y is the output, u is the input, 
The Laplace transform of Equation (4.5) is 
given by 
where 
The output transform Y(s) is 
(4.6) 
(4.7) 
The time solution y(t) is the inverse Laplace transform of Y(s): 
(4.8) 
The first term on the right is the forced response, and the second term is the free response of a system 
represented by Equation (4.5). 
Note that the Laplace transform Y(s) of the output y(t) consists of ratios of polynomials in the 
complex variable s. Such ratios are generally called rational (algebraic) functions. If all initial conditions 
in Eq. (4.8) are zero and U(s) = 1, (4.8) gives the unit impulse response. The denominator of each term 
in (4.8) is the characteristic polynomial of the system. 
For problems in which initial conditions are not specified on y(l) but on some other parameter of 
the system (such as the initial voltage across a capacitor not appearing at the output), yfi, k = 0,1, 
n — 1, must be derived using the available information. For systems represented in the form of Equation 
(4.5), that is, including derivative terms in w. computation of y£ will also depend on w';. Problem 4.38 
illustrates these points. 
The restriction n>m 
in Equation (4.5) is based on the fact that real systems have a smoothing 
effect on their input. By a smoothing effect, it is meant that variations in the input are made less 
pronounced (at least no more pronounced) by the action of the system on the input. Since a 
differentiator generates the slope of a time function, it accentuates the variations of the function. An 
integrator, on the other hand, sums the area under the curve of a time function over an interval of time 
and thus averages (smooths) the variations of the function. 
In Equation (4.5), the output y is related to the input u by an operation which includes m 
differentiations and n integrations of the input. Hence, in order that there be a smoothing effect (at 
least no accentuation of the variations) between the input and the output, there must be more (at least 
as many) integrations than differentiations; that is, n > m. 

82 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E 
z-TRANSFORM 
[CHAP. 4 
EXAMPLE 4.18. 
A certain system is described by the differential equation 
where the input u is graphed in Fig. 4-1. The corresponding functions 
and 
arc also shown. Note from these graphs that differentiation of u accentuates the variations in u while integration 
smooths them. 
Fig. 4-1 
EXAMPLE 4.19. 
Consider a system described by the differential equation 
with initial conditions v" = 1, y,' = 0. If the input is given by u(t) = <?~
4', then the Laplace transform of the output 
y(t) can be obtained by direct application of Equation (4,7) by first identifying m, n, a,, b, and u": n = 2, a{) = 2, 
ax = 3, a, = 1, in = 1, ujj = l i m f ^ ( ) e ~
4 ' = 1, b(l = 3, bv = 1. Substitution of these values into Equation (4.7) yields 
This transform can also be obtained by direct application of Properties 1 and 3 of Section 4.4 to the differential 
equation, as was done in Example 4.17. 
The linear constant-coefficient vector-matrix differential equations discussed in Section 3.15 also 
can be solved by Laplace transform techniques, as illustrated in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 4.20. 
Consider the vector-matrix differential equation of Problem 3.31: 
where 
and wit! 
the unit steo function. The Laolace transform of the vector-matrix form of this eauation is 
where X(j) is the vector Laplace transform whose components are the Laplace transforms of the components of 
x(t). This can be rewritten as 

83 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E 2 - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
where I is the identity or unit matrix. The Laplace transform of the solution vector x(r) can thus be written as 
where 
represents the inverse of the matrix. Since 
then 
Substituting for 
and 
gives 
where the first term is the Laplace transform of the free response, and the second term is the Laplace transform of 
the forced response. Using Table 4.1, the Laplace transform of these vectors can be inverted term by term, 
providing the solution vector: 
4.7 
PARTIAL FRACTION EXPANSIONS 
In Section 4.6 it was shown that the Laplace transforms encountered in the solution of linear 
constant-coefficient differential equations are rational functions of s (i.e., ratios of polynomials in s). In 
this section an important representation of rational functions, the partial fraction expansion, is 
presented. It will be shown in the next section that this representation greatly simplifies the inversion of 
the Laplace transform of a rational function. 
Consider the rational function 
(4.9) 
where an = 1 and 
By the fundamental theorem of algebra, the denominator polynomial equation 
has n roots. Some of these roots may be repeated. 
EXAMPLE 4.21. 
The polynomial 
has three roots: 
is a repeated root. 
Suppose the denominator polynomial equation above has nx roots equal to —pL, n2 roots equal to 
— p2 
, nr roots equal to — pT, where E - ^ w ^ f l . Then 

84 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
The rational function F(s) can then be written as 
The partial fraction expansion representation of the rational function F(s) is 
(4.10a) 
.vhere b„ = 0 unless m = n. The coefficients cik are given by 
(4.10b) 
The particular 
coefficients 
none of the roots are repeated, then 
(4.11a) 
(4.11b) 
where 
EXAMPLE 4.22. 
Consider the rational function 
The partial fraction expansion of F(s) is 
The numerator coefficient of 
The coefficients 
and 
are determined from Equation (4.11b) as 
Hence 
EXAMPLE 4.23. 
Consider the rational function 
The partial fraction expansion of F(s) is 
are called the residues of 
at 
If 

C H A P . 4] 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
85 
The coefficients 
are given by 
Thus 
4.8 
INVERSE TRANSFORMS USING PARTIAL FRACTION EXPANSIONS 
In Section 4.6 it was shown that the solution to a linear constant-coefficient 
ordinary differential 
equation can be determined by finding the inverse Laplace transform of a rational function. The general 
form of this operation can be written using Equation (4.10) as 
where 5(f) is the unit impulse function and b„ = 0 unless m = n. W e remark that the rightmost term in 
Equation (4.12) is the general form of the unit impulse response for Equation (4.5). 
EXAMPLE 4.24. 
The inverse Laplace transform of the function 
is given by 
which is the unit impulse response for the differential equation: 
EXAMPLE 4.25. 
The inverse Laplace transform of the function 
is given by 

86 
THE L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4.9 THE j-TRANSFORM 
The z-transform is used to describe signals and components in discrete-time control systems. It is 
defined as follows: 
Definition 4.4: 
Let 
denote a real-valued sequence 
or equivalently 
for 
Then 
is called the ^-transform of 
is a complex variable defined bv 
r " -
where / i and v are real variables and 
Remark 1: 
The A t h term of the series in this definition is always the Ath element of the 
sequence being z-transtormed times 
Remark 2: 
Often { /(k)} is defined over equally spaced times: 0, T, 27",..., kT 
where T is 
a fixed time interval. The resulting sequence is thus sometimes written as {f(kT)}, 
o r / ( A T ) , A-=-0,1,2,..., and 2 { / ( A T ) } = Zf^0f(kT)z~
k, 
but the dependence on 
T is usually suppressed. W e use the variable arguments k and A T interchangeably 
for time sequences, when there is no ambiguity. 
Remark 3: 
The 
z-transform is defined differently by some authors, as the transformation 
z = e
x/. 
which amounts to a simple exponential change of variables between the 
complex variable z = p. + jv and the complex variable s = a +ja in the Laplace 
transform domain, where T is the sampling period of the discrete-time system. This 
definition implies a sequence {/(A:)}, or { / ( A T ) } , obtained by ideal sampling 
(sometimes called impulse sampling) of a continuous signal / ( / ) at uniformly spaced 
times AT, k = 1.2 
Then s = In z/T, and our definition above, that is, F(z) = 
Y,f^0f{kT)z
k. 
follows directly from the result of Problem 4.39. Additional rela­
tionships between continuous and discrete-time systems, particularly for systems 
with both types of elements, are developed further beginning in Chapter 6. 
EXAMPLE 4.26. 
The series 
is the z-transform of the sequence 
If the rate of increase in the terms of the sequence {/(k)} is no greater than that of some geometric 
series as A approaches infinity, then { / ( A ) } is said to be of exponential order. In this case, there exists a 
real number r such that 
converges for \z\ > r. r is called the radius of convergence of the series. If r is finite, the sequence 
{/(A)} is called ;-transformable. 
EXAMPLE 4.27. The series in Example 4.26 is convergent for |z| > 1 and can be written In closed form as the 
function 
If F(z) exists for \z\ > r, then the integral and derivative of F(z) can be evaluated by operating term by term 
on the defining series. In addition, if 
and 

87 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4) 
then 
The term 
is called the convolution sum of the sequences 
and 
where the radius 
of convergence is the larger of the two radii of convergence of 
and 
EXAMPLE 4.28. 
The derivative of the series in Example 4.26 is 
The indefinite integral is 
EXAMPLE 4.29. 
The z transform of the sequence 
for 
Let 
be the z-transform in Example 4.26. Then 
The z-transform of the sequence 
where A is any finite complex number. 
is 
where the radius of convergence 
By suitable choice of A, the most common types of sequences 
can be defined and their z-transforms generated from this relationship. 
EXAMPLE 4.30. 
For 
the sequence 
is the sampled exponential 
and the --trans­
form of this sequence is 
with radius of convergence 
The z-transform has an inverse very similar to that of the Laplace transform. 
Definition 4.5: 
Let C be a circle centered at the origin of the z-plane and with radius greater than 
the radius of convergence of the z-transform F(z). 
Then 
is the inverse of the z-transform F(z). 
In practice, it is seldom necessary to perform the contour integration in Definition 4.5. F o r 
applications of z-transforms in this book, it is never necessary. The properties and techniques in the 
remainder of this section are adequate to evaluate the inverse transform for most discrete-time control 
system problems. 
Following are some additional properties of the ^-transform and its inverse which can be used 
advantageously in discrete-time control system problems. 
1. 
The z-transform and its inverse are linear transformations between the time domain and the 
z-domain. Therefore, if (f](k)} 
and F^z) 
are a transform pair and if {/ 2(A)} and F2(z) 
are a 

88 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E . - - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
transform pair, then 
are a transform pair for any 
is the z-transform of the sequence 
Note that the A th 
element of this sequence is 
3. 
The initial term 
of the sequence 
whose z-transform 
This relation is called the Initial Value Theorem 
4. 
Let the sequence 
have the z-transform 
with radius of convergence 
Then the final value 
of the sequence is given by 
if the limit exists. This relation is called the Final Value Theorem. 
5. 
The inverse z-transform of the function 
(Frequency Scaling) is 
where 
6. If 
is the z-transform of the sequence 
is the z-transform 
of the time-shifted sequence 
and 
2. 
If 
is the z-transform of the sequence 
then 
where 
then z 
This relationship is called 
the Shift Theorem 
EXAMPLE 4.31. 
The z-lransforms of the sequences 
Then, by Property 1. 
EXAMPLE 4.32. 
The inverse z-transforms of the functions 
are 
and 
Then, by Property 1. 
and 
EXAMPLE 4.33. The z-transform of the sequence 
Then, bv Propertv 2. the 
z-transform of the sequence 
EXAMPLE 4.34. The z-transform of 
The initial value of 
can be determined by the 
Initial Value Theorem as 

89 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
EXAMPLE 4.35. 
The z-transform of the sequence 
The final value of this 
sequence can be determined from the Final Value Theorem as 
EXAMPLE 4.36. 
The inverse z-transform of 
The inverse transform of 
is 
For the types of control problems considered in this book, the resulting z-transforms are rational 
algebraic functions of z. as illustrated below, and there are two practical methods for inverting them. 
The first is a numerical technique, generating a power series expansion by long division. 
Suppose the z-transform has the form: 
It is easily rewritten in powers of z 
as 
by multiplying each term by z 
Then, by long division, the denominator is divided into the numerator. 
yielding a polynomial in 
of the form: 
EXAMPLE 4.37. 
The z-transform z 
is rewritten as 
which, by long division, has the form: 
For the second inversion method, F(z) 
is first expanded into a special partial fraction form and 
each term is inverted using the properties previously discussed. 
Table 4.2 is a short table of z-transform pairs. When used in conjunction with the properties of the 
z-transform described earlier, and the partial fraction expansion techniques described in Section 4.7, it 
Table 4.2 
k th Term of the Time Sequence 
z-Transform 
1 at k, 0 elsewhere 
(Kronecker delta sequence) 
1 (unit step sequence) 
k (unit ramp sequence) 
A 
for complex numbers A \ 

90 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
ICHAP. 4 
is adequate to handle all the problems in this book. A more complete table of z-transform pairs is given 
in Appendix B. 
The final transform pair in Table 4.2 can be used to generate many other useful transforms by 
proper choice of A and use of Property 1. 
The following examples illustrate how z-transforms 
can be inverted using the partial fraction 
expansion method. 
EXAMPLE 4.38. 
To invert the z-transform 
we form the partial fraction expansion of 
Then 
which can be inverted term bv term as 
for all 
EXAMPLE 4.39. 
To invert 
we take the partial fraction expansion of 
Then 
for all 
and 
EXAMPLE 4.40. 
Using the last transform pair in Table 4.2, the z-transform of the sequence 
can be 
generated by noting the following transform pairs: 
SJincp 
then, by Property 1. 
Linear nth-order constant-coefficient difference equations can be solved using z-transform methods 
by a procedure virtually identical to that used to solve differential equations by Laplace transform 
methods. This is illustrated step by step in the following example. 

91 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 41 
EXAMPLE 4.41. 
The difference eqi-ition 
with initial conditions 
and 
is z-transformed by applying Properties 1 and 2. By Property 1 
(Linearity): 
By Property 2, if 
then 
From Table 4.2, the z-transform of the unit step sequence is 
Direct substitution of these expressions into the transformed equation then gives 
Thus the z-transform 
of the solution sequence 
Note that the first term 
results from the initial conditions and the second term 
results from the input 
sequence. Thus the inverse of the first term is the free response, and the inverse of the second term is the forced 
response. The first term can be inverted by forming the partial fraction expansion 
From this, 
and from Table 4.2, the inverse of 
(the free response) is 
Similarly, to find the forced response, the following partial fraction expansion is formed: 
Thus 
Then, from Table 4.2, the inverse of 
(the forced response) is 

92 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
The total response 
is 
Linear constant-coefficient vector-matrix difference equations presented in Section 3.17 can also be 
solved by z-transform techniques, as illustrated in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 4.42. 
Consider the difference equation of Example 4.41 written in state variable form (see Example 
3.36): 
with initial conditions 
In vector-matrix form, these two equations arc written as 
where 
The z-transform of the vector-matrix form of the equation is 
where 
is a vector-valued z-transform whose components are the z-transforms of the corresponding compo­
nents of the state vector 
This transformed equation can be rewritten as 
where I is the identity or unit matrix. The z-transform of the solution vector 
is 
when 
represents the inverse of the matrix. Since 
then 
Substituting for 
and 
yields 
where the first term is the z-transform of the free response and the second of the forced response. Using the partial 
fraction expansion method and Table 4.2, the inverse of this z-transform is 

93 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
4.10 
DETERMINING ROOTS OF POLYNOMIALS 
The results of Sections 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9 indicate that finding the solution of linear constant-coeffi­
cient differential and difference equations by transform techniques generally requires the determination 
of the roots of polynomial equations of the form: 
where 
are real constants and s is replaced by z for z-transform polynomials. 
l h e roots ot a second-order polynomial equation 
can be obtained directly from 
the quadratic formula and are given by 
But for higher-order polynomials such analytical expressions do not, in general, exist. The expressions 
that do exist are very complicated. Fortunately, numerical techniques exist for determining these roots. 
T o aid i n the use of these numerical techniques, the following general properties of 
are given 
1. 
If a repeated root of multiplicity n is counted as n roots, then Q 
0 has exactly n roots 
(Fundamental theorem of algebra). 
2. 
If 
is divided by the factor s + p until a constant remainder is obtained, the remainder is 
3. 
s + p is a factor of Q 
if and only if Q 
is a root of Q 
4. 
If 
is a root of Q 
then 
is also a root of 
5. 
If n is odd, 
has at least one real root. 
6. 
The number of positive real roots of O. 
0 cannot exceed the number of variations in sign 
of the coefficients in the polynomial 
and the number of negative roots cannot exceed the 
number of variations i n sign of the coefficients of 
(Descartes' rule of signs). 
O f the techniques available for iteratively determining the roots of a polynomial equation (or 
equivalently the factors of the polynomial), some can determine only real roots and others both real and 
complex roots. Both types are presented below. 

94 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4. 
Repeat until the desired accuracy of the root has been achieved. The approximation of the real 
root after the A^tli iteration is given by 
(4.14) 
Each iteration increases the accuracy of the approximation by one decimal place. 
Newton's Method 
This method can determine real roots of the polynomial equation Qn(s) = 0. The steps to be 
followed are: 
1. 
Obtain a first approximation s0 of a root by making an "educated" guess, or by a technique 
such as the one in Step 1 of Horner's method. 
2. 
Generate a sequence of improved approximations until the desired accuracy is achieved by the 
recursive relationship 
which can be rewritten as 
(4.15) 
where /= 0,1.2 
This method does not provide a measure of the accuracy of the approximation. Indeed, there is no 
guarantee that the approximations converge to the correct value. 
Lin-Bairstow Method 
This method can determine both real and complex roots of the polynomial equation Qn(s) = 0. 
More exactly, this method determines quadratic factors of Q„(s) from which two roots can be 
determined by the quadratic formula. The roots can, of course, be either real or complex. The steps to 
be followed are: 
1. 
Obtain a first approximation of a quadratic factor 
0 1 
Q„(
s)
 
= £"=o
a/
5' by some method, perhaps an "educated" guess. Corrections to this 
approximation are obtained in the remaining steps. 
2. 
Generate a set of constants 
from the recursive relationship 
where 
and 
3. 
Generate a set of constants 
from the recursive relationship 
where 
and 

95 
C H A P . 4] 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
4. 
Solve the two simultaneous equations 
for 
and 
The new approximation of the quadratic factor is 
5. 
Repeat Steps 1 through 4 for the quadratic factor obtained in Step 4, until successive 
approximations are sufficiently close. 
This method does not provide a measure of the accuracy of the approximation. Indeed, there is no 
guarantee that the approximations converge to the correct value. 
Root-Locus Method 
This method can be used to determine both real and complex roots of the polynomial equation 
Q (s) = 0. The technique is discussed in Chapter 13. 
4.11 
COMPLEX PLANE: POLE-ZERO MAPS 
The rational functions F(s) for continuous systems can be rewritten as 
where the terms s + zt are factors of the numerator polynomial and the terms s + pi are factors of the 
denominator polynomial, with an = I. If s is replaced by z, F{z) represents a system function for 
discrete-time systems. 
Definition 4.6: 
Those values of the complex variable s for which |F(.v)| [absolute value of F(s)] is 
zero are called the zeros of F(s). 
Definition 4.7: 
Those values of the complex variable 5 for which \F(s)\ is infinite are called the 
poles of F(s). 
EXAMPLE 4.43. 
Let F(s) be given by 
which can be rewritten as 
has finite zeros at s 
and s 
and a zero at s 
tias finite poles at s 
and 
s = - 
l+j. 
Poles and zeros are complex numbers determined by two real variables, one representing the real 
part and the other the imaginary part of the complex number. A pole or zero can therefore be 
represented as a point in rectangular coordinates. The abscissa of this point represents the real part and 
the ordinate the imaginary part. In the s-plane, the abscissa is called the o-axis and the ordinate the 
jto-axis. In the z-plane, the abscissa is called the u.-axis and the ordinate the jv-axis. The planes defined 
s 

96 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
by these coordinate systems are generally called the complex plane (.?-plane or z-plane). That half of the 
complex plane in which R e ( i ) < 0 or Re(z) < 0 is called the left half of the s-plane or z-plane ( L H P ) , 
and that half i n which Re(s) > 0 or Re(z) > 0 is called the right half of the s-plane or z-plane ( R H P ) . 
That portion of the z-plane in which |z| < 1 is called (the interior of) the unit circle i n the z-plane. 
The location of a pole i n the complex plane is denoted symbolically by a cross ( X ) , and the 
location of a zero by a small circle (O). The s-plane including the locations of the finite poles and zeros 
of F(s) is called the pole-zero map of F(s). A similar comment holds for the z-plane. 
EXAMPLE 4.44. 
The rational function 
has finite poles s = — 3, s = 
and s = 
and finite zeros s = — I and s = 2. The pole-zero map of F(s) 
is shown in Fig. 4-2. 
4.12 
GRAPHICAL EVALUATION OF RESIDUES* 
Let F(s) be a rational function written i n its factored form: 
Since F(s) is a complex function, it can be written i n polar form as 
where |.F(.s)| is the absolute value of F(s) and $ = arg F(s) = tan
 
l[lm 
F(s)/ReF(s)]. 
F(s) can further be written i n terms of the polar forms of the factors s + z, and s + pf as 
where s 
and s + p 
*While s is used to represent the complex variable in this section, it is not intended to represent the Laplace variable only but 
rather to be a general complex variable and the discussion is applicable to both the Laplace and r-transforms. 

97 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
Each complex number s, zt, pt, s + zj7 and s + pj can be represented by a vector i n the .s-plane. If p 
is a general complex number, then the vector representing p has magnitude \p\ and direction defined by 
the angle 
measured counterclockwise from the positive a-axis. 
A typical pole —pt and zero — z, are shown in Fig. 4-3, along with a general complex variable s. 
The sum vectors s + z ( and s + pt are also shown. Note that the vector s + z, is a vector which starts at 
the zero — z ( and terminates at s, and s + pt starts at the pole —pt and terminates at s. 
For distinct poles of the rational function F(s), the residue ckl = ck of the pole —pk is given by 
These residues can be determined by the following graphical procedure: 
1. 
Plot the pole-zero map of (s + 
pk)F(s). 
2. 
D r a w vectors on this map starting at the poles and zeros of (s + pk)F(s), 
and terminating at 
—pk. Measure the magnitude (in the scale of the pole-zero map) of these vectors and the angles 
of the vectors measured from the positive real axis i n the counterclockwise direction. 
3. 
Obtain the magnitude \ck\ of the residue ck as the product of bm and the magnitudes of the 
vectors from the zeros to —pk, divided by the product of the magnitudes of the vectors from 
the poles to — pk. 
4. 
Determine the angle <$>k of the residue ck as the sum of the angles of the vectors from the zeros 
to —pk, minus the sum of the angles of the vectors from the poles to — pk. 
This is true for 
positive bm. If bm is negative, then add 180° to this angle. 
The residue ck is given in polar form by 
or i n rectangular form by 
This graphical technique is not directly applicable for evaluating residues of multiple poles. 

98 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4.13 
SECOND-ORDER SYSTEMS 
A s indicated in Section 3.14, many control systems can be described or approximated by the 
general second-order dilTerential equation 
The positive coefficient un is called the undamped natural frequency and the coefficient £ is the damping 
ratio of the system. 
The Laplace transform of y(t), when the initial conditions are zero, is 
where U{s) =SC\u(t)]. The poles of the function Y(s)/U(s) 
= u;J{s
2 + 2foj„s + w;) are 
Note that: 
1. 
If J > 1, both poles are negative and real. 
2. 
If f = 1, the poles are equal, negative, and real (s = — «„). 
3. 
If 0 < £ < 1, the poles are complex conjugates with negative real parts (s = — fco„ ± jajl 
— i
2 ) . 
4. 
If f = 0, the poles are imaginary and complex conjugate (s = ±,M,). 
5. 
If f < 0. the poles are in the right half of the s-plane ( R H P ) . 
O f particular interest in this book is Case 3, representing an underdamped second-order system. The 
poles are complex conjugates with negative real parts and are located at 
or at 
where 1 /a ~ 1 / ? « „ is called the time constant of the system and 
= cofl\/T — f
2 is called the damped 
natural frequency of the system. For fixed un, F i g . 4-4 shows the locus of these poles as a function of f. 
0 < f < 1. The locus is a semicircle of radius u„. The angle 6 is related to the damping ratio by 
6» = cos
 
J f . 
A similar description for second-order systems described by difference equations does not exist in 
such a simple and useful form. 

99 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
LAPLACE TRANSFORMS FROM THE DEFINITION 
4.1. 
Show that the unit step function l(r) is Laplace transformable 
and determine its Laplace 
transform. 
Direct substitution into the equation of Definition 4.2 yields 
for a 0 > 0. The Laplace transform is given by Definition 4.1: 
4.2. 
Show that the unit ramp function 
/ is Laplace transformable 
and determine its Laplace 
transform. 
Direct substitution into the equation of Definition 4.2 yields 
for 
for 
The Laplace transform is given by Definition 4.1: 
4.3. 
Show that the sine function sin t is Laplace transformable and determine its Laplace transform. 
The integral /0°? |sin t\e~"
a' dt can be evaluated by writing the integral over the positive half cycles of 
sin t as 
for n even, and over negative half-cycles of sin / as 
for n odd. Then 
The summation converges for e °°* < 1 or o„ > 0 and can be written in closed form as 
Then 
Finally, 
for 
for 

100 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4.4. 
Show that the Laplace transform of the unit impulse function is given by ^[8(t)] 
— 1-
Direct substitution of Equation (3,19) into the equation of Definition 4.1 viclds 
where the Laplace transform of 1(0 is l / s , as shown in Problem 4.1, and the second term is obtained using 
Property 9. Now 
(see Reference [1]). Thus 
PROPERTIES OF THE LAPLACE TRANSFORM AND ITS INVERSE 
4.5. 
Show 
that 
where 
and 
(Property 1) 
By definition. 
4.6. 
Show 
that 
where 
and 
(Property 2). 
By definition, 
4.7. 
Show that the Laplace transform 
of the derivative df/dt of a function 
fit) 
is given by 
Property 3) 
By definition, 

101 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 41 
Integrating by parts. 
where 
4.8. 
Show that 
where 
(Property 4). 
By definition and a change in the order of integrations, we have 
4.9. 
Show that 
(Properly 5). 
From Problem 4.7, 
Now let 
that is. 
Since the limiting processes can be interchanged, we have 
But lim. 
Hence the right side of the equation is zero and lim. 
4.10. 
Show that if 
exists then 
(Property 6). 
where 
From Problem 4.7, 
Now let s -» 0, that is, 
Since the limiting processes can be interchanged, we have 
Adding 
to both sides of the last equation yields 
exists. 

102 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
4.11. 
Show that 
where 
(Property 7). 
By definition, 
Making the change of variable 
4.12. 
Show that 
where 
(Property 8). 
By definition, 
Making the change of variable 
4.13. 
Show that 
where 
for 
and 
(Property 
9). 
By definition, 
Making the change of variable 
4.14. 
Show that 
where 
(Property 10). 
By definition, 
4.15. 
Show that 
where 
and 
(Property 11). 
By definitio 
But 
Hence 
Interchanging the order of integrations yields 

C H A P . 4] 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
103 
Since 
4.16. 
Show that 
where 
and 
(Property 12). 
By definition, 
But , 
Hence 
Interchanging the order of integrations yields 
Since 
then 
where the second equality is true since 
4.17. 
Show that 
for 
where 
and 
This result can be shown by mathematical induction. For 
as shown in Problem 4.7. Now assume the result holds for 
that is, 
Then 
can be written as 
For the special case 
we have 

104 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
LAPLACE TRANSFORMS AND THEIR INVERSE FROM THE TABLE OF TRANSFORM PAIRS 
4.18. 
F i n d the Laplace transform of 
From the table of transform pairs, 
Using Property 9, 
Using Property 1, 
4.19. 
F i n d the inverse Laplace transform of 
for 
The inverse transforms are determined directly from Table 4.1 as 
Using Property 9, then Property 2, results in 
LAPLACE TRANSFORMS OF LINEAR 
CONSTANT-COEFFICIENT 
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
4.20. 
Determine the output transform Y(s) for the differential equation 
where y = output, u = input, and initial conditions are 
Using Property 3 or the result of Problem 4.17, the Laplace transforms of the terms of the equation are 
given as 
where 
and 
rhe Laplace transform of the given equation can now be 

105 
C H A P . 4] 
written as 
Solving for Y(s), we obtain 
4.21. 
What part of the solution of Problem 4.20 is the transform of the free response? The forced 
response? 
The transform of the free response Ya(s) is that part of the output transform Y(s) which does not 
depend on the input u(t), its derivatives or its transform; that is, 
The transform of the forced response Yb(s) is that part of Y(s) which depends on u(t), its derivative and 
its transform; that is, 
4.22. 
What is the characteristic polynomial for the differential equation of Problems 4.20 and 4.21? 
The characteristic polynomial is the denominator polynomial which is common to the transforms of 
the free and forced responses (see Problem 4.21), that is, the polynomial s
3 + 3s
2 — s + 6. 
4.23. 
Determine the output transform Y(s) of the system of Problem 4.20 for an input u(t) = 5 sin t. 
From Table 4.1, 
The initial values of 
and 
are 
Substituting these values into the output transform 
given in Problem 4.20, 
PARTIAL FRACTION EXPANSIONS 
4.24. 
A rational function 
can be represented by 
(4.10a) 
where the second form is the partial fraction expansion of F(s). Show that the constants cik are 
given by 
(4.10b) 

106 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
Let 
be the factor of interest and form 
This can be rewritten as 
Now form 
Note that the first three terms on the right-hand side of (s + pi)"JF(s) 
will have a factor s + pj in the 
numerator even after being differentiated n • — / times ( / = 1,2,..., n.) and thus these three terms become 
zero when evaluated at s = —p,. Therefore 
Except for that term in the summation for which k = /, all the other terms are zero since they contain 
factors s + pj. Then 
or 
4.25. 
Expand Y(s) of Example 4.17 in a partial fraction expansion. 
Y(s) can be rewritten with the denominator polynomial in factored form as 
The partial fraction expansion of Y(s) is [see Equation (4.11)] 
where 
Thus 
4.26. 
Expand Y(s) of Example 4.19 in a partial fraction expansion. 
Y(s) can be rewritten with the denominator polynomial in factored form as 

107 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
The partial fraction expansion of Y(s) is [see Equation (4.11)} 
where 
Thus 
INVERSE LAPLACE TRANSFORMS USING PARTIAL FRACTION EXPANSIONS 
4.27. 
Determine y(t) for the system of Example 4.17. 
From the result of Problem 4.25, the transform of y(t) can be written as 
Therefore 
4.28. 
Determine y(t) for the system of Example 4.19. 
From the result of Problem 4.26, the transform of y(t) can be written as 
Therefore 
ROOTS OF POLYNOMIALS 
4.29. 
F i n d an approximation of a real root of the polynomial equation 
to an accuracy of three significant figures using Horner 'j method. 
By Descartes' rule of signs, Q^(s) has three variations in the signs of its coefficients (1 to - 3, - 3 to 4, 
and 4 to —5). Thus there may be three positive real roots. Q*( — s) = —s
i - 3s
1 - 4s — 5 has no sign 
changes; therefore Q^(s) has no negative real roots and only real values of s greater than zero need be 
considered. 
Step 1— We have <?_,(()) = - 5 , Qi(l)= - 3 , (? 3(2)= - 1 , Qi(3) = 7. Therefore k{) = 2 and the first 
approximation is slt = k0 = 2. 
Step 2—Determine Q\(s) as 
Step 
Hence 
and 
Now repeat Step 2 to determine Qj(s): 

108 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
Repeating Step 
Hence 
and 
which is an approximation of the root accurate to three significant figures. 
4.30. 
F i n d an approximation of a real root of the polynomial equation given in Problem 4.29 using 
Newton 's method. Perform four iterations and compare the result with the solution of Problem 
4.29. 
The sequence of approximations is defined by letting H = 3, a, = 1, a2 = — 3, al= 4-, and an = — 5 in 
the recursive relationship of Newton's method [Equation (4.15)]. The result is 
Let the first guess be .?„ = 0. Then 
The next iteration yields ss = 2.22 and the sequence is converging. 
4.31. 
F i n d an approximation of a quadratic factor of the polynomial 
of Problems 4.29 and 4.30, using the Lin-Bairstow method. Perform two iterations. 
Step 1 — Choose as a first approximation the factor s
1 — s + 2. 
The constants needed in Step 2 arc «j = — 1, a(l = 2, n = 3, a3 = 1, a 2 = — 3, al= 4, a[} = —5. 
Step 2—From the recursive relationship 
the following constants arc formed: 
Step —From the recursive relationship 
the following constants are determined: 
Step 4—The simultaneous equations 
can now be written as 
whose solution is 
and the new approximation of the quadratic factor is 
If Steps 1 through 4 are repeated for 
the second iteration produces 

109 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
POLE-ZERO MAPS 
4.32. 
Determine all of the Doles and zeros of 
The finite poles of 
are the roots of the denominator polynomial equation 
Therefore s = 0, s= - 3, and s = 10 are the finite poles of F(s). s = 0 is a triple root of the equation and is 
called a triple pole of F(s). These are the only values of s for which \F(s)\ is infinite and are all the poles of 
F(s). The finite zeros of F(s) are the roots of the numerator polynomial equation 
Therefore s = 4 and s = —4 are the finite zeros of F(s). As \s\ -» co, F(s) s 1 / V
1 -> 0. Then F(s) has a 
triple zero at s = oc. 
4.33. 
Draw a oole-zero man for the function of Problem 4.32. 
From the solution of Problem 4.32, F(s) has finite zeros at s = 4 and a = - 4 , and /™?<? poles at j = 0 
(a triple pole), .s = - 3 and s = 10. The pole-zero map is shown in Fig. 4-5. 
4.34. 
Using the graphical technique, evaluate the residues of the function 
The pole-zero map of F(s) is shown in Fig. 4-6. 
Fig. 4-6 
Included in this pole-zero map are the vector displacements between the poles. For example, A is the 
vector displacement of the pole 5= —10 relative to the pole s = — 1 +j. Clearly then, -A 
is the vector 
displacement of the pole s = —l+j relative to the pole s = —10. 
The magnitude of the residue at the pole s = - 1 0 is 
The angle 4>t of the residue at s = -10 is the negative of the sum of the angles of A and B, that is, 
4>i = - [ 1 8 6 ° 2 0 ' + 173°40']= - 3 6 0 ° . Hence c, =0.243. 

110 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
The magnitude of the residue at the pole s 
is 
The angle 
of the residue at the pole 
is the negative of the sums of the angles of — A and C: 
Hence 
The magnitude of the residue at the pole A-
The angle <fo of the residue at the pole 
is the negative of the sum of the angles of - B and - C: 
Note that the residues 
and c 
of the complex conjugate poles arc also complex conjugates. This is 
always true for the residues of complex conjugate poles. 
SECOND-ORDER SYSTEMS 
1.35. 
Determine (a) 
the undamped natural frequency u>„, (b) 
the damping ratio f, (c) the time 
constant T. (d) the damped natural frequency oid, (e) characteristic equation for the second-order 
system given by 
Comparing this equation with the definitions of Section 4.13, we have 
(d) 
4.36. 
H o w and why can the following system be approximated by a second-order system? 
When the initial conditions on y(t) and its derivatives are zero, the output transform is 
where U(.i) ==2qw(r)]. This can be rewritten as 
The constant factor ^ of the second term is 8 times the constant factor 
of the first term. The output 
y(t) 
will then be dominated by the time function 
The output transform Y(s) can then be approximated by this second term; that is, 
The second-order approximation is 
4.37. 
In Chapter 6 it will be shown that the output y(t) 
of a time-invariant linear causal system with 
all initial conditions equal to zero is related to the input u(t) in the Laplace transform domain 

I l l 
r H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
by the equation Y(s) — P(s)U(s), 
where P(s) is called the transfer function of the system. Show 
that p(t), the inverse Laplace transform of P(s), is equal to the weighting function w(t) of a 
system described by the constant-coefficient differential equation 
The forced response for a system described by the above equation is given by Equation (±15). with all 
b, = 0 except 
b,=l: 
and w(t — T) is the weighting function of the differential equation. 
The inverse Laptacc transform of Y(s) = P(s)U(s) is easily determined from the convolution integral 
of Property 12 as 
Hence 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
4.38. 
F o r the R-C network in Fig. 4-7: 
(a) 
F i n d a differential equation which relates the output voltage y and the input voltage u. 
(b) 
Let the initial voltage across the capacitor C be vc0 = 1 volt with the polarity shown, and 
let u — 2e~'. Using the Laplace transform technique, find y. 
(a) 
From Kirchhoff's voltage law 
But 
)•=/?/ = /. Therefore u=vrn-\- j^ydt+y. 
Differentiating both sides of this integral equation 
yields the differential equation y + y = u. 
(b) 
The Laplace transform of the differential equation found in part (a) is 
where 
and 
find 
limits arc taken on 
both sides of the original voltage equation 
Hence 
The transform of 
is then 

i n 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
[CHAP. 4 
Finally, 
4.39. 
Determine the Laplace transform of the output of the ideal sampler described in Problem 3.5. 
From Definition 4.1 and Equation (3.20), the screening property of the unit impulse, we have 
4.40. 
Compare the result of Problem 4.39 with the z-transform of the sampled signal 
u(kT), 
k = 0,1,2.... . 
By definition the z-transform of the sampled signal is 
This result could have been obtained directly by substituting z = e
sl 
in the result of Problem 4.39. 
4.41. 
Prove the Shift Theorem (Property 6, Section 4.9). 
By definition, 
If we define a new, shifted sequence by g(0) = / ( - 1 ) = 0 and g(k.) =f(k 
- 1), A. = 1,2, 
then 
(see Remark 1 following Definition 4.4). Now let k be redefined as k = j - 1 in the last equation. Then 
Note that repeated application of this result gives 
Supplementary Problems 
4.42. 
Show that 
where 
4.43. 
Using the convolution integral find the inverse transform of 

113 
T H E L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M A N D T H E z - T R A N S F O R M 
C H A P . 4] 
4.44. 
Determine the final value of the function f(t) 
whose Laplace transform is 
4.45. 
Determine the initial value of the function f(t) whose Laplace transform is 
4.46. 
Find the partial fraction expansion of the function 
4.47. 
Find the inverse Laplace transform 
of the function 
4.48. 
Solve Problem 3.24 using the Laplace transform technique. 
4.49. 
Using the Laplace transform technique, find the forced response of the differential equation 
where 
Compare this solution with that obtained in Problem 3.26. 
4.50. 
Using the Laplace transform technique, find the transient and steady state responses of the system 
described by the differential equation 
with initial conditions 
and 
4.51. 
Using the Laplace transform technique, find the unit impulse response of the system described by the 
differential equation , 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
4.43. 
4.44. 
4.45. 
4.46. 
4.47. 
4.49. 
4.50. 
Transient response 
Steady state response 
4.51. 

114 
Chapter 5 
Stability 
5.1 
STABILITY DEFINITIONS 
The stability of a continuous or discrete-time system is determined by its response to inputs or 
disturbances. Intuitively, a stable system is one that remains at rest unless excited by an external source 
and returns to rest if all excitations are removed. Stability can be precisely defined in terms of the 
impulse response ys(t) of a continuous system, or Kronecker delta response ys(k) 
of a discrete-time 
system (see Sections 3.13 and 3.16), as follows: 
Definition 5.1a: 
A continuous system (discrete-time system) is stable if its impulse response 
ys(t) 
(Kronecker delta response ys(k)) approaches zero as time approaches infinity. 
Alternatively, the definition of a stable system can be based upon the response of the system to 
bounded inputs, that is, inputs whose magnitudes are less than some finite value for all time. 
Definition 5.1b: 
A continuous or discrete-time system is stable if every bounded input produces a 
bounded output. 
Consideration of the degree of stability of a system often provides valuable information about its 
behavior. That is, if it is stable, how close is it to being unstable? This is the concept of relative stability. 
Usually, relative stability is expressed in terms of some allowable variation of a particular system 
parameter, over which the system remains stable. More precise definitions of relative stability indicators 
are presented in later chapters. Stability of nonlinear systems is treated in Chapter 19. 
5.2 
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C R O O T L O C A T I O N S FOR C O N T I N U O U S S Y S T E M S 
A major result of Chapters 3 and 4 is that the impulse response of a linear time-invariant 
continuous system is a sum of exponential time functions whose exponents are the roots of the system 
characteristic equation (see Equation 4.12). A necessary and sufficient condition for the system to be stable 
is that the real parts of the roots of the characteristic equation have negative real parts. This ensures that 
the impulse response will decay exponentially with time. 
If the system has some roots with real parts equal to zero, but none with positive real parts, the 
system is said to be marginally stable. In this instance, the impulse response does not decay to zero, 
although it is bounded, but certain other inputs will produce unbounded outputs. Therefore marginally 
stable systems are unstable. 
EXAMPLE 5.1. 
The system described by the Laplace transformed differential equation, 
has the characteristic equation 
This equation has the two roots ±j. Since these roots have zero real parts, the system is not stable. It is, however, 
marginally stable since the equation has no roots with positive real parts. In response to most inputs or 
disturbances, the system oscillates with a bounded output. However, if the input is u = sin t, the output will contain 
a term of the form: y = / cos t, which is unbounded. 

115 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
5.3 
ROUTH STABILITY 
CRITERION 
The R o u t h criterion is a method for determining continuous system stability, for systems with ar 
n th-order characteristic equation of the form: 
The criterion is applied using a Routh table defined as follows: 
where 
are the coefficients of the characteristic equation and 
etc. 
etc. 
The table is continued horizontally and vertically until only zeros are obtained. A n y row can be 
multiplied by a positive constant before the next row is computed without disturbing the properties of 
the table. 
The Routh Criterion: All the roots of the characteristic equation have negative real parts if and only if 
the elements of the first column of the Routh table have the same sign. Otherwise, the number of roots with 
positive real parts is equal to the number of changes of sign. 
EXAMPLE 5.2. 
Since there are no changes of sign in the first column of the table, all the roots of the equation have negative real 
parts. 
Often it is desirable to determine a range of values of a particular system parameter for which the 
system is stable. This can be accomplished by writing the inequalities that ensure that there is no change 
of sign i n the first column of the Routh table for the system. These inequalities then specify the range of 
allowable values of the parameter. 
EXAMPLE 5.3. 
For no sign changes in the first column, it is necessary that the conditions 8 — K> 0, 1 + A' > 0 be satisfied. Thus 
the characteristic equation has roots with negative real parts if — 1 < K < 8, the simultaneous solution of these two 
inequalities. 

116 
STABILITY 
[CHAP. 5 
A row of zeros for the s
1 row of the Routh table indicates that the polynomial has a pair of roots 
which satisfy the auxiliary equation formed as follows: 
where A and B are the first and second elements of the s
2 row. 
T o continue the table, the zeros in the s
1 row are replaced with the coefficients of the derivative of 
the auxiliary equation. The derivative of the auxiliary equation is 
The coefficients 2A and 0 are then entered into the s
l row and the table is continued as described 
above. 
EXAMPLE 5.4. In the previous example, the s
1 row is zero if K= 8. In this case, the auxiliary equation is 
3s
2 + 9 = 0. Therefore two of the roots of the characteristic equation are s = ±jf3 . 
5.4 
HURWITZ STABILITY CRITERION 
The Hurwitz criterion is another method for determining whether all the roots of the characteristic 
equation of a continuous system have negative real parts. This criterion is applied using determinants 
formed from the coefficients of the characteristic equation. It is assumed that the first coefficient, an, is 
positive. The determinants A , , /' = 1 , 2 , . . . , « — 1, are formed as the principal minor determinants of the 
determinant 
The determinants are thus formed as follows: 
and so on up to 
Hurwitz Criterion: All the roots of the characteristic equation have negative real parts if and only if 
Thus all the roots of the characteristic equation have negative real parts if 
EXAMPLE 5.5. For 

117 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
5.5 
CONTINUED FRACTION STABILITY CRITERION 
This criterion is applied to the characteristic equation of a continuous system by forming a 
continued fraction from the odd and even portions of the equation, in the following manner. Let 
Form the fraction 
£?i/£?2>
 
a
n ^ then divide the denominator into the numerator and invert the 
remainder, to form a continued fraction as follows: 
If hv h2 
, hn are all positive, then all the roots of Q(s) = 0 have negative real parts. 
EXAMPLE 5.6. 
Since all the coefficients of s in the continued fraction arc positive, that is, 
B5 
all the 
roots of the polynomial equation 
have negative real parts. 
5.6 
STABILITY CRITERIA FOR DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS 
The stability of discrete systems is determined by the roots of the discrete system characteristic 
equation 
(5.1) 
However, in this case the stability region is defined by the unit circle \z\ = 1 in the z-plane. A necessary 
and sufficient condition for system stability is that all the roots of the characteristic equation have a 
magnitude less than one, that is, be within the unit circle. This ensures that the Kronecker delta response 
decays with time. 

118 
STABILITY 
[CHAP. 5 
A stability criterion for discrete systems similar to the Routh criterion is called the Jury test. For 
this test, the coefficients of the characteristic equation are first arranged in the Jury array: 
row 
where 
The first two rows are written using the characteristic equation coefficients and the next two rows are 
computed using the determinant relationships shown above. The process is continued with each 
succeeding pair of rows having one less column than the previous pair until row In — 3 is computed, 
which only has three entries. The array is then terminated. 
Jury Test: Necessary and sufficient conditions for the roots of Q(z) = 0 to have magnitudes less than 
one are: 
N o t e that if the Q{\)
 
o
r Q(~ 1) conditions above are not satisfied, the system is unstable and it is not 
necessary to construct the array. 
EXAMPLE 5.7. 
For 
(n even) 
Thus the Jury array must be completed as 

119 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
The remaining test condition constraints are therefore 
Since all the constraints of the Jury test arc satisfied, all the roots of the characteristic equation are within the unit 
circle and the system is stable. 
The H'-Transform 
The stability of a linear discrete-time system expressed in the z-domain also can be determined 
using the s-plane methods developed for continuous systems (e.g., Routh, Hurwitz). The following 
bilinear transformation of the complex variable z into the new complex variable w given by the 
equivalent expressions: 
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
transforms the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane onto the left half of the w-plane. Therefore the 
stability of a discrete-time system with characteristic polynomial Q(z) can be determined by examining 
the locations of the roots of 
in the n-plane, treating w like s and using j-plane techniques to establish stability properties. This 
transformation is developed more extensively in Chapter 10 and is also used in subsequent frequency 
domain analysis and design chapters. 
EXAMPLE 5.8. 
The polynomial equation 
is the characteristic equation of a discrete-time system. To test for roots outside the unit circle \z\ = 1, which would 
signify instability, we set 
which, after some algebraic manipulation, leads to a new characteristic equation in w: 
This equation was found to have roots only in the left half of the complex plane in Example 5.2. Therefore the 
original discrete-time system is stable. 
Solved Problems 
STABILITY DEFINITIONS 
5.1. 
The impulse responses of several linear continuous systems are given below. For each case 
determine if the impulse response represents a stable or an unstable system. 
If the impulse response decays to zero as time approaches infinity, the system is stable. As can be seen 
in Fig. 5-1, the impulse responses (a), (b), and (J) decay to zero as time approaches infinity and therefore 

120 
STABILITY 
[CHAP. 5 
(a) 
(6) 
(c) 
(e) 
Fig. 5-1 
represent stable systems. Since the impulse responses (c) and (e) do not approach zero, they represent 
unstable systems. 
5.2. 
If a step function is applied at the input of a continuous system and the output remains below a 
certain level for all time, is the system stable? 
The system is not necessarily stable since the output must be bounded for every bounded input. A 
bounded output to one specific bounded input does not ensure stability. 
5.3. 
If a step function is applied at the input of a continuous system and the output is of the form 
y = t,is 
the system stable or unstable? 
The system is unstable since a bounded input produced an unbounded output. 
CHARACTERISTIC ROOT LOCATIONS FOR CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS 
5.4. 
The roots of the characteristic equations of several systems are given below. Determine in each 
case if the set of roots represents stable, marginally stable, or unstable systems. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(/) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
The sets of roots (a), (d), and (h) represent stable systems since all the roots have negative real parts. 
The sets of roots (c) and (e) represent marginally stable systems since all the roots have nonpositive real 
parts, that is, zero or negative. The sets (b), (/), (g), and (i) represent unstable systems since each has at 
least one root with a positive real part. 

121 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
5.5. 
A system has poles at — 1 and — 5 and zeros at 1 and — 2. Is the system stable? 
The system is stable since the poles are the roots of the system characteristic equation (Chapter 3) 
which have negative real parts. The fact that the system has a zero with a positive real part does not affect 
its stability. 
5.6. 
Determine if the system with the following characteristic equation is stable: 
This characteristic equation has the roots - 1 , - 2 , and 3 and therefore represents an unstable system 
since there is a positive real root. 
5.7. 
The differential equation of an integrator may be written as follows: dy/dt = u. Determine if an 
integrator is stable. 
The characteristic equation of this system is s = 0. Since the root does not have a negative real part, an 
integrator is not stable. Since it has no roots with positive real parts, an integrator is marginally stable. 
5.8. 
Determine a bounded input which will produce an unbounded output from an integrator. 
The input u = 1 will produce the output y = t, which is unbounded. 
ROUTH STABILITY CRITERION 
5.9. 
Determine if the following characteristic equation represents a stable system: 
The Routh table for this system is 
Since there are no changes of sign in the first column, all the roots of the characteristic equation have 
negative real parts and the system is stable. 
5.10. 
Determine it the following characteristic equation has any roots with positive real parts: 
Note that the coefficient of the s
2 term is zero. The Routh table for this equation is 
The presence of the zeros in the 
row indicates that the characteristic equation has two roots which satisfy 
the auxiliary equation formed from the s
2 row as follows: s
2 - 1 = 0. The roots of this equation are +1 
and — 1. 
The new s
l row was formed using the coefficients from the derivative of the auxiliary equation: 
2s — 0 = 0. Since there is one change of sign, the characteristic equation has one root with a positive real 
part, the one at +1 determined from the auxiliary equation. 

122 
STABILITY 
[CHAP, 5 
5.11. 
The characteristic equation of a given system is 
What restrictions must be placed upon the parameter K in order to ensure that the system is 
stflhlfv' 
The Routh table for this system is 
For the system to be stable, 
and 
Thus 
5.12. 
Construct a Routh table and determine the number of roots with positive real parts for the 
equation 
The Routh table for this equation is given below. Here the s
2 row was divided by 4 before the s
l row 
was computed. The A-
1 row was then divided by 2 before the .9° row was computed. 
Since there are two changes of sign in the first column of the Routh table, the equation above has two roots 
with Dositive real oarts. 
HURWITZ STABILITY CRITERION 
5.13. 
Determine if the characteristic equation below represents a stable or an unstable system. 
The Hurwitz determinants for this system are 
Since each determinant is positive, the system is stable. Note that the general formulation of Example 5.5 
could have been used to check the stability in this case by substituting the appropriate values for the 
coefficients a„, ay, a2, and 
5.14. 
For what range of values of K is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
The Hurwitz determinants for this system are 
In order for these determinants to be positive, it is necessary that K > 0 and 2 K - 1 > 0. Thus the system is 
stable if K > \. 

123 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
5.15. 
A system is designed to give satisfactory performance when a particular amplifier gain K = 2. 
Determine how much K can vary before the system becomes unstable if the characteristic 
equation is 
Substituting the coefficients of the given equation into the general Hurwitz conditions of Example 5.5 
results in the following requirements for stability: 
Assuming the amplifier gain K cannot be negative, the first condition is satisfied. The second and third 
conditions are satisfied if K is less than 4. Hence with an amplifier gain design value of 2, the system could 
tolerate an increase in gain of a factor of 2 before it would become unstable. The gain could also drop to 
zero without causing instability. 
5.16. 
Determine the Hurwitz conditions for stability of the following general fourth-order characteris­
tic equation, assuming a 4 is positive. 
The Hurwitz determinants arc 
The conditions for stability are then 
5.17. 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
Substituting the appropriate values for the coefficients in the general conditions of Problem 5.16, we 
have 
Since the last two conditions are not satisfied, the system is unstable. 
CONTINUED FRACTION STABILITY CRITERION 
5.18. 
Repeat Problem 5.9 using the continued fraction stability criterion. 
The polynomial 
is divided into the two parts: 

124 
STABILITY 
[CHAP. 5 
The continued fraction for 
Since all the coefficients of s are positive, the polynomial has all its roots in the left half-plane and the 
system with the characteristic equation Q(s) = 0 is stable. 
5.19. 
Determine bounds upon the parameter K for which a system with the following characteristic 
equation is stable: 
For the system to be stable, the following conditions must be satisfied: 
that is, 
5.20. 
Derive conditions for all the roots of a general third-order polynomial to have negative real 
parts. 
The conditions for all the roots of Q(s) to have negative real parts are then 
Thus if a, is positive, the required conditions are a2, a (, an > 0 and asa2 - a^an > 0. Note that if a a is not 
positive, Q(s) should be multiplied by - 1 before checking the above conditions. 
5.21. 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
Since the coefficients of s arc not all positive, the system is unstable. 
DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS 
5.22. 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 

125 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 51 
Applying the Jury test, with 
(even), 
The Jury array must be constructed, as follows: 
The Jury test constraints are 
Since all the constraints are not satisfied, the system is unstable. 
5.23. 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
Applying the Jury test, with n = 4 (even), 
The Jury array must be constructed, as follows: 
The test constraints are 
Since all the constraints are satisfied, the system is stable. 
5.24, 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
Applying the Jury test, with n = 5 (odd), 
Since n is odd, Q( — 1) must be less than zero for the system to be stable. Therefore the system is unstable. 

126 
STABILITY 
[CHAP. 5 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
5.25. 
If a zero appears in the first column of the Routh table, is the system necessarily unstable? 
Strictly speaking, a zero in the first column must be interpreted as having no sign, that is, neither 
positive nor negative. Consequently, all the elements of the first column cannot have the same sign if one of 
them is zero, and the system is unstable. In some cases, a zero in the first column indicates the presence of 
two roots of equal magnitude but opposite sign (see Problem 5.10). In other cases, it indicates the presence 
of one or more roots with zero real parts. Thus a characteristic equation having one or more roots with zero 
real parts and no roots with positive real parts will produce a Routh table in which all the elements of the 
first column do not have the same sign and do not have any sign changes. 
5.26. 
Prove that a continuous system is unstable if any coefficients of the characteristic equation are 
zero. 
The characteristic equation may be written in the form 
where slt .v 2,..., .?„ are the roots of the equation. If this equation is multiplied out, n new equations can be 
obtained relating the roots and the coefficients of the characteristic equation in the usual form. Thus 
and the relations are 
The coefficients a„._l,a„_2,..., 
an all have the same sign as aa and are nonzero if all the roots .s,, s2 
sn 
have negative real parts. The only way any one of the coefficients can be zero is for one or more of the roots 
to have zero or positive real parts. In cither case, the system would be unstable. 
5.27. 
Prove that a continuous system is unstable if all the coefficients of the characteristic equation do 
not have the same sign. 
From the relations presented in Problem 5.26, it can be seen that the coefficients a„_ ,, a„_2,..., 
aa 
have the same sign as an if all the roots si,s2,..., sn have negative real parts. The only way any of these 
coefficients may differ in sign from an is for one or more of the roots to have a positive real part. Thus the 
system is necessarily unstable if all the coefficients do not have the same sign. Note that a system is no! 
necessarily stable if all the coefficients do have the same sign. 
5.28. 
C a n the continuous system stability criteria presented in this chapter be applied to continuous 
systems which contain time delays? 
N o they cannot be directly applied because systems which contain time delays do not have characteris­
tic equations of the required form, that is, finite polynomials in s. For example, the following characteristic 
equation represents a system which contains a time delay: 
Strictly speaking, this equation has an infinite number of roots. However, in sonic cases an approximation 
may be employed for e~
sT 
to give useful, although not entirely accurate, information concerning system 
stability. To illustrate, let e~
sT 
in the equation above be replaced by the first two terms of its Taylor series. 
The equation then becomes 
One of the stability criteria of this chapter may then be applied to this approximation of the characteristic 
equation. 

127 
STABILITY 
C H A P . 5] 
5.29. 
Determine an approximate upper limit on the time delay in order that the system discussed in 
the solution of Problem 5.28 be stable. 
Employing the approximate equation s
2 + (1 - T)s +1 = 0, the Hurwitz determinants are A, = A 2 = 
1-7". Hence for the system to be stable, the time delay T must be less than 1. 
Supplementary Problems 
5.30. 
For each characteristic polynomial, determine if it represents a stable or an unstable system. 
(b) 
to 
U) 
(<0 
(/) 
5.31. 
For what values of K does the polynomial s
i + (4 + K)s
2 + 6A- + 12 have roots with negative rea! parts? 
5.32. 
How many roots with positive real parts does each polynomial have? 
( « ) 
(b) 
(d) 
5,33. 
For what positive value of K does the polynomial 
have roots with zero real 
parts? What are these roots? 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
5.30. 
(b) and (e) represent stable systems: (a), (c), (d), and (/) represent unstable systems. 
5.31. 
5.32. 
5.33. 

128 
Chapter 6 
Transfer Functions 
6.1 
DEFINITION OF A CONTINUOUS SYSTEM TRANSFER FUNCTION 
A s shown in Chapters 3 and 4, the response of a time-invariant linear system can be separated into 
two parts: the forced response and the free response. This is true for both continuous and discrete 
systems. W e consider continuous transfer functions first, and for single-input, single-output systems 
only. Equation (4.8) clearly illustrates this division for the most general constant-coefficient, linear, 
ordinary differential equation. The forced response includes terms due to initial values UQ of the input, 
and the free response depends only on initial conditions y£ on the output. If terms due to all initial 
values, that is, u$ and VQ, are lumped together, Equation (4.8) can be written as 
(terms due to all initial values 
or, in transform notation, as 
(terms due to all initial values 
The transfer function P(s) of a continuous system is defined as that factor in the equation for Y(s) 
multiplying the transform of the input U(s). F o r the system described above, the transfer function is 
the denominator is the characteristic polynomial, and the transform of the response may be rewritten as 
(terms due to all initial values 
If the quantity (terms due to all initial values 
is zero, the Laplace transform of the output 
in response to an input 
is given by 
If the system is at rest prior to application of the input, that is, 
for 
then 
terms due to all initial values 
and the output as a function of time y(t) is simply the inverse transform of 
P(s)U(s). 
It is emphasized that not all transfer functions are rational algebraic expressions. F o r example, the 
transfer function of a continuous system including time delays contains terms of the form e~
sT 
(e.g.. 
Problem 5.28). The transfer function of an element representing a pure time delay is P(s) = e"
sT, 
where 
T is the time delay in units of time. 
Since the formation of the output transform Y(s) is purely an algebraic multiplication of P(s) and 
U(s) when (terms due to all initial values wj, y (f) = 0, the multiplication is commutative; that is. 
(6.1) 

129 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
6.2 
PROPERTIES OF A CONTINUOUS SYSTEM TRANSFER FUNCTION 
The transfer function of a continuous system has several useful properties: 
1. 
It is the Laplace transform of its impulse response y s(/), t > 0. That is, if the input to a system 
with transfer function P(s) is an impulse and all initial values are zero the transform of the 
output is P(s). 
2. 
The system transfer function can be determined from the system differential equation by taking 
the Laplace transform and ignoring all terms arising from initial values. The transfer function 
P(s) is then given by 
3. 
The system differential equation can be obtained from the transfer function by replacing the s 
variable with the differential operator D defined by D = d/dt. 
4. 
The stability of a time-invariant linear system can be determined from the characteristic 
equation (see Chapter 5). The denominator of the system transfer function is the characteristic 
polynomial. Consequently, for continuous systems, if all the roots of the denominator have 
negative real parts, the system is stable. 
5. 
The roots of the denominator are the system poles and the roots of the numerator are the 
system zeros (see Chapter 4). The system transfer function can then be specified to within a 
constant by specifying the system poles and zeros. This constant, usually denoted by K, is the 
system gain factor. As was described in Chapter 4, Section 4.11, the system poles and zeros can 
be represented schematically by a pole-zero map in the .v-plane. 
6. 
If the system transfer function has no poles or zeros with positive real parts, the system is a 
minimum phase system. 
EXAMPLE 6.1. Consider the system with the differential equation 
The Laplace transform version of this equation with all initial values set equal to zero is 
The system transfer function is thus given by 
EXAMPLE 6.2. 
Given 
the system differential equation is 
EXAMPLE 6.3. 
The transfer function 
can be specified by giving the zero iocation 
-a, the pole locations — b and —c, and the gain factor K. 
6.3 
TRANSFER FUNCTIONS OF CONTINUOUS CONTROL SYSTEM COMPENSATORS 
AND CONTROLLERS 
The transfer functions of four common control system components are presented below. Typical 
mechanizations of three of these transfer functions, using R-C networks, are presented in the solved 
problems. 
EXAMPLE 6.4. The general transfer function of a continuous system lead compensator is 
(6.2) 
This compensator has a zero at s = — a and a pole at s = - b. 

130 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
EXAMPLE 6.5. 
The general transfer function of a continuous system lag compensator is 
(6.3) 
However, in this case the zero is at s = —b and the pole is at J = — a. The gain factor a/b is included because of 
the way it is usually mechanized (Problem 6.13). 
EXAMPLE 6.6. The general transfer function of a continuous system lag-lead compensator is 
(6.4) 
This compensator has two zeros and two poles. For mechanization considerations, the restriction a1b2 = bxa2 is 
usually imposed (Problem 6.14). 
EXAMPLE 6.7. 
The transfer function of the PID controller of Example 2.14 is 
This controller has two zeros and one pole. It is similar to the lag-lead compensator of the previous example except 
that the smallest pole is at the origin (an integrator) and it does not have the second pole. It is typically mechanized 
in an analog or digital computer. 
(6.5) 
6.4 
CONTINUOUS SYSTEM TIME RESPONSE 
The Laplace transform of the response of a continuous system to a specific input is given by 
when all initial conditions are zero. The inverse transform y(t) = J?~
l[P(s)U(s)] 
is then the time 
response and y(t) may be determined by finding the poles of P(s)U(s) 
and evaluating the residues at 
these poles (when there are no multiple poles). Therefore y(t) depends on both the poles and zeros of 
the transfer function and the poles and zeros of the input. 
The residues can be determined graphically from a pole-zero map of Y(s), constructed from the 
pole-zero map of P(s) by simply adding the poles and zeros of U(s). Graphical evaluation of the 
residues may then be performed as described in Chapter 4, Section 4.12. 
6.5 
CONTINUOUS SYSTEM FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
The steady state response of a continuous system to sinusoidal inputs can be determined from the 
system transfer function. For the special case of a step function input of amplitude A, often called a d.c. 
input, the Laplace transform of the system output is given by 
If the system is stable, the steady state response is a step function of amplitude AP(0), since this is 
the residue at the input pole. The amplitude of the input signal is thus multiplied by P(Q) to determine 
the amplitude of the output. P(0) is therefore the d.c. gain of the system. 
Note that for an unstable system such as an integrator (P(s) = l/s), a steady state response does 
not always exist. If the input to an integrator is a step function, the output is a ramp, which is 
unbounded (see Problems 5.7 and 5.8). For this reason, integrators are sometimes said to have infinite 
d.c. gain. 
The steady state response of a stable system to an input u = A sin cot is given by 
where \P(jco)\ = magnitude of P(joi), <j> = aig P(ju), and the complex number P(jco) is determined 

131 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
from P(s) b y replacing s by yco (see Problem 6.20). The system output has the same frequency as the 
input and can be obtained by multiplying the magnitude of the input b y \P(ju)\ 
and shifting the phase 
angle of the input by argP(y'co). The magnitude \P(jco)\ and angle avgP(ju) 
for all co together define 
the system frequency response. The magnitude |P(yco)| is the gain of the system for sinusoidal inputs 
with frequency co. 
The system frequency response can be determined graphically i n the s-plane from a pole-zero map 
of P(s) i n the same manner as the graphical calculation of residues. In this instance, however, the 
magnitude and phase angle of P(s) are computed at a point on the _/'co axis by measuring the 
magnitudes and angles of the vectors drawn from the poles and zeros of P(s) to the point on the ju 
axis. 
EXAMPLE 6.8. 
Consider the system with the transfer function 
Referring to Fig. 6-1, the magnitude and angle of P(jco) for co = 1 are computed in the s-plane as follows. The 
magnitude of P(JV) is 
and the angle is 
EXAMPLE 6.9. The system frequency response is usually represented by two graphs (see Fig. 6-2): one of 
|P(y'co)| as a function of co and one of arg/
>(yco) as a function of co. For the transfer function of Example 6.8, 
P(s) = 1 / ( 5 + l)(s + 2), these graphs are easily determined by plotting the values of \P(ju)\ and arg P(jo>) for 
several values of co as shown below. 
Fig. 6-2 

132 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.6 
DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEM TRANSFER FUNCTIONS, 
COMPENSATORS AND TIME RESPONSES 
The transfer function P(z) 
for a discrete-time system is defined as that factor in the equation for 
the transform of the output Y(z) 
that multiplies the transform of the input U(z). 
If all terms due to 
initial conditions are zero, then the system response to an input U(z) is given by: Y(z) = P(z)U(z) 
in 
the z-domain, and (y(k)} = Z~
1[P(z)U(z)] 
in the time-domain. 
The transfer function of a discrete-time system has the following properties: 
1. 
P(z) 
is the z-transform of its Kronecker delta response ys(k), 
k = Q,l,... . 
2. 
The system difference equation can be obtained from P(z) by replacing the z variable with the 
shift operator Z defined for any integers k and n by 
(6.6) 
3. 
The denominator of P(z) 
is the system characteristic polynomial. Consequently, if all the roots 
of the denominator are within the unit circle of the z-plane, the system is stable. 
4. 
The roots of the denominator are system poles and the roots of the numerator are the system 
zeros. P(z) 
can be specified by specifying the system poles and zeros and the gain factor K: 
(6.7) 
The system poles and zeros can be represented schematically by a pole-zero map in the z-plane. 
The pole-zero map of the output response can be constructed from the pole-zero map of 
P(z) 
by including the poles and zeros of the input 
U(z). 
5. 
The order of the denominator polynomial of the transfer function of a causal (physically 
realizable) discrete-time system must be greater than or equal to the order of the numerator 
polynomial. 
6. 
The steady state response of a discrete-time system to a unit step input is called the d.c. gain 
and is given by the Final Value Theorem (Section 4.9): 
(6.8) 
EXAMPLE 6.10. 
Consider a discrete-time system characterized by the difference equation 
The z-transform version of this equation with all initial conditions set equal to zero is 
The system transfer function is given by 
This system has a zero at -0.2 and two poles, at —0.5 and -0.6. Since the poles are inside the unit circle, the 
system is stable. The d.c. gain is 
EXAMPLE 6.11. 
The general transfer function of a digital lead compensator is 
This compensator has a zero at z = zc. and a pole at z = pc. Its steady state gain is 
(6.9) 
(6.10) 

133 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
The gain factor AT L c a d is included in the transfer function to adjust its gain at a given co to a desired value. In 
Problem 12.13, for example, KLcad 
is chosen to render the steady state gain of P L e a d (at co = 0) equal to that of its 
analog counterpart. 
EXAMPLE 6.12. 
The general transfer function of a digital lag compensator is 
(6.11) 
This compensator has a zero at z = zc and a pole at z = pc. The gain factor (1 — pc)/(l 
— z r) is included so that the 
low frequency or steady state gain /
>
L a g ( l ) = 1, analogous to the continuous-time lag compensator. 
EXAMPLE 6.13. 
Digital lag and lead compensators can be designed directly from ^-domain specifications by 
using the transform between the s- and z-domains defined by z = e
sT. That is, the poles and zeros of 
can be mapped according to z = e
sT. For the lead compensator, the zero at s = —a maps into the zero at 
z = zt. = e~"
T, and the pole at s = — b maps into the pole at z =pc = e"
bT. This gives 
(6.12) 
Similarly, 
Note that 
(6.13) 
This transformation is only one of many possible for digital lead and lag compensators, or any type 
of compensators for that matter. Another variant of the lead compensator is illustrated in Problems 
12.13 through 12.15. 
A n example of how Equation (6.13) can be used in applications is given in Example 12.7. 
6.7 
DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEM FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
The steady state response to an input sequence { u(k) = A sin u>kT} of a stable discrete-time system 
with transfer function P(z) is given by 
(6.14) 
where \P(e
JuT)\ 
is the magnitude of P(e
J"
T), 
<t> = argP(e
j u T), and the complex function P(e
JwT) is 
determined from P(z) by replacing z by e
juT 
(see Problem 6.40). The system output is a sequence of 
samples of a sinusoid with the same frequency as the input sinusoid. The output sequence is obtained 
by multiplying the magnitude A of the input by \P(e
juT)\ 
and shifting the phase angle of the input by 
arg P(<?
/ a , r). The magnitude \P(e
JuT)\ 
and phase angle arg P(e
juT), 
for all co, together define the 
discrete-time system frequency response function. The magnitude \P(e'"
T)\ 
is the gain of the system for 
sinusoidal inputs with angular frequency co. 
A discrete-time system frequency response function can be determined in the z-plane from a 
pole-zero map of P(z) in the same manner as the graphical calculation of residues (Section 4.12). In this 
instance, however, the magnitude and phase angle are computed on the e
JwT circle (the unit circle), by 
measuring the magnitude and angle of the vectors drawn from the poles and zeros of P to the point on 
the unit circle. Since P(e
j"
T) 
is periodic in co, with period 2-ir/T, the frequency response function need 
only be determined over the angular frequency range -m/T < co <ir/T. 
Also, since the magnitude 
function is an even function of co, and the phase angle is an odd function of co, actual computations 
need only be performed over half this angular frequency range, that is, 0 < co < ir/T. 

134 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.8 
COMBINING CONTINUOUS-TIME AND DISCRETE-TIME ELEMENTS 
Thus far the z-transform has been used mainly to describe systems and elements which operate on 
and produce only discrete-time signals, and the Laplace transform has been used only for continuous-
time systems and elements, with continuous-time input and output signals. However, many control 
systems include both types of elements. Some of the important relationships between the z-transform 
and the Laplace transform are developed here, to facilitate analysis and design of mixed 
(continuous/discrete) systems. 
Discrete-time signals arise either from the sampling of continuous-time signals, or as the output of 
inherently discrete-time system components, such as digital computers. If a continuous-time signal y(t) 
with Laplace transform Y(s) is sampled uniformly, with period 77, the resulting sequence of samples 
y(kT), 
k = 0,1,2,..., can be written as 
where c > er0 (see Definition 4.3). The z-transform of this sequence is Y*(z) — T,
c
k = 0y(kT)z
 
k (Defini­
tion 4.4) which, as shown in Problem 6.41, can be written as 
(6.75) 
for the region of convergence \z\ > e
cT. 
This relationship between the Laplace transform and the 
z-transform can be evaluated by application of Cauchy's integral law [1]. However, in practice, it is 
usually not necessary to use this complex analysis approach. 
The continuous-time function y(t) =J^~
l[Y(s)] 
can be determined from Y(s) and a table of 
Laplace transforms, and the time variable t is then replaced by kT, providing the fcth element of the 
desired sequence: 
Then the z-transform of the sequence y(kT), 
k = 0,1,2,..., is generated by referring to a table of 
z-transforms, which yields the desired result: 
(6.16) 
Thus, in Equation (6.16), the symbolic operations 
and 2 
represent straightforward table 
lookups, and \, = k
T generates the sequence to be z-transformed. 
A common combination of discrete-time and continuous-time elements and signals is shown in Fig. 
6-3. 
If the hold circuit is a zero-order hold, then as shown in Problem 6.42, the discrete-time transfer 
function from U*(z) to Y*(z) is given by 
(6.17) 
In practice, the sampler at the output, generating y*(t) in Fig. 6-3, may not exist. However, it is 
sometimes convenient to assume one exists at that point, for purposes of analysis (see, e.g., Problem 
10.13). When this is done, the sampler is often called a fictitious sampler. 
If both the input and output of a system like the one shown in Fig. 6-3 are continuous-time signals, 
and the input is subsequently sampled, then Equation (6.77) generates a discrete-time transfer function 

135 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
which relates the input at the sampling times T,2T,... 
to the output at the same sampling times. 
However, this discrete-time system transfer function does not relate input and output signals at times T 
between sampling times, that is, for kT < T < (k + l)T, k = 0,1,2,... . 
EXAMPLE 6.14. 
In Fig. 6-3, if the hold circuit is a zero-order hold and P(s) = l/(.v + 1), then from Equation 
(6.17), the discrete-time transfer function of the mixed-element subsystem is 
Solved Problems 
TRANSFER FUNCTION DEFINITIONS 
6.1. 
What is the transfer function of a system whose input and output are related by the following 
differential equation? 
Taking the Laplace transform of this equation, ignoring terms due to initial conditions, we obtain 
This equation can be written as 
The transfer function of this system is therefore given by 
6.2. 
A particular system containing a time delay has the differential equation (d/dt)y(t) 
+ y(t) = 
u(t — T). F i n d the transfer function of this system. 
The Laplace transform of the differential equation, ignoring terms due to initial conditions, is 
J Y ( . S ) + Y(s) = e
 
slU(s). 
Y(.i) and U(s) are related by the following function of A-, which is the system 
transfer function 

136 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.3. 
The position y of a moving object of constant mass M is related to the total force / applied to 
the object by the differential equation M(d
2y/dt
2) 
= / . Determine the transfer function relating 
the position to the applied force. 
Taking the Laplace transform of the differential equation, we obtain Ms
2Y{s) = F(s). The transfer 
function relating Y(s) to F(s) is therefore P(s) = Y(s)/F(s) = 1/Ms
2. 
6.4. 
A motor connected to a load with inertia J and viscous friction 
B produces a torque 
proportional to the input current /. If the differential equation for the motor and load is 
J(d
2B/dt
2) 
+ B(d6/dt) 
= Ki, determine the transfer function between the input current / and 
the shaft position 6. 
The Laplace transform version of the differential equation is (Js
2 + Bs)&(s) = KI(s), and the required 
transfer function is P(s) = Q(s)/f(s) = K/s(Js + B). 
PROPERTIES OF TRANSFER FUNCTIONS 
6.5. 
A n impulse is applied at the input of a continuous system and the output is observed to be the 
time function e
 
l r . Find the transfer function of this system. 
The transfer function is 
and 
Therefore 
6.6. 
The impulse response of a certain continuous system is the sinusoidal signal sin t. Determine the 
system transfer function and differential equation. 
The system transfer function is the Laplace transform of its impulse response, 
Then 
6.7. 
The step response of a given system is y 
What is the transfer 
function of this system? 
Since the derivative of a step is an impulse (see Definition 3.17), the Impulse response for this system is 
The Laplace transform of p(t) is the desired transfer function. Thus 
Note that an alternative solution would be to compute the Laplace transform of y and then multiply 
by s to determine P(s), since a multiplication by s in the ^-domain is equivalent to differentiation in the 
time domain. 
6.8. 
Determine if the transfer function 
represents a stable or an unsta­
ble system. 
The characteristic equation of the system is obtained by setting the denominator polynomial to zero, 
that is, s
2 + s + 1 = 0. The characteristic equation may then be tested using one of the stability criteria 
described in Chapter 5, The Routh table for this system is given by 
Since there are no sign changes in the first column, the system is stable. 

137 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
6.9. 
Does the transfer function 
represent a stable or an unstable 
svstem? 
The stability of the system is determined by the roots of the denominator polynomial, that is, the poles 
of the system. Here the denominator is in factored form and the poles are located at s = — 1, — 2, +1. Since 
there is one pole with a positive real part, the system is unstable. 
6.10. 
What is the transfer function of a system with a gain factor of 2 and a pole-zero map in the 
s-nlane as shown in Fia. 6-4? 
The transfer function has a zero at - 1 and poles at - 2 and the origin. Hence the transfer function is 
Fte. 6-4 
Fig. 6-5 
6.11. 
Determine the transfer function of a system with a gain factor of 3 and the pole-zero map shown 
in Fig. 6-5 
The transfer function has zeros at 
and poles at 
and at 
The transfer function is 
therefore 
TRANSFER FUNCTIONS OF CONTINUOUS CONTROL SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
6.12. 
A n R-C network mechanization of a lead compensator is shown in Fig. 6-6. Find its transfer 
function. 
Fie. 6-6 
Assuming the circuit is not loaded, that is, no current flows through the output terminals, KirchhofFs 
current law for the output node yields 
The Laplace transform of this equation (with zero initial conditions) is 

138 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
The transfer function is 
where 
and 
6.13. 
Determine the transfer function of the R-C 
network mechanization of the lag compensator 
shown in Fig. 6-7. 
Fig. 6-7 
Kirchhoffs voltage law for the loop yields the equation 
whose Laplace transform is 
The output voltage is given by 
The transfer function of the lag network is therefore 
where 
6.14. 
Derive the transfer function of the R-C 
network mechanization of the las-lead compensator 
shown in Fig. 6-8. 
Fig. 6-8 
Equating currents at the output node a yields 
The voltage v(] and the current i are related by 

139 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
Taking the Laplace transform of these two equations (with zero initial conditions) and eliminating l(s) 
results in the equation 
The transfer function of the network is therefore 
where 
6.15. 
Find the transfer function of the simple lag network shown in Fig. 6-9. 
This network is a special case of the lag compensation network of Problem 6.13 with R^ set equal to 
zero. Hence the transfer function is given by 
6.16. 
Determine the transfer function of two simple lag networks connected in series as shown in Fig. 
6-10. 
The two loop equations are 
Using the Laplace transformation and solving the two loop equations for I2(s),
 w
e obtain 
The output voltage is given by 
Thus 
CONTINUOUS SYSTEM TIME RESPONSE 
6.17. 
What is the unit step response of a continuous system whose transfer function has a zero at - 1 , 
a pole at - 2, and a gain factor of 2? 

140 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
The Laplace transform of the output is given by 
Here 
Evaluating the inverse transform of the partial fraction expansion of 
gives 
6.18. 
Graphically evaluate the unit step response of a continuous system whose transfer function is 
given by 
The pole-zero map of the output is obtained by adding the poles and zeros of the input to the pole-zero 
map of the transfer function. The output potc-zcro map therefore has poles at 0, -0.5, and - 4 and a zero 
at — 2 as shown in Fig. 6-11. 
Fig. 6-11 
The residue for the pole at the origin is 
For the pole at -0.5, 
For the pole at —4, 
The time response is therefore 
6.19. 
Evaluate the unit step response of the system of Problem 6.11. 
The Laplace transform of the system output is 
Expanding Y(s) into partial fractions yields 

141 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
where 
Evaluating the inverse Laplace transform, 
where 
CONTINUOUS SYSTEM FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
6.20. 
Prove that the steady state output of a stable system with transfer function P(s) 
and input 
w = A sin oil is given by 
The Laplace transform of the output is Y(s) = P(s)U(s) = P(s-)[Ao>/(s
2 + to
2)]. 
When this transform is expanded into partial fractions, there will be terms due to the poles of P(s) 
and two terms due to the poles of the input (.? = 
Since the system is stable, all time functions 
resulting from the poles of P(s) decay to zero as time approaches infinity. Thus the steady state output 
contains only the time functions resulting from the terms in the partial fraction expansion due to the poles 
of the input. The Laplace transform of the steady state output is therefore 
The inverse transform of this equation is 
where 
6.21. 
F i n d the d.c. gain of each of the systems represented by the following transfer functions: 
(a) 
O) 
(<0 
The d.c. gain is given by 
Then (a) P(0) = 1, (/>) P(0) = 5, (c) P(0) = 1. 
6.22. 
Evaluate the gain and phase shift of 
and 
for 
The gain of 
is given by 
For 
for 
for 
The phase shift of the transfer function is the phase angle of 
For 
6.23. 
Sketch the graphs of IP 
and 
as a function of frequency for the transfer function 
of Problem 
In addition to the values calculated in Problem 
for 
and 
the values for 
will also be useful 
As 
becomes large, 
asymptotically approaches zero while 
asymptotically ap­
proaches 
The graphs representing the frequency response of 
are shown in Fig. 6-12. 

142 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
Fig. 6-12 
DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEM TRANSFER FUNCTIONS AND TIME RESPONSES 
6.24. 
The Kronecker delta response of a discrete-time system is given by 
for all 
What 
is its transfer function? 
The transfer function is the z-transform of the Kronecker delta response, as given in Example 4.26: 
To determine a pole-zero representation of P(z), note that 
or 
so that 
Alternatively, note that the Kronecker delta response is the unit step sequence, which has the z-transform 
(see Table 4.2). 
6.25. 
The Kronecker delta response of a particular discrete system is given by 
What is its transfer function? 
The form of the Kronecker delta response indicates the presence of a single pole at 0.5. The Kronecker 
delta response of a system with a single pole and no zero has no output at k = 0. That is, 
Consequently, the transfer function must have a zero in the numerator to advance the output sequence one 
sample interval. That is, 

143 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
6.26. 
What is the difference equation for a system whose transfer function is 
Replacing 
with 
we get 
Then 
and, by cross multiplying, 
6.27. 
What is the transfer function of a discrete system with a gain factor of 2, zeros at 0.2 and —0.5, 
and poles at 0.5, 0.6, and - 0 . 4 ? Is it stable? 
The transfer function is 
Since all the system poles are inside the unit circle, the system is stable. 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
6.28. 
A d.c. (direct current) motor is shown schematically in F i g . 6-13. L and R represent the 
inductance and resistance of the motor armature circuit, and the voltage vb represents the 
generated back e.m.f. (electromotive force) which is proportional to the shaft velocity dd/dt. The 
torque T generated by the motor is proportional to the armature current i. The inertia J 
represents the combined inertia of the motor armature and the load, and B is the total viscous 
friction acting on the output shaft. Determine the transfer function between the input voltage V 
and the angular position G of the output shaft. 
Fig. 6-13 
Motor Armature Circuit 
Inertial Load 
The differential equations of the motor armature circuit and the inertial load arc 
Taking the Laplace transform of each equation, ignoring initial conditions, 
Solving these equations simultaneously for the transfer function between V and &, we have 

144 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.29. 
The back e.m.f generated by the armature circuit of a d.c. machine is proportional to the angular 
velocity of its shaft, as noted in the problem above. This principle is utilized i n the d.c. 
tachometer shown schematically in F i g . 6-14, where vh is the voltage generated by the armature, 
L is the armature inductance, Ra is the armature resistance, and vQ is the output voltage. If Kf 
is the proportionality constant between vh and shaft velocity dd/dt, that is, vb = 
Kf(d9/dt\ 
determine the transfer function between the shaft position 0 and the output voltage V0. The 
output load is represented by a resistance RL and RL + Ra = R. 
Fig. 6-14 
The Laplace transformed equation representing the tachometer is 
The output 
voltage is given by 
The transfer function of the d.c. tachometer is then 
6.30. 
A simple mechanical accelerometer is shown in F i g . 6-15. The position y of the mass M with 
respect to the accelerometer case is proportional to the acceleration of the case. What is the 
transfer function between the input acceleration A (a = d
2x/dt
2) 
and the output Y ? 
Fig. 6-15 
Equating the sum of the forces acting on the mass M to its inertia! acceleration, we obtain 
or 
where a is the input acceleration, The zero initial condition transformed equation is 
The transfer function of the accelerometer is therefore 

145 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
6.31. 
A differential equation describing the dynamic operation of the one-degree-of-freedom gyroscope 
shown in Fig. 6-16 is 
where to is the angular velocity of the gyroscope about the input axis. 6 is the angular position of 
the spin axis—the measured output of the gyroscope, / / is angular momentum stored in the 
spinning wheel, J is the inertia of the wheel about the output axis, B is the viscous friction 
coefficient about the output axis, and K is the spring constant of the restraining spring attached 
to the spin axis. 
Fig. 6-16 
(a) 
Determine the transfer function relating the Laplace transforms of to and 0, and show that 
the steady state output is proportional to the magnitude of a constant rate input. This type 
of gyroscope is called a rate gyro. 
(b) 
Determine the transfer function between to and 8 with the restraining spring removed 
(K = 0). Since here the output is proportional to the integral of the input rate, this type of 
gyroscope is called an integrating gyro. 
(a) 
The zero initial condition transform of the gyroscope differential equation is 
where © and Q, arc the Laplace transforms of 6 and to, respectively. The transfer function relating & 
and £2 is therefore 
For a constant or d.c. rate input uK, the magnitude of the steady state output 8SS can be obtained by 
multiplying the input by the d.c. gain of the transfer function, which in this case is H/K. 
Thus the 
steady state output is proportional to the magnitude of the rate input, that is, 0S5 = 
(H/K)uK. 
(b) 
Setting K equal to zero in the transfer function of (a) yields 
= H/s(Js + B). This transfer 
function now has a pole at the origin, so that an integration is obtained between the input Q and the 
output 0. The output is thus proportional to the integral of the input rate or, equivalently, the input 
angle. 
6.32. 
A differential equation approximating the rotational dynamics of a rigid vehicle moving in the 
atmosphere is 

146 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
where $ is the vehicle attitude angle, J is its inertia, N is the normal-force coefficient, L is the 
distance from the center of gravity to the center of pressure, and T is any applied torque (see 
Fig. 6-17). Determine the transfer function between an applied torque and the vehicle attitude 
angle. 
Fig. 6-17 
The zero initial condition, transformed system differential equation is 
The desired transfer function is 
Note that if NL is positive (center of pressure forward of the vehicle center of gravity), the system is 
unstable because there is a pole in the right half-plane at s = \jNL/J. 
If NL is negative, the poles are 
imaginary and the system is oscillatory (marginally Stable). However, aerodynamic damping terms not 
included in the differential equation are actually present and perform the function of damping out any 
oscillations. 
6.33. 
Pressure receptors called baroreceptors measure changes in arterial blood pressure, as outlined in 
Problem 2.14. They are shown as a block in the feedback path of the block diagram determined 
in the solution of that problem. The frequency b(t) 
at which signals (action potentials) move 
along the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves from the baroreceptors to the vasomotor center 
( V M C ) in the brain is proportional to arterial blood pressure p plus the time rate of change of 
blood pressure. Determine the form of the transfer function for the baroreceptors. 
From the description given above, the equation for b is 
where A, and k2 arc constants, and p is blood pressure. [ p should not be confused here with the notation 
p(t), 
the inverse Laplace transform of P(s) introduced in this chapter as a general representation for a 
transfer function.] The Laplace transform of the above equation, with zero initial conditions, is 
The transfer function of the baroreceptors is therefore B/P = k, + k2s. We again remind the reader that P 
represents the transform of arterial blood pressure in this problem. 
6.34. 
Consider the transfer function Ck/Rk 
for the biological system described in Problem 3.4(a) by 
the equations 
for k = 1,2, 
n. Explain how Ck/Rk 
may be computed. 

147 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
Taking the Laplace transform of the above equations, ignoring initial conditions, yields the following 
set of equations: 
for k = 1,2 
n. If all n equations were written down, we would have n equations in n unknowns (Ck for 
k = 1,2,..., n). The general solution for any Q in terms of the inputs RL can then be determined using the 
standard techniques for solving simultaneous equations. Let D represent the determinant of the coefficient 
matrix: 
Then in general. 
where 
is the determinant of the coefficient matrix with the k th column replaced by 
The transfer function 
is then determined by setting all the inputs except 
equal to zero, 
computing 
from the formula above, and dividing 
6.35. 
Can you determine the .v-domain transfer function of the ideal sampler described in Problems 3.5 
and 4.39? Why? 
No. From the results of Problem 4.39, the output transform U(s) of the ideal sampler is 
It is not possible to factor out the transform U(s) of the input signal u(t) applied to the sampler, because 
the sampler is not a time-invariant system element. Therefore it cannot be described by an ordinary transfer 
6.36. 
Based on the developments of the sampler and zero-order hold function given in Problems 3.5, 
3.6, 3.7, and 4.39, design an idealization of the zero-order hold transfer function. 
In Problem 3.7, impulses in mlT(i) replaced the current pulses modulated by « v ( r ) in Problem 3.6. 
Then, by the screening property of the unit impulse. Equation (3.20), the integral of each impulse is the 
value of u(t) at the sampling instant kT, k = 0,1,..., etc. Therefore it is logical to replace the capacitor 
(and resistor) in the approximate hold circuit of Problem 3.6 by an integrator, which has the Laplace 
transform l/s. To complete the design, the output of the hold must be equal to u at each sampling time, 
not u-y!m; 
therefore we need a function that automatically resets the integrator to zero after each 
sampling period. The transfer function of such a device is given by the "pulse" transfer function: 
Then we can write the transform of the output of the ideal hold device as 

148 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.37. 
C a n you determine the ^-domain transfer function of the ideal sampler and ideal zero-order hold 
combination of the previous problem? Why? 
No. It is not possible to factor out the transform U(s) of u(t) applied to the sampler. Again, the 
sampler is not a time-invariant device. 
6.38. 
The simple lag circuit of Fig. 6-3, with a switch S in the input line, was described in Problem 3.6 
as an approximate sample and zero-order hold device, and idealized in Problem 6.36. W h y is this 
the case, and under what circumstances? 
The transfer function of the simple lag was shown in Problem 6-15 to be 
If RC 
1, P(s) can be approximated as P(s) = 1, and the capacitor ideally holds the output constant 
until the next sample time. 
6.39. 
Show that for a rational function P(z) 
to be the transfer function of a carnal discrete-time 
system, the order of its denominator polynomial must be equal to or greater than the order of its 
numerator polynomial (Property 6, Section 6.6). 
In Section 3.16 we saw that a discrete-time system is causal if its weighting sequence w(k) = Q for 
k < 0. Let P(z), the system transfer function, have the form: 
where an 
0 and bm =/= 0. The weighting sequence w(k) can be generated by inverting P{z). using the long 
division technique of Section 4.9. 
We first divide the numerator and denominator of P(z) by z"\ thus forming; 
Dividing the denominator of P(z) into its numerator then gives 
The coefficient of z
 
k in this expansion of P{z) is w(k), and we see that w(k) = 0 for k < n - m and 
For causality, 
therefore 
and 
6.40. 
Show that the steady state response of a stable discrete-time system to an input 
sequence 
is given by 
where P(z) 
is the system transfer function. 
Since the system is linear, if this result is true for A = 1, then it is true for arbitrary values of A. To 
simplify the arguments, an input u'(k) = e'"
kT, k = 0,1,2,..., is used. By noting that 
the response of the system to {u'(k)} is a complex combination of the responses to (cos tokT) and 
(6.14) 

149 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
where the imaginary part is the response to 
From Table 4.2 the z-transform of 
is 
Thus the z-transform of the system output 
is 
To invert 
we form the partial fraction expansion of 
This expansion consists of terms due to the poles of 
and a term due to the pole at 
Therefore 
and 
terms due to poles of 
terms due to poles of 
Since the system is stable, the first term vanishes as k becomes large and 
where 
The steady state response to the input 
is the imaginary part of 
6.41. 
Show that, if a continuous-time function y(t) with Laplace transform Y(s) is sampled uniformly 
with period T, the z-transform of the resulting sequence of samples Y*(z) 
is related to Y(s) 
by 
Equation (6,15). 
From Definition 4.3: 
where 
Uniformly sampling 
Therefore 
generates the samples 
The z-transform of this sequence is 
and after interchanging summation and integration, 
Now 
is a geometric series, which converges 
In this case, 
The inequality 
implies that 
On the integration contour, 

150 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
Thus the scries converges for 
Therefore 
for 
which is Equation 
6.42. 
Show that if the hold circuit in Fig. 6-3 is a zero-order hold, the discrete-time transfer function is 
given by Equation (6.17). 
Let 
Then, using the convolution integral (Definition 3.23), the output of P(s) can 
be written as 
Since x,m(t) is the output of a zero-order hold, it is constant over each sampling interval. Thus 
can be 
written as 
where 
Now 
By letting 
the integral can be rewritten as 
where 
Now, defining 
yields 
Therefore we can write 
Using the relationship between the convolution sum and the product of z-transforms in Section 4.9, the 
Shift Theorem (Property 6, Section 4.9), and the definition of the z-transform, the z-transform of the last 
equation is 
where 
is the z-transform of the sequence 
is the z-transform of 
and 
is the z-transform of 
Rearranging terms 
yields 

151 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
C H A P . 6] 
Then, since 
and 
6.43. 
Compare the solution in Problem 6.42 with that in Problem 6.37. What is fundamentally 
different about Problem 6.42, thereby permitting the use of linear frequency domain methods on 
this problem? 
The presence of a sampler at the output of P(s) permits the use of z-domain transfer functions for the 
combination of the sampler, zero-order hold, and 
P(s). 
Supplementary Problems 
6.44. 
Determine the transfer function of the R-C network shown in Fig. 6-18 
Fig. 6-18 
Fig. 6-19 
6.45. 
A n equivalent circuit of an electronic amplifier is shown in Fig. 6-19. What is its transfer function? 
6.46. 
Find the transfer function of a system having the impulse response 
6.47. 
A sinusoidal input 
is applied to a system with the transfer function 
Determine the steady state output 
6.48. 
Find the step response of a system having the transfer function 
6.49. 
Determine which of the following transfer functions represent stable systems and which represent unstable 
systems: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
6.50. 
Use the Final Value Theorem (Chapter 4) to show that the steady state value of the output of a stable 
system in response to a unit step input is equal to the d.c. gain of the system. 

152 
T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S 
[CHAP. 6 
6.51. 
Determine the transfer function of two of the networks shown in Problem 6.44 connected in cascade 
(scries). 
6.52. 
Examine the literature for the transfer functions of two- and thrce-dcgrcc-of-frccdom gyros and compare 
them with the onc-dcgree-of-freedom gyro of Problem 6.31. 
6.53. 
Determine the ramp response of a system having the transfer function 
6.54. 
Show that if a system described by 
for 
is at rest prior to application of the input, that is, 
for 
then 
(terms due to all initial values 
(Hint: Integrate the differential equation n times from 
and then let 
6.55. 
Determine the frequency response of the ideal zero-order hold (ZOH) device, with transfer function given 
in Problem 6.36, and sketch the gain and phase characteristics. 
6.56. 
A zero-order hold was defined in Definition 2.13 and Example 2.9. A first-order hold maintains the slope of 
the function defined by the last two values of the sampler output, until the next sample time. Determine the 
discrete-time transfer function from U*(z) to Y*(z) for the subsystem in Fig. 6-3, with a first-order hold 
element. 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
6.44. 
6.45. 
6.46. 
6.47. 
6.48. 
6.49. 
(b) and (d) represent stable systems; (a), (c), and (e) represent unstable systems. 
6.51. 
6.53. 

153 
TRANSFER FUNCTIONS 
C H A P . 6] 
6.55. 
Fig. P6-55 
6.56. 

154 
Chapter 7 
Block Diagram Algebra and Transfer Functions 
of Systems 
7.1 
INTRODUCTION 
It is pointed out in Chapters 1 and 2 that the block diagram is a shorthand, graphical representation 
of a physical system, illustrating the functional relationships among its components. This latter feature 
permits evaluation of the contributions of the individual elements to the overall performance of the 
system. 
In this chapter we first investigate these relationships in more detail, utilizing the frequency domain 
and transfer function concepts developed in preceding chapters. Then we develop methods for reducing 
complicated block diagrams to manageable forms so that they may be used to predict the overall 
performance of a system. 
7.2 
REVIEW OF FUNDAMENTALS 
In general, a block diagram consists of a specific configuration of four types of elements: blocks, 
summing points, takeoff points, and arrows representing unidirectional signal flow: 
Fig. 7-1 
The meaning of each element should be clear from Fig. 7-1. 
Time-domain quantities are represented by lowercase letters. 
EXAMPLE 7.1. 
for continuous signals, and 
for discrete-time signals. 
Capital letters in this chapter are used for Laplace transforms, or z-transforms. The argument .y or z 
is often suppressed, to simplify the notation, if the context is clear, or if the results presented are the 
same for both Laplace (continuous-time system) and z-(discrete-time system)transfer function domains. 
EXAMPLE 7.2. 
The basic feedback control system configuration presented in Chapter 2 is reproduced in Fig. 7-2, 
with all quantities in abbreviated transform notation. 

155 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
Fig. 7-2 
The quantities Gv G2, and H are the transfer functions of the components in the blocks. They may 
be either Laplace or z-transform transfer functions. 
EXAMPLE 7.3. 
It is important to note that these results apply either to Laplace transform or to z-transform 
transfer functions, but not necessarily to mixed continuous/discrete block diagrams that include 
samplers. Samplers are linear devices, but they are not time-invariant. Therefore they cannot be 
characterized by an ordinary s-domain transfer function, as denned in Chapter 6. See Problem 7.38 for 
some exceptions, and Section 6.8 for a more extensive discussion of mixed continuous/discrete systems. 
7.3 
BLOCKS IN CASCADE 
Any finite number of blocks in series may be algebraically combined by multiplication of transfer 
functions. That is, n components or blocks with transfer functions Gx, G2,...,Gn 
connected in cascade 
are equivalent to a single element G with a transfer function given by 
(7.1) 
The symbol for multiplication 
is omitted when no confusion results. 
EXAMPLE 7.4. 
Fig. 7-3 
Multiplication of transfer functions is commutative; that is, 
(7.2) 
for any / or j. 
EXAMPLE 7.5. 
Fig. 7-4 
Loading effects (interaction of one transfer function upon its neighbor) must be accounted for in 
he derivation of the individual transfer functions before blocks can be cascaded. (See Problem 7.4.) 

156 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
7.4 
CANONICAL FORM OF A FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEM 
The two blocks in the forward path of the feedback system of Fig. 7-2 may be combined. Letting 
G = G1G2, the resulting configuration is called the canonical form of a feedback control system. G and 
H are not necessarily unique for a particular system. 
The following definitions refer to Fig. 7-5. 
Fig. 7-5 
Definition 7.1: 
G = direct transfer function = forward transfer function 
Definition 7.2: 
H= feedback transfer function 
Definition 7.3: 
GH = loop transfer function = open-loop transfer function 
Definition 7.4: 
C/R = closed-loop transfer function = control ratio 
Definition 7.5: 
E/R = actuating signal ratio = error ratio 
Definition 7.6: 
B/R = primary feedback ratio 
In the following equations, the - sign refers to a positive feedback system, and the + sign refers to 
a negative feedback system: 
(7.3) 
(7.4) 
(7.5) 
The denominator of 
determines the characteristic equation of the system, which is usually 
determined from 
or, equivalently, 
(7.6) 
where 
is the denominator and 
is the numerator of GH. unless a Dole of G cancels a zero of H 
(see Problem 7.9). Relations (7.1) through (7.6) are valid for both continuous (s-domain) and discrete 
(z-domain) systems. 
7.5 
BLOCK DIAGRAM TRANSFORMATION THEOREMS 
Block diagrams of complicated control systems may be simplified using easily derivable transforma­
tions. The first important transformation, combining blocks in cascade, has already been presented in 
Section 7.3. It is repeated for completeness in the chart illustrating the transformation theorems (Fig. 
7-6). The letter P is used to represent any transfer function, and W, X, Y, Z denote any transformed 
signals. 

157 
C H A P . 7] 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
Transformation 
Equation 
Block Diagram 
Equivalent Block 
Diagram 
1 
Combining Blocks 
in Cascade 
2 
Combining Blocks 
in Parallel; or 
Eliminating a 
Forward Loop 
3 
Removing a Block 
from a Forward 
Path 
4 
Eliminating a 
Feedback Loop 
5 
Removing a Block 
from a Feedback 
Loop 
6a 
Rearranging 
Summing Points 
6b 
Rearranging 
Summing Points 
G 
Moving a Summing 
Point Ahead of a 
Block 
Moving a Summing 
Point Beyond a 
Block 
Fig. 7-6 
8

158 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Transformation 
Equation 
Block Diagram 
Equivalent Block 
Diagram 
9 
Moving a Takeoff 
Point Ahead of a 
Block 
10 
Moving a Takeoff 
Point Beyond a 
Block 
1 1 
Moving a Takeoff 
Point Ahead of a 
Summing Point 
12 
Moving a Takeoff 
Point Beyond a 
Summing Point 
Fig,. 7-6 Continued 
7.6 
UNITY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
Definition 7.7: 
A unity feedback system is one in which the primary feedback /; is identically equal 
to the controlled output c. 
EXAMPLE 7.6. 
H = 1 for a linear, unity feedback system (Fig. 7-7). 
Fig. 7-7 
A n y feedback system with only linear time-invariant elements can be put into the form of a unity 
feedback system by using Transformation 5. 
EXAMPLE 7.7. 
Fig. 7-8 

159 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
The characteristic equation for the unity feedback system, determined from 
(7.7) 
where 
is the denominator and 
the numerator of G. 
1.1 SUPERPOSITION OF MULTIPLE INPUTS 
Sometimes it is necessary to evaluate system performance when several inputs are simultaneously 
applied at different points of the system. 
When multiple inputs are present in a linear system, each is treated independently of the others. 
The output due to all stimuli acting together is found in the following manner. We assume zero initial 
conditions, as we seek the system response only to inputs. 
Step 1: Set all inputs except one equal to zero. 
Step 2: 
Transform the block diagram to canonical form, using the transformations of Section 7.5. 
Step 3: 
Calculate the response due to the chosen input acting alone. 
Step 4: 
Repeat Steps 1 to 3 for each of the remaining inputs. 
Step 5: 
Algebraically add all of the responses (outputs) determined in Steps 1 to 4. This sum is the 
total output of the system with all inputs acting simultaneously. 
W e reemphasize here that the above superposition process is dependent on the system being linear. 
EXAMPLE 7.8. 
Wc determine the output C due to inputs U and R for Fig. 7-9. 
Fig. 7-9 
Step 1: 
Put ( 7 - 0 . 
Step 2: 
The system reduces to 
Step 3: 
By Equation (7.3), the output CR due to input R is 
Step 4a: 
Put R = 0. 
Step 4b: 
Put - 1 into a block, representing the negative feedback effect: 
Rearrange the block diagram: 

160 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Let the - 1 block be absorbed into the summing point: 
Step 4c: 
By Equation (7.3), the output C„ due to input 
Step 5: 
The total output is 
7.8 
REDUCTION OF COMPLICATED BLOCK DIAGRAMS 
The block diagram of a practical feedback control system is often quite complicated. It may include 
several feedback or feedforward loops, and multiple inputs. By means or systematic block diagram 
reduction, every multiple loop linear feedback system may be reduced to canonical form. The 
techniques developed in the preceding paragraphs provide the necessary tools. 
The following general steps may be used as a basic approach in the reduction of complicated block 
diagrams. Each step refers to specific transformations listed in Fig. 7-6. 
Step 1: Combine all cascade blocks using Transformation 1. 
Step 2: Combine all parallel blocks using Transformation 2. 
Step 3: Eliminate all minor feedback loops using Transformation 4. 
Step 4: Shift summing points to the left and takeoff points to the right of the major loop, using 
Transformations 7, 10, and 12. 
Step 5: Repeat Steps-J to 4 until the canonical form has been achieved for a particular input. 
Step 6: Repeat Steps 1 to 5 for each input, as required. 
Transformations 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 11 are sometimes useful, and experience with the reduction 
technique will determine their application. 
EXAMPLE 7.9. 
Let us reduce the block diagram (Fig. 7-10) to canonical form 
Fig. 7-10 
Step 1: 

161 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
Step 2: 
Step 3: 
Step 4: Does not apply. 
Step 5: 
Step 6: Does not apply. 
A n occasional requirement of block diagram reduction is the isolation of a particular block in a 
feedback or feedforward loop. This may be desirable to more easily examine the effect of a particular 
block o n the overall system. 
Isolation of a block generally may be accomplished by applying the same reduction steps to the 
system, but usually in a different order. Also, the block to be isolated cannot be combined with any 
others. 
Rearranging Summing Points (Transformation 6) and Transformations 8, 9, and 11 are especially 
useful for isolating blocks. 
EXAMPLE 7.10. 
Let us reduce the block diagram of Example 7.9, isolating block Hv 
Steps 1 and 2: 

162 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
We do not apply Step 3 at this time, but go directly to Step 4, moving takeoff point 1 beyond block C, + Gy. 
We may now rearrange summing points / and 2 and combine the cascade blocks in the forward loop using 
Transformation 6, then Transformation 1: 
Step 3: 
Finally, we apply Transformation 5 to remove 
from the feedback loop: 
Note that the same result could have been obtained after applying Step 2 by moving takeoff point 2 ahead of 
G2 + G3, instead of takeoff point 1 beyond G2 + G 3. Block G2 + G 3 has the same effect on the control ratio 
C/R 
whether it directly follows R or directly precedes C. 

163 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
Solved Problems 
BLOCKS IN CASCADE 
7.1. 
Prove Equation 
for blocks in cascade. 
The block diagram for n transfer functions 
in cascade is given in Fig. 7-11. 
Fig. 7-11 
The output transform for any block is equal to the input transform multiplied bv the transfer function 
Therefore 
Combining these 
equations, we have 
Dividing both sides 
we obtain 
7.2. 
Prove the commutativity of blocks in cascade, Equation (7.2). 
Consider two blocks in cascade (Fig. 7-12): 
Fig. 7-12 
From Equation (6.1) we have 
Therefore 
Dividing both sides by 
Also, 
Dividing again 
Thus f. 
This result is extended by mathematical induction to any finite number of transfer functions (blocks) 
in cascade. 
7.3. 
F i n d 
for each of the systems in Fig. 7-13. 
(a) 
Fig. 7-13 
(a) 
One way to work this problem is to first write X2 in terms of Xt: 
Then write Xn in terms of X2. 
Multiplying out and dividing both sides by 
we have 

164 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
A shorter method is as follows. We know from Equation (7.1) that two blocks can be reduced to 
one by simply multiplying their transfer functions. Also, the transfer function of a single block is its 
output-to-input transform. Hence 
(b) 
This system has the same transfer function determined in part (a) because multiplication of transfer 
functions is commutative. 
(c) 
By Equation (7.1), we have 
7.4. 
The transfer function of Fie. 7-14a is 
where 
Is the transfer function of 
Fig. 7-14b equal to 
Why? 
Fig. 7-14a 
Fig. 7-14b 
No. If two networks are connected in series (Fig. 7-15) the second loads the first by drawing current 
from it. Therefore Equation (7.1) cannot be directly applied to the combined system. The correct transfer 
function for the connected networks is 
(see Problem 6.16), and this is not equal to 
Fig. 7-15 
CANONICAL FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS 
7.5. 
Prove Equation 
The equations describing the canonical feedback system are taken directly from Fig. 7-16 They are 
given by 
and 
Substituting one into the other, we have 
Subtracting 
from both sides, we obtain 

165 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
7.6. 
Prove Equation 
From the preceding problem, we have 
and 
Then 
and 
7.7. 
Prove Equation (7.5), 
From 
and 
we obtain 
Then 
and 
7.8. 
Prove Equation (7.6), 
The characteristic equation is usually obtained by setting l±GH=0. 
(See Problem 7.9 for an 
exception.) Putting GH = 
we obtain 
7.9. 
Determine (a) 
the loop transfer function, (b) the control ratio, (c) the error ratio, (d) 
the 
primary feedback ratio, (e) the characteristic equation, for the feedback control system in which 
K1 and K2 
are constants (Fig. 7-17). 
Fig. 7-17 
fa) 
The loop transfer function is equal to GH. 
Hence 
(b) 
The control ratio, or closed-loop transfer function, is given by Equation (7.3) (with a minus sign for 
positive feedback): 
(c) 
The error ratio, or actuating signal ratio, is given by Equation (7.4): 
(d) 
The primary feedback ratio is given by Equation (7.5): 
(e) 
The characteristic equation is given by the denominator of C/R above, s(s + p — KXK2) = 0. In this 
case, 1 — GH = s + p — KlK2 = d, which is not the characteristic equation, because the pole s of G 
cancels the zero i of H. 

166 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
BLOCK DIAGRAM TRANSFORMATIONS 
7.10. 
Prove the equivalence of the block diagrams for Transformation 2 (Section 7.5). 
The equation in the second column, Y = 
governs the construction of the block diagram in 
the third column, as shown. Rewrite this equation as 
The equivalent block diagram in the 
last column is clearly the representation of this form of the equation (Fig. 7-18) 
Fig. 7-18 
7.11. 
Repeat Problem 7.10 for Transformation 3. 
Rewrite Y 
as 
The block diaaram for this form of the eauation is 
clearly given in Fig. 
Fig. 7-19 
7.12. 
Repeat Problem 7.10 for Transformation 5. 
We have 
The block diagram for the latter form is given in Fig. 
7-20. 
7.13. 
Repeat Problem 7.10 for Transformation 7. 
We have Z 
which yields the block diagram given in Fig. 7-21. 
Fig. 7-21 
7.14. 
Repeat Problem 7.10 for Transformation 8. 
We have Z
: 
whose block diagram is clearly given in Fig. 7-22. 

167 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
UNITY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
7.15. 
Reduce the block diagram given in Fig. 7-23 to unity feedback form and find the system 
characteristic equation. 
Fig. 7-23 
Combining the blocks in the forward path, we obtain Fig. 7-24. 
Applying Transformation 5, we have Fig. 7-25. 
Fig. 7-24 
Fie. 7-22 
Fig. 7-25 
By Equation 
the characteristic equation for this system is 
MULTIPLE INPUTS AND OUTPUTS 
7.16. 
Determine the output C due to 
and R for Fig. 7-26. 
Fig. 7-26 

168 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Let 
After combining the cascaded blocks, we obtain Fig. 7-27, ivhcrc CK is the output due 
to R acting alone. Applying Equation (7,3) to this system, 
Fig. 7-27 
Now let 
The block diagram is now given in Fig. 7-28, where C} is the response due to L 
acting 
alone. 
Rearranging 
the blocks, we have Fig. 7-29. From 
Equation 
we 
get 
Fig. 7-28 
Fig. 7-29 
Finally, let 
Fhe block diagram is given in Fig. 7-30, where C2 is the response due to U2 
acting alone. Rearranging the blocks, we get 

169 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
CFIAP. 7] 
By superposition, the total output is 
7.17. 
Figure 7-32 is an example of a multiinput-multioutput system. Determine Cl and C2 due to R1 
and 
R2. 
Fig. 7-32 
First put the block diagram in the form of Fig. 7-33, ignoring the output C2. 
Letting R2 = 0 and combining the summing points, we get Fig. 7-34. 
Fig. 7-33 
Fig. 7-34 
Hence 
the output at 
due tc 
alone, is 
we have Fig. 
For 
7-35. 
Fig. 7-35 
Hence 
is the output at 
due to 
alone Thus 

170 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Now we reduce the original block diagram, ignoring output Ct. First we obtain Fig. 7-36. 
Fie. 7-36 
Then we obtain the block diagram given in Fig. 7-37. Hence 
Next. 
letting 
we obtain Fig. 7-38. Hence 
Finally, 
Fig. 7-37 
Fig. 7-38 
R I O r K D I A G R A M RF.DIIPTION 
7.18. 
Reduce the block diagram given in Fig. 7-39 to canonical form, and find the output transform C. 
A" is a constant. 
Fig. 7-39 
First we combine the cascade blocks of the forward path and apply Transformation 4 to the innermost 
feedback loop to obtain Fig. 7-40. 
Fig. 7-40 
Equation (7.3) or the reapplication of Transformation 4 yields 

171 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
7.19. 
Reduce the block diagram of Fig. 7-39 to canonical form, isolating block K in the forward loop. 
By Transformation 9 we can move the takeoff point ahead of the 
block (Fig. 7-41): 
Applying Transformations 1 and 6b, we get Fig. 7-42. 
Fig. 7-42 
Fig. 7-41 
Now we can apply Transformation 2 to the feedback loops, resulting in the final form given in 
Fig. 7-43. 
Fig. 7-43 
7.20. 
Reduce the block diagram given in Fig. 7-44 to open-loop form. 
Fig. 7-44 

172 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
First, moving the leftmost summing point beyond Gx (Transformation 8), we obtain Fig. 7-45. 
Fig. 7-45 
Next, moving takeoff point a beyond G,, we get Fig. 7-46. 
Fig. 7-46 
Now, using Transformation 6b, and then Transformation 2, to combine the two lower feedback loops 
(from C, H{) entering d and e, we obtain Fig. 7-47. 
Fis. 7-47 
Applying Transformation 4 to this inner loop, the system becomes 

173 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
CFfAP. 71 
Again, applying Transformation 4 to the remaining feedback loop yields 
Finally, Transformation 1 and 2 give the open-loop block diagram: 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
7.21. 
Show that simple block diagram Transformation 1 of Section 7.5 (combining blocks in cascade) 
is not valid if the first block is (or includes) a sampler. 
The output transform U*(s) of an ideal sampler was determined in Problem 4.39 as 
Taking U*(s) as the input of block P2 of Transformation 1 of the table, the output transform Y(s) of block 
P2 is 
Clearly, the input transform X(s) = U(s) cannot be factored from the right-hand side of Y(s), that is, 
Y(s) ¥= F(s)U(s). The same problem occurs if P1 includes other elements, as well as a sampler. 
7.22. 
Why is the characteristic equation invariant under block diagram transformation? 
Block diagram transformations are determined by rearranging the input-output equations of one or 
more of the subsystems that make up the total system. Therefore the final transformed system is governed 
by the same equations, probably arranged in a different manner than those for the original system. 
Now, the characteristic equation is determined from the denominator of the overall system transfer 
function set equal to zero. Factoring or other rearrangement of the numerator and denominator of the 
system transfer function clearly does not change it, nor does it alter the denominator set equal to zero. 
7.23. 
Prove that the transfer function represented by C/R 
in Equation (7.3) can be approximated by 
when \G\ or \GH\ are very large. 
Dividing the numerator and denominator of 
w e pet 1 
Then 
Dividing by GH and taking the limit, we obtain 
by 

174 
KT OCK D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
7.24. 
Assume that the characteristics of G change radically or unpredictably during system operation. 
Using the results of the previous problem, show how the system should be designed so that the 
output C can always be predicted reasonably well. 
In problem 
we found that 
Thus 
as 
C is independent of G for large 
Hence the system should be 
designed so that 
7.25. 
Determine the transfer function of the system in Fig. 7-48. Then let 
and 
Fig. 7-48 
Reducing the inner loops, we have Fig. 7-49 
Fig. 7-49 
Applying Transformation 4 again, we obtain Fig. 7-50. 
Now put 
and 
This yields 
7.26. 
Show that F i g . 7-51 is valid. 
Fig. 7-51 

175 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 7] 
From the open-loop diagram, we have 
Rearranging, 
and 
The closed-loop diagram follows from this equation. 
7.27. 
Prove F i g . 7-52. 
Fig. 7-52 
This problem illustrates how a finite zero may be removed from a block. 
From the forward-loop diagram, 
Rearranging, 
This mathematical equivalence clearly proves the equivalence of the block diagrams. 
7.28. 
Assume that linear approximations in the form of transfer functions are available for each block 
of the Supply and Demand System of Problem 2.13, and that the system can be represented by 
Fig. 7-53. 
Fig. 7-53 
Determine the overall transfer function of the system. 
Block diagram Transformation 4, applied twice to this system, gives Fig. 7-54. 
(1) 
(2) 
Fig. 7-54 
Hence the transfer function for the linearized Supply and Demand model is: 

176 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S OF SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Supplementary Problems 
7.29. 
Determine C/R for each system in Fig. 7-55. 
(a) 
(6) 
(«) 
Fig. 7-55 
7.30. 
Consider the blood pressure regulator described in Problem 2.14. Assume the vasomotor center (VMC) can 
be described by a linear transfer function Gn(s), and the baroreceptors by the transfer function kxs + k2 
(see Problem 6.33). Transform the block diagram into its simplest, unity feedback form. 
7.31. 
Reduce Fig. 7-56 to canonical form. 
Fig. 7-56 

177 
C H A P . 7] 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
7.32. 
Determine C for the system represented by Fig. 7-57. 
Fig. 7-57 
7.33. 
Give an example of two feedback systems in canonical form having identical control ratios C/R 
but 
different G and H components. 
7.34. 
Determine C/R2 
for the system given in Fig. 7-58. 
Fig. 7-58 
7.35. 
Determine the complete output C, with both inputs Rx and R2 acting simultaneously, for the system given 
in the preceding problem. 
7.36. 
Determine C/R for the system represented by Fig. 7-59. 
Fig. 7-59 
7.37. 
Determine the characteristic equation for each of the systems of Problems (a) 7.32, (b) 7.35, (c) 7.36. 
7.38. 
What block diagram transformation rules in the table of Section 7.5 permit the inclusion of a sampler? 

178 
B L O C K D I A G R A M A L G E B R A A N D T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N S O F SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 7 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
7.29. 
See Problem 8.15. 
7.30. 
7.31. 
7.32. 
7.34. 
7.35. 
7.36. 
7.37. 
(b) 
(c) 
7.38. 
The results of Problem 7.21 indicate that any transformation that involves any product of two or more 
transforms is not valid if a sampler is included. But all those that simply involve the sum or difference 
of signals are valid, that is, Transformations 6, 11, and 12. Each represents a simple rearrangement of 
signals as a linear-sum, and addition is a commutative operation, even for sampled signals, that is 
Z=X± 
Y= Y± X. 

179 
Chapter 8 
Signal Flow Graphs 
8.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The most extensively used graphical representation of a feedback control system is the block 
diagram, presented in Chapters 2 and 7. In this chapter we consider another model, the signal flow 
graph. 
A signal flow graph is a pictorial representation of the simultaneous equations describing a system. 
It graphically displays the transmission of signals through the system, as does the block diagram. But it 
is easier to draw and therefore easier to manipulate than the block diagram. 
The properties of signal flow graphs are presented in the next few sections. The remainder of the 
chapter treats applications. 
8.2 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SIGNAL FLOW GRAPHS 
Let us first consider the simple equation 
(8.1) 
The variables Xt and X- can be functions of time, complex frequency, or any other quantity. They may 
even be constants, which are " variables" in the mathematical sense. 
F o r signal flow graphs, Atj 
is a mathematical operator mapping X; into X{, and is called the 
transmission function. F o r example, A, - may be a constant, i n which case Xf is a constant times X- in 
Equation (8.1); if Xi and Xf are functions of s or z, At/ 
may be a transfer function Atj(s) 
or A{-(z). 
The signal flow graph for Equation (8.1) is given in Fig. 8-1. This is the simplest form of a signal 
flow graph. Note that the variables Xt and Xj are represented by a small dot called a node, and the 
transmission function At- is represented by a line with an arrow, called a branch. 
Fig. 8-1 
Every variable in a signal flow graph is designated by a node, and every transmission function by a 
branch. Branches are always unidirectional. The arrow denotes the direction of signal flow. 
EXAMPLE 8.1. 
Ohm's law states that E= RI, where E is a voltage, / a current, and R a resistance. The signal 
flow graph for this equation is given in Fig. 8-2. 
Fig. 8-2 

180 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
8.3 
SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH ALGEBRA 
1. 
The Addition Rule 
The value of the variable designated by a node is equal to the sum of all signals entering the node. 
In other words, the equation 
is represented by Fig. 8-3. 
Fig. 8-3 
EXAMPLE 8.2. 
The signal flow graph for the equation of a line in rectangular coordinates, Y= mX + b. is given 
in Fig. 8-4. Since b, the Y-axis intercept, is a constant it may represent a node (variable) or a transmission function. 
Fig. 8-4 
2. 
The Transmission Rule 
The value of the variable designated by a node is transmitted on every branch leaving that node. In 
other words, the equation 
is represented by Fig. 8-5. 
Fig. 8-5 

181 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
EXAMPLE 8.3. 
The signal How graph of the simultaneous equations 
is given in Fig. 8-6. 
Fig. 8-6 
3. 
The Multiplication Rule 
A 
cascaded 
(series) 
connection 
of n — 1 
branches 
with 
transmission 
functions 
can be replaced by a single branch with a new transmission function equal to 
the product of the old ones. That is. 
The signal flow graph equivalence is represented by Fig. 8-7. 
Fig. 8-7 
EXAMPLE 8.4. 
The signal flow graph of the simultaneous equations 
is given in Fig. 8-8. 
which reduces to 
Fig. 8-8 
8.4 DEFINITIONS 
The following terminology is frequently used in signal flow graph theory. The examples associated 
with each definition refer to Fig. 8-9. 
Fig. 8-9 
Definition 8.1: 
A path is a continuous, unidirectional succession of branches along which no node is 
passed more than once. For example, X{ to X2 to A", to X4, X2 to X
3 and back to 
X2, and Xl to X2 to X4 are paths. 
Definition 8.2: 
A n input node or source is a node with only outgoing branches. For example, Xx is 
an input node. 

182 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
Definition 8.3: 
A n output node or sink is a node with only incoming branches. For example, X4 is 
an output node. 
Definition 8.4: 
A forward path is a path from the input node to the output node. For example, Xx 
to X2 to X3 to X4, and Xx to X2 to XA are forward paths. 
Definition 8.5: 
A feedback path or feedback loop is a path which originates and terminates on the 
same node. For example, X2 to X3 and back to X2 is a feedback path. 
Definition 8.6: 
A self-loop is a feedback loop consisting of a single branch. F o r example, A33 is a 
self-loop. 
Definition 8.7: 
The gain of a branch is the transmission function of that branch when the 
transmission function is a multiplicative operator. For example, A^ is the gain of 
the self-loop if Ai3t is a constant or transfer function. 
Definition 8.8: 
The path gain is the product of the branch gains encountered in traversing a path. 
For example, the path gain of the forward path from Xi to X2 to X3 to X4 is 
^ 2 1 ^ 3 2 ^ 4 3 -
Definition 8.9: 
The loop gain is the product of the branch gains of the loop. For example, the loop 
gain of the feedback loop from X2 to X3 and back to X2 is 
A32A2J. 
Very often, a variable in a system is a function of the output variable. The canonical feedback 
system is an obvious example. In this case, if the signal flow graph were to be drawn directly from the 
equations, the "output node" would require an outgoing branch, contrary to the definition. This 
problem may be remedied by adding a branch with a transmission function of unity entering a 
" d u m m y " node. For example, the two graphs in F i g . 8-10 are equivalent, and Y4 is an output node. 
N o t e that Y4 = Y3. 
Fig. 8-10 
8.5 
CONSTRUCTION OF SIGNAL FLOW GRAPHS 
The signal flow graph of a linear feedback control system whose components are specified by 
noninteracting transfer functions can be constructed by direct reference to the block diagram of the 
system. Each variable of the block diagram becomes a node and each block becomes a branch. 
EXAMPLE 8.5. 
The block diagram of the canonical feedback control system is given in Fig. 8-11. 
Fig. 8-11 

183 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
The signal flow graph is easily constructed from Fig. 8-12. Note that the - or + sign of the summing point is 
associated with H, 
Fig. 8-12 
The signal flow graph of a system described by a set of simultaneous equations can be constructed 
in the following general manner. 
1. 
Write the system equations in the form 
A n equation for Xl is not required if X1 is an input node. 
2. 
Arrange the m or n (whichever is larger) nodes from left to right. The nodes may be rearranged 
if the required loops later appear too cumbersome. 
3. 
Connect the nodes by the appropriate branches An, 
Ai2. 
etc. 
4. 
If the desired output node has outgoing branches, add a dummy node and a unity gain branch. 
5. 
Rearrange the nodes a n d / o r loops in the graph to achieve maximum pictorial clarity. 
EXAMPLE 8.6. 
Let us construct a signal flow graph for the simple resistance network given in Fig. 8-13. There 
are five variables, <>,, ts, i>., ;\, and i2. c, is known. We can write four independent equations from KirchhofTs 
voltage and current laws. Proceeding from left to right in the schematic, wc have 
Fig. 8-13 
Laying out the five nodes in the same order with vx as an input node, and connecting the nodes with the 
appropriate branches, wc get Fig. 8-14. If we wish to consider {>3 as an output node, we must add a unity gain 
Fig. 8-14 

184 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
branch and another node, yielding Fig. 8-15. N o rearrangement of the nodes is necessary. We have one forward 
path and three feedback loops clearly in evidence. 
Fig. 8-15 
Note that signal flow graph representations of equations are not unique. For example, the addition 
of a unity gain branch followed by a dummy node changes the graph, but not the equations it 
represents. 
8.6 
THE GENERAL INPUT-OUTPUT GAIN FORMULA 
We found in Chapter 7 that we can reduce complicated block diagrams to canonical form, from 
which the control ratio is easily written as 
It is possible to simplify signal flow graphs in a manner similar to that of block diagram reduction. 
But it is also possible, and much less time-consuming, to write down the input-output relationship by 
inspection from the original signal flow graph. This can be accomplished using the formula presented 
below. This formula can also be applied directly to block diagrams, but the signal flow graph 
representation is easier to read—especially when the block diagram is very complicated. 
Let us denote the ratio of the input variable to the output variable by 77. For linear feedback control 
systems, 77= C/R. 
For the general signal flow graph presented in preceding paragraphs T= 
Xn/Xv 
where Xn is the output and Xx is the input. 
The general formula for any signal flow graph is 
(8.2) 
where 
the ith forward path gain 
Pjk = y'th possible product of k nontouching loop gains 
(sum of all loop gains) + (sum of all gain products of two nontouching loops) 
(sum of all gain products of three nontouching loops) + • • • 
evaluated with all loops touching Pt eliminated 
Two loops, paths, or a loop and a path are said to be nontouching if they have no nodes in common. 
A is called the signal flow graph determinant or characteristic function, since A = 0 is the system 
characteristic equation. 
The application of Equation (8.2) is considerably more straightforward than it appears. The 
following examples illustrate this point. 
EXAMPLE 8.7. 
Let us first apply Equation (8.2) to the signal flow graph of the canonical feedback system (Fig. 
8-16). 

185 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
There is only one forward path; hence 
There is only one (feedback) loop. Hence 
Then 
Finally, 
and 
Fig. 8-16 
EXAMPLE 8.8. 
The signal flow graph of the resistance network of Example 8.6 is shown in Fig. 8-17. Let us 
apply Equation (8.2) to this graph and determine the voltage gain T = v^/i\ of the resistance network. 
Fig. 8-17 
There is one forward path (Fig. 8-18). Hence the forward path gain is 
Fig. 8-18 
There are three feedback loops (Fig. 8-19). Hence the loop gains are 
Fig. 8-19 

186 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
There are two nontouching loops, loops 1 and 3. Hence 
Pl2 = gain product of the only two nontouching loops = 
There are no three loops that do not touch. Therefore 
Since all loops touch the forward path, 
Finally, 
8.7 
TRANSFER FUNCTION COMPUTATION OF CASCADED COMPONENTS 
Loading effects of interacting components require little special attention using signal flow graphs. 
Simply combine the graphs of the components at their normal joining points (output node of one to the 
input node of another), account for loading by adding new loops at the joined nodes, and compute the 
overall gain using Equation (8.2). This procedure is best illustrated by example. 
EXAMPLE 8.9. 
Assume that two identical resistance networks are to be cascaded and used as the control 
elements in the forward loop of a control system. The networks are simple voltage dividers of the form given in Fig. 
8-20. 
Fig. 8-20 
Two independent equations for this network are 
and 
The signal flow graph is easily drawn (Fig. 8-21). The gain of this network is, by inspection, equal to 
Fig. 8-21 
If we were to ignore loading, the overall gain of two cascaded networks would simply be determined by multiplying 
the individual gains: 

187 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
This answer is incorrect. We prove this in the following, manner. When the two identical networks arc cascaded, we 
note that the result is equivalent to the network of Example 8.6, with 
;Fig. 8-22). 
and 
Fig. 8-22 
The signal flow graph of this network was also determined in Example 8.6 (Fig. 8-23). 
Fig. 8-23 
We observe that the feedback branch —/?3 in Fig, 8-23 does not appear in the signal flow graph of the 
cascaded signal flow graphs of the individual networks connected from node v2 to v{ (Fig. 8-24). This means that, 
as a result of connecting the two networks, the second one loads the first, changing the equation for v2 from 
Fig. 8-24 
This result could also have been obtained by directly writing the equations for the combined networks. In this case, 
only the equation for a, would have changed form. 
The gain of the combined networks was determined in Example 8.8 as 
when R2 is set equal to Rt and R4 is set equal to R^. We observe that 
It is good general practice to calculate the gain of cascaded networks directly from the combined 
signal flow graph. Most practical control system components load each other when connected in series. 
8.8 
BLOCK DIAGRAM REDUCTION USING SIGNAL FLOW GRAPHS 
AND THE GENERAL INPUT-OUTPUT GAIN FORMULA 
Often, the easiest way to determine the control ratio of a complicated block diagram is to translate 
the block diagram into a signal flow graph and apply Equation (8.2). Takeoff points and summing 
points must be separated by a unity gain branch in the signal flow graph when using Equation (8.2). 

188 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
If the elements G and H of a canonical feedback representation are desired, Equation (8.2) 
also 
provides this information. The direct transfer function is 
(8.3) 
The loop transfer function is 
(8.4) 
Equations (8.3) and (8.4) are solved simultaneously for G and H, and the canonical feedback control 
system is drawn from the result. 
EXAMPLE 8.10. 
Let us determine the control ratio C/R 
and the canonical block diagram of the feedback 
control system of Example 7.9 (Fig. 8-25). 
Fig. 8-25 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-26. There are two forward paths: 
Fig. 8-26 
There are three feedback loops: 
There are no nontouching loops, and all loops touch both forward paths; then 
Therefore the control ratio is 

189 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
From Equations (8.3) and (8.4), we have 
Therefore 
The canonical block diagram is therefore given in Fig. 8-27. 
Fig. 8-27 
The negative summing point sign for the feedback loop is a result of using a positive sign in the GH formula 
above. If this is not obvious, refer to Equation (7.3) and its explanation in Section 7.4. 
The block diagram above may be put into the final form of Examples 7.9 or 7.10 by using the transformation 
theorems of Section 7.5. 
Solved Problems 
SIGNAL F L O W GRAPH ALGEBRA AND DEFINITIONS 
8.1. 
Simplify the signal flow graphs given in Fig. 8-28. 
Fig. 8-28 
(a) 
Clearly, 
Therefore we have 
(b) 
We have 
and 
Hence 
yielding 
or 
(c) 
If A and B are multiplicative operators (e.g., constants or transfer functions), we have 
Hence the signal flow graph becomes 

190 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
8.2. 
Draw signal flow graphs for the block diagrams in Problem 7.3 and reduce them by the 
multiplication rule (Fig. 8-29). 
('->) 
8.3. 
Consider the signal flow graph in Fig. 8-30. 
Fie. 8-30 
(a) 
Draw the signal flow graph for the system equivalent to that graphed in Fig. 8-30, but in 
which X3 becomes kX3 (k constant) and Xh 
X2, and X4 remain the same. 
(/;) 
Repeat part (a) for the case in which X2 and X^ become k2X2 
and k^X^, and Xx and A
4 
remain the same (k2 
and A:3 are constants). 
This problem illustrates the fundamentals of a technique that can be used for scaling 
variables. 
(a) 
For the system to remain the same when a node variable is multiplied by a constant, ail signals 
entering the node must be multiplied by the same constant, and all signals leaving the node divided by 
that constant. Since Xt, X2, and X4 must remain the same, the branches are modified (Fig. 8-31). 
Fig. 8-31 
(b) 
Substitute k2 X2 for X2, and k} X:> for X3 (Fig. 8-32) 
Fig. 8-32 

191 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 81 
It is clear from the graph that A2l 
becomes k2A2l, 
A.,2 becomes (k^/k^A^, 
/1 2, becomes 
(k2/k3)A2}, 
and A^ becomes {\/k2)An 
(Fig. 8-33). 
Fig. 8-33 
8.4. 
Consider the signal flow graph given in Fig. 8-34. 
Fig. 8-34 
Identify the (a) 
input node, (b) output node, (c) 
forward paths, (d) 
feedback paths, 
(<?) self-loop. Determine the ( / ) loop gains of the feedback loops, (g) path gains of the forward 
paths. 
(b) 
(d) 
(<-) 
( / ) 
SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH CONSTRUCTION 
8.5. 
Consider the following equations in which xx, x2,..., xn 
are variables and a{, a2, • • •, an 
are 
coefficients or mathematical operators: 
(a) 
(b) 
What are the minimum number of nodes and the minimum number of branches required to 
construct the signal flow graphs of these equations? Draw the graphs. 
(a) 
There are four variables in this equation: x, x2, x3, and +5. Therefore a minimum of four nodes are 
required. There are three coefficients or transmission functions on the right-hand side of the equation: 

192 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
al, a 7 , and +1. Hence a minimum of three branches are required. A minimal signal flow graph is 
shown in Fig. 8-35(a). 
(a) 
Fig. 8-35 
(6) 
(b) 
There are n + 1 variables: xx, x2,..., 
xn, and 5; and there are n coefficients: a,, a2,..., an_1, and 1. 
Therefore a minimal signal flow graph is shown in Fig. 8-35(6). 
8.6. 
D r a w signal flow graphs for 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
The operations called for in this equation are ay and d/dt. Let the equation be written as 
x2 = ax • (d/dt)(xx). Since there are two operations, we may define a new variable dxx/dt and use it 
as an intermediate node. The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-36. 
Fig. 8-36 
(b) 
Similarly, 
Therefore we obtain Fig. 8-37 
Fig. 8-37 
(c) 
The operation is integration. Let the operator be denoted by / dt. The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 
8-38. 
Fig. 8-38 

193 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
8.7. 
Construct the signal flow graph for the following set of simultaneous equations: 
There are four variables: xu..., x4. Hence four nodes are required. Arranging them from left to right 
and connecting them with the appropriate branches, we obtain Fig. 8-39. 
Fig. 8-39 
A neater way to arrange this graph is shown in Fig. 8-40. 
Fig. 8-40 
8.8. 
D r a w a signal flow graph for the resistance network shown in F i g . 8-41 in which 
v2 is the voltage across 
Cv 
Fig. 8-41 
The five variables are vly v2, v3, i \ , and i2; and 
is the input. The four independent equations derived 
from Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws are 
The signal flow graph can be drawn directly from these equations (Fig. 8-42). 

194 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
Fig. 8-42 
In Laplace transform notation, the signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-43. 
Fig. 8-43 
T H E G E N E R A L INPUT- O U T P U T GAIN F O R M U L A 
8.9. 
The transformed equations for the mechanical system given in Fig. 8-44 are 
(i) 
(ii) 
Fig. 8-44 
where F is force, M is mass, k is spring constant, / is friction, and X is displacement. 
Determine X2/F 
using Equation (8.2). 
There are three variables: Xx, X2, and F. Therefore we need three nodes, In order to draw the signal 
flow graph, divide Equation (i) by A and Equation (ii) by B, where A = MYs
2 + f}s + kl, and B = M-,s
2 + 
f2s + kl + k-,: 
(hi) 
(iv) 
Therefore the signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-45. 
Fig. 8-45 
The forward path gain is 
The feedback loop gain is 
Finally, 
and 
then 

195 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
8.10. 
Determine the transfer function for the block diagram in Problem 7.20 by signal flow graph 
techniques. 
The signal flow graph, Fig. 8-46, is drawn directly from Fig. 7-44. There are two forward paths. The 
path gains are P, = Gfi2G2 
and P2 = GA. The three feedback loop gains are Pn = -G2Hi, 
P21 = G1G2H1, 
and 7
>
31 = - G2G3H2. No loops are nontouching. Hence A = 1 — (Pu + P2l + P3l). Also, Aj = 1; and since 
no loons touch the nodes of 
A-, = A. Thus 
Fig. 8-46 
8.11. 
Determine the transfer function V3/V1 
from the signal flow graph of Problem 8.8. 
The single forward path gain is l/(s
2RlR2ClC2). 
The loop gains of the three feedback loops are 
Pn = —l/(sR1Cl), 
P2l = - 1 / ( J 7 ? 2 Q ) > 
P31
 
= 
— ^/(sR-iCi)- The gain product of the only two non-
touching loops is Pl2 = Pn • P2l = l/(s
2R1R2ClC2)- 
Hence 
Since all loops touch the forward path, 
Finally, 
8.12. 
Solve Problem 7.16 with signal flow graph techniques. 
The signal flow graph is drawn directly from Fig. 7-26, as shown in Fig. 8-47: 
Fig. 8-47 

196 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
With UX = U2 = 0, we have Fig. 8-48. Then Px = GXG2 and Pn = G&H^. 
Hence A = 1 - Pu = 1 -
GfijH^z, 
A, = 1, and 
Fig. 8-48 
Now put 
(Fig. 8-49). 
Fig. 8-49 
Then 
and 
Now put 
Fig. 8-50 
Then 
and 
Finally, we have 
TRANSFER FUNCTION COMPUTATION OF CASCADED COMPONENTS 
8.13. 
Determine the transfer function for two of the networks in cascade shown in Fig. 8-51. 
Fig. 8-51 

197 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
In Laplace transform notation the network becomes Fig. 8-52. 
Fig. 8-52 
By Kirehhoffs laws, wc have 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8.53. 
Fig. 8-53 
For two networks in cascade (Fig. 8-54) the V2 equation is also dependent on /-,; V2 = RIl - Rl2. Hence 
two networks are joined at node 2 (Fig. 8-55) and a feedback loop ( - Rl2) is added between T2 and V2 (Fig. 
Fig. 8-54 
Fig. 8-55 
Then 
and 

198 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
Two resistance networks in the form of that in Example 8.6 are to be used for control elements 
in the forward path of a control system. They are to be cascaded and shall have identical 
respective component values as shown in Fig. 8-57. Find v5/v1 
using Equation (8.2). 
8.14. 
Fig. 8-57 
There are nine variables: 
Eight independent equations are 
Only the equation for v3 is different from those of the single network of Example 8.6; it has an extra term, 
( — R4i3). 
Therefore the signal flow diagram for each network alone (Example 8.6) may be joined at node 
y,, and an extra branch of gain — R4 drawn from i3 to v3. The resulting signal flow graph for the double 
network is given in Fig. 8-58. 
Fig. 8-58 
The voltage gain 
is calculated from Equation (8.2) as follows. One forward path yields 
The gains of the seven feedback loops are 
and 
There are 15 gain products of two nontouching loops. From left to right, we have 
There are 10 gain products of three nontouching loops. From left to right, we have 

199 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
There is one gain product of four nontouching loops: 
Therefore the determinant is 
Since all loops touch the forward path, 
and 
BLOCK DIAGRAM REDUCTION 
8.15 
Determine C/R for each system shown in Fig. 8-59 using Equation (8.2). 
( a ) 
(<•) 
Fig. 8-59 
(a) 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-60. The two forward path gains are 
The two 
feedback loop gains are 
Then 

200 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
Fig. 8-60 
Now, 
and 
because both paths touch the feedback loops at both interior nodes. Hence 
(b) 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-61. Again, we have P, = G, and P, = G 2. But now there is 
only one feedback loop, and Pu = GlHl\ then A = 1 - G{ H{. The forward path through G, clearly 
touches the feedback loop at nodes a and b\ thus A, = 1. The forward path through Gi touches the 
feedback loop at node a; then A 2 = 1. Hence 
Fig. 8-61 
(c) 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-62. Again, we have P, = G,, P, = G 2 , Pl{ = C, Ht, A = 1 -
G[//,, and A t = 1. But the feedback path does not touch the forward path through G 2 at any node. 
Therefore A , = A = 1 - Gj //] and 
Fig. 8-62 
This problem illustrates the importance of separating summing points and takeoff points with a 
branch of unity gain when applying Equation (8.2). 
8.16. 
F i n d the transfer function C/R 
for the system shown in Fig. 8-63 in which AT is a constant. 

201 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
Fig. 8-63 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-64. The only forward path gain is 
Fig. 8-64 
The two feedback loop gains are P
u = (l/s) 
• (-s
2) 
= —s and P21 = -OIK/s. 
There are no nontouching 
loops. Hence 
8.17. 
Solve Problem 7.18 using signal flow graph techniques. 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-65. 
Fig. 8-65 
Applying the multiplication and addition rules, we obtain Fig. 8-66. Now 
Fig. 8-66 

202 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
and 
8.18. 
Find C/R 
for the control system given in Fig. 8-67. 
Fig. 8-67 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8.68. The two forward path gains are 
and 
The five feedback loop gains are 
and 
Hence 
Fig. 8-68 
and 
Finally, 
8.19. 
Determine C/R for the system given in Fig. 8-69. Then put G 3 = 
G1G2H2. 
Fig. 8-69 

203 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
The signal flow graph is given in Fig. 8-70. We have 
Fig. 8-70 
Putting 
we obtain 
and the system transfer function becomes open-loop. 
8.20. 
Determine the elements for a canonical feedback system for the system of Problem 8.10. 
From Problem 8.10, 
From Equation (8.3) we have 
and from Equation (8.4) we obtain 
Supplementary Problems 
8.21. 
Find 
for Fig. 8-71, using Equation (8.2). 
Fig. 8-71 
8.22. 
Determine a set of canonical feedback system transfer functions for the preceding problem, using 
Equations (8.3) and (8.4). 

204 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
8.23. 
Scale the signal flow graph in Fig. 8-72 so that 
becomes 
(see Problem 8.3) 
Fig. 8-72 
8.24. 
Draw a signal flow graph for several nodes of the lateral inhibition system described in Problem 
3.4 by the equation 
8.25. 
Draw a signal flow graph for the system presented in Problem 7.31. 
8.26. 
Draw a signal flow graph for the system presented in Problem 7.32. 
8.27. 
Determine 
from Equation (8.2) for the signal flow graph drawn in Problem 8.26. 
8.28. 
Draw a signal flow graph for the electrical network in Fig. 8-73. 
Fig. 8-73 
8.29. 
Determine 
from Equation (8.2) for the network of Problem 8.28. 
8.30. 
Determine the elements for a canonical feedback system for the network of Problem 8.28, using Equations 
(83) and (8.4). 
8.31. 
Draw the signal flow graph for the analog computer circuit in Fig 8-74. 

205 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
Fig. 8-74 
8.32. 
Scale the analog computer circuit of Problem 8.31 so that y becomes 10y, 
becomes 
and 
becomes 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
8.21. 
Fig. 8-75 
8.22. 
8.23. 
Fig. 8-76 

206 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
[CHAP. 8 
8.24. 
Fig. 8-77 
8.25. 
Fig. 8-78 
8.26. 
Fig. 8-79 
8.27. 

207 
S I G N A L F L O W G R A P H S 
C H A P . 8] 
8.28. 
Fig. 8-80 
8.29. 
8.30. 
8.31. 
Fig. 8-81 
8.32. 
Fig. 8-82 

208 
Chapter 9 
System Sensitivity Measures and Classification 
of Feedback Systems 
9.1 
INTRODUCTION 
In earlier chapters the concepts of feedback and feedback systems have been emphasized. Since a 
system with a given transfer function can be synthesized in either an open-loop or a closed-loop 
configuration, a closed-loop (feedback) configuration must have some desirable properties which an 
open-loop configuration does not have. 
In this chapter some of the properties of feedback and feedback systems are further discussed, and 
quantitative measures of the effectiveness of feedback are developed in terms of the concepts of 
sensitivity and error constants. 
9.2 
SENSITIVITY OF TRANSFER FUNCTIONS AND FREQUENCY RESPONSE FUNCTIONS 
T O SYSTEM PARAMETERS 
A n early step in the analysis or design of a control system is the generation of models for the 
various elements in the system. If the system is linear and time-invariant, two useful mathematical 
models for these elements are the transfer function and the frequency response function (see Chapter 6). 
The transfer function is fixed when its parameters are specified, and the values given to these 
parameters are called nominal values. They are rarely, if ever, known exactly, so nominal values are 
actually approximations to true parameter values. The corresponding transfer function is called the 
nominal transfer function. The accuracy of the model then depends in part, on how closely these 
nominal parameter values approximate the real system parameters they represent, and also how much 
these parameters deviate from nominal values during the course of system operation. The sensitivity of a 
system to its parameters is a measure of how much the system transfer function differs from its nominal 
when each of its parameters differs from its nominal value. 
System sensitivity can also be defined and analyzed in terms of the frequency response function. 
The frequency response function of a continuous system can be determined directly from the transfer 
function of the system, if it is known, by replacing the complex variable s in the transfer function by 
ju. For discrete-time systems, the frequency response function is obtained by replacing z by e
]aT. 
Thus 
the frequency response function is defined by the same parameters as those of the transfer function, and 
its accuracy is determined by the accuracy of these parameters. The frequency response function can 
alternatively be defined by graphs of its magnitude and phase- angle, both plotted as a function of the 
real frequency w. These graphs are often determined experimentally, and in many cases cannot be 
defined by a finite number of parameters. Hence an infinite number of values of amplitude and phase 
angle (values for all frequencies) define the frequency response function. The sensitivity of the system is 
in this case a measure of the amount by which its frequency response function differs from its nominal 
when the frequency response function of an element of the system differs from its nominal value. 
Consider the mathematical model T(k) (transfer function or frequency response function) of a 
linear time-invariant system, written in polar form as 
(9.1) 
where k is a parameter upon which T(k) depends. Usually both \T(k) \ and $ T depend on k, and k is a 
real or complex parameter of the system. 

209 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Definition 9.1: 
For the mathematical model T(k), with k regarded as the only parameter, the 
sensitivity of T(k) with respect to the parameter k is defined by 
(9.2) 
In some treatments of this subject, S
J
k^
k) is called the relative sensitivity, or normalized sensitivity, 
because it represents the variation dT relative to the nominal T, for a variation dk relative to the 
nominal k. S[
ik) is also sometimes called the Bode sensitivity. 
Definition 9.2: 
The sensitivity of the magnitude of T(k) with respect to the parameter k is defined 
by 
(9.3) 
Definition 9.3: 
The sensitivity of the phase angle <t>r of T(k) with respect to the parameter k is 
defined by 
(9.4) 
The sensitivities of T(k) = \T(k)\e
J<"'\ the magnitude \T(k)\, and the phase angle <j>T with respect 
to the parameter A
- are related by the expression 
(9.5) 
Note that, in general, Sk
T{k)] 
and 5 f
r are complex numbers. In the special but very important case 
where k is real, then both S |
/ ( A ) | and Sf
T are real. When Sk
lik) = 0, T(k) is insensitive to k. 
EXAMPLE 9.1. 
Consider the frequency response function 
where fi= k. The magnitude of T(p.) is \T(n)\ = 1, and the phase angle of T(p) is 4>T= — w/t. 
The sensitivity of T(p.) with respect to the parameter fi is 
The sensitivity of the magnitude of T(p) with respect to the parameter fi is 
The sensitivity of the phase angle of T(fi) with respect to the parameter ji is 
Note that 
The following development is in terms of transfer functions. However, everything is applicable to 
frequency response functions (for continuous systems) by simply replacing s in all equations by y'to, or 
z = e
1"
1 for discrete systems. 
A special but very important class of system transfer functions has the form: 
(9.6) 

210 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
where k is a parameter and Ax, A2, A3, and A4 are polynomials i n s (or z). This type of dependence 
between a parameter k and a transfer function T is general enough to include many of the systems 
considered i n this book. 
F o r a transfer function with the form of Equation (9.6), the sensitivity of T with respect to the 
parameter k is given by 
(9.7) 
In general, 
is a function of the complex variable s (or z). 
EXAMPLE 9.2. 
The transfer function of the discrete-time system given in Fig. 9-1 is 
Fig. 9-1 
If K is the parameter of interest (k = K), we group terms in T as follows: 
Comparing T with Equation (9.6), we see that 
If a is the parameter of interest (k =• a), T can be rewritten as 
Comparing this expression with Equation (9.6) we see that 
If b is the parameter of interest (k = b), T can be rewritten as 
Again comparing this expression with Equation (9.6), we see that 
EXAMPLE 9.3. 
For the lead network shown in Fig. 9-2 the transfer function is 

211 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Fig. 9-2 
If C (capacitance) is the parameter of interest, we write 
Comparing this expression 
with Equation (9.6), we see that 
EXAMPLE 9.4. 
For the system of Example 9.2 the sensitivity of T with respect to K is 
The sensitivity of T with respect to the parameter a is 
The sensitivity of T with respect to the parameter b is 
EXAMPLE 9.5. 
For the lead network of Fig. 9-2 the sensitivity of T with respect to the capacitance C is 
EXAMPLE 9.6. 
The open-loop and closed-loop systems given in Fig. 9-3 have the same plant and the same 
overall system transfer function for 
K=2. 
Fig. 9-3 
Although these systems are precisely equivalent for AT = 2, their properties differ significantly for small (and 
large) deviations of K from K= 2. The transfer function of the first system is 
Comparing this expression with Equation (9.6) gives 
Substituting these 

212 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
values into Equation (9.7), we obtain 
for all K. 
The transfer function of the second system is 
Comparing this expression with Equation (9.6) yields 
Substituting these 
values into Equation (9.7), we obtain 
For 
Note that the sensitivity of the open-loop system 7j is fixed at 1 for all values of gain K. On the other hand, 
the closed-loop sensitivity is a function of K and the complex variable s. Thus Sfc may be adjusted in a design 
problem by varying K or maintaining the frequencies of the input function within an appropriate range. 
For to < f?> rad/sec, the sensitivity of the closed-loop system is 
Thus the feedback system is 40% less sensitive than the open-loop system for low frequencies. For high frequencies, 
the sensitivity of the closed-loop system approaches 1, the same as that of the open-loop system. 
EXAMPLE 9.7. 
Suppose G is a frequency response function, either G(ju) for a continuous system, or G(e'"
T) 
for a discrete-time system. The frequency response function for the unity feedback system (continuous or 
discrete-time) given in Fig. 9-4 is related to the forward-loop frequency response function G by 
Fig. 9-4 
where 4>C/R is the phase angle of C/R and <f>G is the phase angle of G. The sensitivity of C/R with respect to \G\ is 
given by 
(9.8) 
Note that for large 
the sensitivity of C R to \G\ is relatively small. 
EXAMPLE 9.8. 
Suppose the system of Example 9.7 is continuous, that to = 1, and for some given G(fio), 
G(jl) = 1 + / Then \G(jo>)\ = fl, <f>c = IT/4 rad, (C/R)(jo) = f 
\(C/R)(ju)\ 
= /To/5, and 4>C/R = 0.3215 
rad. 
Using the result of the previous example, the sensitivity of (C/R)(fu) 
with respect to |G(/'to)| is 

213 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Then from Equation (9.5) we have 
These real values of sensitivity mean that a 10% change in \G 
will produce a 4% change in 
and a 
change in 
A qualitative attribute of a system related to its sensitivity is its robustness. A system is said to be 
robust when its operation is insensitive to parameter variations. Robustness may be characterized in 
terms of the sensitivity of its transfer or frequency response function, or of a set of performance indices 
to system parameters. 
9.3 
OUTPUT SENSITIVITY TO PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENTIAL AND DIFFERENCE 
EQUATION MODELS 
The concept of sensitivity is also applicable to system models expressed in the time domain. The 
sensitivity of the model output y to any parameter p is given by 
Since the model is denned in the time domain, the sensitivity is usually found by solving for the output 
y(t) 
in the time domain. The derivative dy/dp is sometimes called the output sensitivity coefficient, 
which is generally a function of time, as is the sensitivity S*. 
EXAMPLE 9.9. 
We determine the sensitivity of the output y(t) = x(t) 
to the parameter a for the differential 
system x = ax + u. The sensitivity is 
To determine S-
v, consider the time derivative of dx/da, and interchange the order of differentiation, that is, 
Now define a new variable v = dx/da. Then 
The sensitivity function Sj can then be found by first solving the system differential equation for x(t), because x(t) 
is the forcing function in the differential equation for v(t) above. The required solutions were developed in Section 
3.15 as 
and 
because v(0) = 0. The time-varying output sensitivity is computed from these two functions as 
EXAMPLE 9.10. 
For the discrete system defined by 

214 
SYSTEM SENSITIVITY OF FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
[ C H A P . 9 
we determine the sensitivity of the output y to the parameter a as follows. Let 
Then 
SRRI 
Thus, to determine S
y, we first solve the two discrete equations: 
(e.g., see Section 3.17). Then 
9.4 
CLASSIFICATION OF CONTINUOUS FEEDBACK SYSTEMS BY TYPE 
Consider the class of canonical feedback systems defined by Fig. 9-5. For continuous systems, the 
open-loop transfer function may be written as 
Fig. 9-5 
where AT is a constant, m < n, and —zi and —/>,- are the finite zeros and poles, respectively, of GH. If 
there are a zeros and b poles at the origin, then 
In the remainder of this chapter, only systems for which b > a are considered, and l=b- 
a. 

215 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 91 
Definition 9.4: 
A canonical feedback system whose open-loop transfer function can be written i n 
the form: 
(9.9) 
where / > 0 and —zi and —pi are the nonzero finite zeros and poles of GH, 
respectively, is called a type / system. 
EXAMPLE 9.11. 
The system defined by Fig. 9-6 is a type 2 system. 
Fig. 9-6 
EXAMPLE 9.12. The system defined by Fig. 9-7 is a type 1 system. 
EXAMPLE 9.13. 
The system defined by Fig. 9-8 is a type 0 system. 
Fig. 9-8 
Fig. 9-7 
9.5 
POSITION ERROR CONSTANTS FOR CONTINUOUS UNITY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
One criterion of the effectiveness of feedback in a stable type I unity feedback system is the position 
(step) error constant. It is a measure of the steady state error between the input and output when the 
input is a unit step function, that is, the difference between the input and output when the system is i n 
steady state and the input is a step. 

216 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
TCHAP. 9 
Definition 9.5: 
The position error constant K of a type / unity feedback system is denned as 
(9.10) 
The steady state error of a stable type / unity feedback system when the input is a unit step 
function [e(ao) = 1 — c(x)] is related to the position error constant by 
(9.11) 
EXAMPLE 9.14. 
The position error constant for a type 0 system is finite. That is, 
The steady state error for a type 0 system is nonzero and finite. 
EXAMPLE 9.15. 
The position error constant for a type 1 system is 
Therefore the steady state error is e 
EXAMPLE 9.16. 
The position error constant for a type 2 system is 
Therefore the steady state error is e 
9.6 
VELOCITY ERROR CONSTANTS FOR CONTINUOUS UNITY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
Another criterion of the effectiveness of feedback in a stable type I unity feedback system is the 
velocity (ramp) error constant. It is a measure of the steady state error between the input and output of 
the system when the input is a unit ramp function. 
Definition 9.6: 
The velocity error constant Klt of a stable type / unity feedback system is defined as 
The steady state error of a stable type / unity feedback system when the input is a unit ramp 
function is related to the velocity error constant by 
(9.13) 
EXAMPLE 9.17. 
The velocity error constant for a type 0 system is K = 0. Hence the steady state error is infinite. 
EXAMPLE 9.18. 
The velocity error constant for a type 1 system, 
is finite. Therefore the 
steady state error is nonzero and finite. 

217 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
EXAMPLE 9.19. 
The velocity error constant for a type 2 system is infinite. Therefore the steady state error is 
zero. 
9.7 
ACCELERATION ERROR CONSTANTS FOR CONTINUOUS UNITY 
FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
A third criterion of the effectiveness of feedback in a stable type I unity feedback system is the 
acceleration (parabolic) error constant. It is a measure of the steady state error of the system when the 
input is a unit parabolic function; that is, 
Definition 9.7: 
The acceleration error constant 
of a stable type / unity feedback system is 
defined as 
(9.14) 
The steady state error of a stable type / unity feedback system when the input is a unit parabolic 
function is related to the acceleration error constant by 
(9.15) 
EXAMPLE 9.20. 
The acceleration error constant for a type 0 system is Ka = 0. Hence the steady state error is 
infinite. 
EXAMPLE 9.21. 
The acceleration error constant for a type 1 system is Ka = 0. Hence the steady state error is 
infinite. 
EXAMPLE 9.22. 
The acceleration error constant for a type 2 system, Ka = KB^ty/B^Q), 
is finite. Hence the 
steady state error is nonzero and finite. 
9.8 
ERROR CONSTANTS FOR DISCRETE UNITY FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
The open-loop transfer function for a type / discrete system can be written as 
where / > 0 and - z, and ~pt are the nonunity zeros and poles of GH in the z-plane. 
A l l the results developed for continuous unity feedback systems in Sections 9.5 through 9.7 are the 
same for discrete systems with this open-loop transfer function. 
9.9 
SUMMARY TABLE FOR CONTINUOUS AND DISCRETE-TIME UNITY 
FEEDBACK SYSTEMS 
In Tabic 9.1 the error constants are given in terms of a, where a = 0 for continuous systems, and 
a — 1 for discrete-time systems. For continuous systems T= 1 in the steady state error. 

218 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
T A B L E 9.1 
Input 
Unit Step 
Unit Ramp 
Unit Parabola 
Steady 
State 
Error 
Steady 
State 
Error 
Steady 
State 
Error 
System 
Type 
Type 0 
Type 1 
Type 2 
9.10 
ERROR CONSTANTS FOR MORE GENERAL SYSTEMS 
The results of Sections 9.5 through 9.9 are only applicable to stable unity feedback linear systems. 
They can be readily extended, however, to more general stable linear systems. In F i g . 9-9, Td represents 
the transfer function of a desired (ideal) system, and C/R represents the transfer function of the actual 
system (an approximation of Td). R is the input to both systems, and E is the difference (the error) 
between the desired output and the actual output. F o r this more general system, three error constants 
are defined below and are related to the steady state error. 
Fig. 9-9 
Definition 9.8: 
The step error constant Ks is defined for continuous systems as 
(9.16) 
The steady state error for the general system when the input is a unit step function is related to Ks 
by 
(9.77) 
Definition 9.9: 
The ramp error constant Kr is defined for continuous systems as 
(9.18) 
The steady state error for the general system when the input is a unit ramp function is related to Kr 
by 
(9.19) 

219 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Definition 9.10: 
The parabolic error constant K 
is defined for continuous systems as 
(9.20) 
The steady state error for the general system when the input is a unit parabolic function is related 
to 
by 
(9.21) 
EXAMPLE 9.23. 
The nonunity feedback system given in Fig. 9-10 has the transfer function 
4). If the desired transfer function which C, R approximates is 
then 
Fig. 9-10 
Therefore 
EXAMPLE 9.24. 
For the system of Example 9.23 the steady state errors due to a unit step input, a unit ramp 
input, and a unit parabolic input can be found using the results of that example. For a unit step input, 
^(cc) = 1/KS = 0. For a unit ramp input, e(co) = l/Kr = 
For a unit parabolic input, e(co) = \/Kpa 
= oc. 
T o establish relationships between the general error constants Ks, Kr, and K 
and the error 
constants K , Kv. and Ka for unity feedback systems, we let the actual system be a continuous unity 
feedback system and let the desired system have a unity transfer function. That is, we let 
Therefore 
(9.22) 
(9.23) 
(9.24) 

220 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K 
SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
Solved Problems 
SYSTEM CONFIGURATIONS 
9.1. 
A given plant has the transfer function G2. A system is desired which includes G2 as the output 
element and has a transfer function C/R. 
Show that, if no constraints (such as stability) are 
placed on the compensating elements, then such a system can be synthesized as either an 
open-loop or a unity feedback system. 
If the system can be synthesized as an open-loop system, then it will have the configuration given in 
Fig. 9-11, where Gx is an unknown compensating element. The system transfer function is C/R = G{G2, 
from which G[ = (C/R)/G2. 
This value for G[ permits synthesis of C/R as an open-loop system. 
Fig. 9-11 
If the system can be synthesized as a unity feedback system, then it will have the configuration given in 
Fig. 9-12. 
Fig. 9-12 
The system transfer function is 
from which 
This value for G, permits synthesis of C/R as a unity feedback system. 
9.2. 
Using the results of Problem 9.1, show how the system transfer function C/R 
= 2/(s
2 
+ s + 2) 
which includes as its output element the plant G2 = l/s(s 
+ 1) can be synthesized as (a) 
an 
open-loop system, (b) a unity feedback system. 
(a) 
For the open-loop system, 
and the system block diagram is given in Fig. 9-13 
Fig. 9-13 
(b) 
For the unity feedback system, 
and the system block diagram is given in Fig. 9-14. 

221 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Fig. 9-14 
TRANSFER FUNCTION SENSITIVITY 
9.3. 
The two systems given in Fig. 9-15 have the same transfer function when K1 = K2 = 100. 
Fig. 9-15 
Compare the sensitivities of these two systems with respect to parameter Kx for nominal values 
Kx = K2= 
100. 
For the first system, Tt = K1K2/[l 
+ AT,(0.0099A"2)]. Comparing this expression with Equation (9.6) 
yields Al =0, A2 ** K2, A3 = 1, AA = 0.0099AT2. Substituting these values into Equation (9.7), we obtain 
For the second system, 
Comparing this expression with Equation (9.6) yields Ax = 0, A2 = K2, A3 = 1 + 0.09K2, At = 0.09 + 
0.0081 K2. Substituting these values into Equation (9.7), we have 
A 10% variation in Kx will approximately produce a 0.1% variation in Tx and a 1% variation in T2. 
Thus the second system T2 is 10 times more sensitive to variations in Kl than is the first system Tx. 
9.4. 
The closed-loop system given in Fig. 9-16 is defined in terms of the frequency response function 
of the feedforward element G(Jos). 
Fig. 946 

222 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
Suppose that G(jto) = 1 /(jco + 1). In Chapter 15 it is shown that the frequency response 
functions \/(ju 
+ 1) can be approximated by the straight line graphs of magnitude and phase of 
G(joi) given in Fig. 9-17. 
Fig. 9-17 
At w = l the true values of 20log 1 0|G(yw)j and <j> are —3 and —IT/4, respectively. For 
co = 1, find: 
(a) 
The sensitivity of \(C/R)(ju)\ 
with respect to \G(joi)\. 
(b) 
Using the result of part (a), determine an approximate value for the error in \(C/ R)( joi)\ 
caused by using the straight-line approximations for l/O'w + 1). 
(a) 
Using Equation (9.8) the sensitivity of (C/R)(ju) 
with respect to \G(ju>)\ is given by 
Since 
is real. 
For 
(b) 
For u = 1, the exact value of \G(ju)\ is \G( /co) = l / i / 2 = 0.707. The approximate value taken from 
the graph is \G(ju)\ = 1. Then the percentage error in the approximation is 100(1 - 0.707)/0.707 = 
41,4%. The approximate percentage error in \(C/R)(ju)\ 
is 41.4 Slfi^^ 
= 16.6%. 
9.5. 
Show that the sensitivities of T(k) = \T(k)\ethe 
magnitude |77(/c)|, and the phase angle 4>T 
with respect to parameter k are related by 
Using Equation 
Note that if 
is real, then 
are both real, and 
9.6. 
Show that the sensitivity of the transfer function 
with respect to the 
parameter k is given by 
By definition, the sensitivity of T with respect to the parameter k is 

223 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
Now 
Thus 
9.7. 
Consider the system of Example 9.6 with the addition of a load disturbance and a noise input as 
shown in Fig. 9-18. Show that the feedback controller improves the output sensitivity to the 
noise input and the load disturbance. 
Fig. 9-18 
For the open-loop system, the output due to the noise input and load disturbance is 
independent of the action of open-loop controller. For the closed-loop system, 
For low frequencies the closed-loop system attenuates both the load disturbance and the noise input, 
compared to the open-loop system. In particular, the closed-loop system has steady state or d.c. gain: 
while the open-loop system has 
At high frequencies these gains arc approximately equal. 
SYSTEM OUTPUT SENSITIVITY IN THE TIME DOMAIN 
9.8. 
F o r the system defined by 
show that the matrix of output sensitivities 
is determined by solution of the differential equations 
(9.25) 
(9.26) 

224 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
with 
where 
that is, V is the matrix of sensitivity functions. The derivative of the sensitivity function vtj is 
given by 
Assuming the state variables have continuous derivatives, we can interchange the order of total 
and partial differentiation, so that 
In matrix form, 
Since 
we have 
Then 
Note that, in the above equations, the partial derivative of a matrix with respect to the vector 
p is understood to generate a series of matrices, each one of which, when multiplied by x, 
generates a column in the resulting matrix. That is, (dA/dp)x 
is a matrix with jth column 
(dA/dpj)\. 
This is easily verified by writing out all the scalar equations explicitly and 
differentiating term by term. 
SYSTEMS CLASSIFICATION BY TYPE 
9.9. 
The canonical feedback system is represented by Fig. 9-19. 
Fig. 9-19 
Classify this system according to type if 
(a) 
(b) 

225 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
(0 
i d ) 
(e) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
9.10. 
Classify the system given in Fig. 9-20 by type. 
Fig. 9-20 
The open-loop transfer function of this system is 
Therefore it is a type 2 system. 
ERROR CONSTANTS AND STEADY STATE ERRORS 
9.11. 
Show that the steady state error <?(oo) of a stable type / unity feedback system when the input is 
a unit step function is related to the position error constant by 
The error ratio (Definition 7.5) for a unity negative feedback system is given by Equation (7.4) with 
// = 1, that is, E/R = 1/(1 + G). For R = 1/s, E=(l/s)(\/(l 
+ G)). From the Final Value Theorem, we 
obtain 
where we have used the definition 

226 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY O F F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
9.12. 
Show that the steady state error e(co) of a stable tvpe / unity feedback system with a unit ramp 
function input is related to the velocity error constant by 
We have 
and 
Since 
Definition 9.4, 
For 
we have 
where / — 1 > 0. Now we can use the Final Value Theorem, as was done in the previous problem, because 
the condition for the application of this theorem is satisfied. That is, for / > 0 we have 
/^(O) and B2(0) are nonzero and finite by Definition 9.4; hence the limit exists (i.e., it is finite). 
We cannot evoke the Final Value Theorem for the case / = 0 because 
and the limit as s - » 0 of the quantity on the right does not exist. However, we may use the following 
argument for / = 0. Since the system is stable, B2(s) + KBx(s) = 0 has roots only in the left half-plane. 
Therefore E can be written with its denominator in the general factored form: 
where 
and 
(see Definition 9.4), that is, some roots may be repeated. Expanding 
E into partial fractions [Equation i 
we obtain 
where bH in Equation (4.10a) is zero because the degree of the denominator is greater than that of the 
numerator (m < ri). Inverting E(s) (Section 4.8), we get 
Since 
and 
and 
are finite nonzero constants (E is a rational algebraic expression), then 
Collecting results, we have 
Equivalently, 

227 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
These three values for 
define 
thus 
9.13. 
F o r F i g . 9-21 find the position, velocity, and acceleration error constants. 
Fig. 9-21 
Position error constant: 
Velocity error constant: 
Acceleration error constant: 
9.14. 
F o r the system in Problem 9.13, find the steady state error for (a) a unit step input, (b) a unit 
ramp input, (c) a unit parabolic input. 
(a) 
The steady state error for a unit step input is given by e(oc)= 1/(1 + Kp). 
Using the result of 
Problem 9.13 yields e(oo) = 1/(1 + oo) = 0. 
(b) 
The steady state error for a unit ramp input is given by e(oo) = l/K,,. Again using the result of 
Problem 9.13, we get e(oo) = \. 
(c) 
The steady state error for a unit parabolic input is given by e(oo) = 1/Ka. 
Then e(x) = 1/0 = x . 
9.15. 
Figure 9-22 
approximately represents 
a 
differentiator. 
Its 
transfer 
function 
is 
C/R 
= 
KS/[S(TS 
+ 1) + K], Note that l i m
T ^
0 
K^VC/R 
= s, that is, C/R 
is a pure differentiator in the 
limit. F i n d the step, ramp, and parabolic error constants for this system, where the ideal system 
Td is assumed to be a differentiator. 
Fig. 9-22 

228 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 9 
Using the notation of Section 9.10, 
Applying 
Definitions 9.8, 9.9, and 9.10 yields 
9.16. 
F i n d the steady state value of the difference (error) between the outputs of a pure differentiator 
and the approximate differentiator of the previous problem for (a) a unit step input, (b) a unit 
ramp input, (c) a unit parabolic input. 
From Problem 9.15, 
= oo, Kr = oo, and Kpa = K. 
(a) The steady state error for a unit step input is e(co) = 1/KX = 0. 
(b) The steady state error for a unit ramp input is e(oc) = 1/AT, = 0. 
(c) 
The steady state error for a unit parabolic input is e(oo) = \/K 
= l/K. 
9.17. 
G i v e n the stable type 2 unity feedback system shown in Fig. 9-23, find (a) the position, velocity, 
and acceleration error constants, (b) the steady state error when the input is 
Fig. 9-23 
(a) 
Using the last row of Table 9.1 (type 2 systems), the error constants are Kp=cc, 
K,. = x, 
Ku = (4)(l)/2 = 2. 
(b) 
The steady state errors for unit step, unit ramp, and unit parabolic inputs are obtained from the same 
row of the table and are given by: e,(oo) = 0 for a unit step; e2(zc) = 0 for a unit ramp; e3(cc) = \ 
for a unit parabola. 
Since the svstem is linear, the errors can be suoerimnosed. Thus the stcadv state error when the input is 
is given by e 
Supplementary Problems 
9.18. 
Prove the validity of Equation (9.17). (Hint: See Problems 9.11 and 9.12.) 
9.19. 
Prove the validity of Equation (9.19). (Hint: See Problems 9.11 and 9.12.) 
9.20. 
Prove the validity of Equation (9.21). (Hint: See Problems 9.11 and 9.12.) 

229 
S Y S T E M SENSITIVITY OF F E E D B A C K SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 9] 
9.21. 
Determine the sensitivity of the system in Problem 7.9, to variations in each of the parameters K,, K2 and 
p individually. 
9.22. 
Generate an expression, in terms of the sensitivities determined in Problem 9.21. which relates the total 
variation in the transfer function of the system in Problem 7.9 to variations in K{, K2, and 
9.23. 
Show that the steady state error e(oo) of a stable type / unity feedback system with a unit parabolic input is 
related to the acceleration error constant by e(oo) = lim, _^^.e(t) = 1 /Ku. 
(Hint: See Problem 9.12.) 
9.24. 
Verify Equations (9.26) and (9.27) by performing all differentiations on the full set of scalar simultaneous 
differential equations making up Equation (9.25). 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
9.21. 
9.22. 

230 
Chapter 10 
Analysis and Design of Feedback Control 
Systems: Objectives and Methods 
10.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The basic concepts, mathematical tools, and properties of feedback control systems have been 
presented in the first nine chapters. Attention is now focused on our major goal: analysis and design of 
feedback control systems. 
The methods presented in the next eight chapters are linear techniques, applicable to linear models. 
However, under appropriate circumstances, one or more can also be used for some nonlinear control 
system problems, thereby generating approximate designs when the particular method is sufficiently 
robust. Techniques for solving control system problems represented by nonlinear models are introduced 
in Chapter 19. 
This chapter is mainly devoted to making explicit the objectives and to describing briefly the 
methodology of analysis and design. It also includes one digital system design approach, in Section 10.8. 
that can be considered independently of the several approaches developed in subsequent chapters. 
10.2 
O B J E C T I V E S OF A N A L Y S I S 
The three predominant objectives of feedback control systems analysis are the determination of the 
following system characteristics: 
1. 
The degree or extent of system stability 
2. 
The steady state performance 
3. 
The transient performance 
Knowing whether a system is absolutely stable or not is insufficient information for most purposes. 
If a system is stable, we usually want to know how close it is to being unstable. We need to determine 
its relative stability. 
In Chapter 3 we learned that the complete solution of the equations describing a system may be 
split into two parts. The first, the steady state response, is that part of the complete solution which does 
not approach zero as time approaches infinity. The second, the transient response, is that part of the 
complete solution which approaches zero (or decays) as time approaches infinity. We shall soon see that 
there is a strong correlation between relative stability and transient response of feedback control 
systems. 
10.3 
METHODS OF ANALYSIS 
The general procedure for analyzing a linear control system is the following: 
1. 
Determine the equations or transfer function for each system component. 
2. 
Choose a scheme for representing the system (block diagram or signal flow graph). 
3. 
Formulate the system model by appropriately connecting the components (blocks, or nodes and 
branches). 
4. 
Determine the system response characteristics. 
Several methods are available for determining the response characteristics of linear systems. Direct 
solution of the system equations may be employed to find the steady state and transient solutions 

231 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N OF F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
(Chapters 3 and 4). This technique can be cumbersome for higher than second-order systems, and 
relative stability is difficult to study in the time-domain. 
Four primarily graphical methods are available to the control system analyst which are simpler and 
more direct than time-domain methods for practical linear models of feedback control systems. They 
are: 
1. 
The Root-Locus Method 
2. 
Bode-Plot Representations 
3. 
Nyquist Diagrams 
4. 
Nichols Charts 
The latter three are frequency-domain techniques. A l l four are considered in detail in Chapters 13, 
15, 11, and 17, respectively. 
10.4 
DESIGN OBJECTIVES 
The basic goal of control system design is meeting performance specifications. 
Performance 
specifications are the constraints put on system response characteristics. They may be stated in any 
number of ways. Generally they take two forms: 
1. 
Frequency-domain specifications (pertinent quantities expressed as functions of frequency) 
2. 
Time-domain specifications (in terms of time response) 
The desired system characteristics may be prescribed in either or both of the above forms. In 
general, they specify three important properties of dynamic systems: 
1. 
Speed of response 
2. 
Relative stability 
3. 
System accuracy or allowable error 
Frequency-domain specifications for both continuous and discrete-time systems are often stated i n 
one or more of the following seven ways. T o maintain generality, we define a unified open-loop 
frequency response function 
GH(<A). 
for continuous systems 
for discrete-time systems 
1. 
Gain Margin 
G a i n margin, a measure of relative stability, is defined as the magnitude of the reciprocal of the 
open-loop transfer function, evaluated at the frequency 
at which the phase angle (see chapter 6) is 
- 1 8 0 ° . That is. 
(10.2) 
where 
radians and 
is called the phase crossover frequency. 
2. 
Phase Margin 
Phase margin 
a measure of relative stability, is defined as 180° plus the phase angle 
of the 
open-loop transfer function at unity gain. That is, 
degrees 
(10.3) 
where 
and 
is called the gain crossover frequency. 

232 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
EXAMPLE 10.1. 
The gain and phase margins of a typical continuous-time feedback control system are illustrated 
in Fig. 10-1. 
F i g . 10-1 
3. 
Delay Time 
Delay time Td. interpreted as a frequency-domain specification, is a measure of the speed of 
response, and is given by 
(10.4) 
where 
The average value of 
over the frequencies of interest is usually specified. 
4. 
Bandwidth (BW) 
Roughly speaking, the bandwidth of a system was defined in Chapter 1 as that range of frequencies 
over which the system responds satisfactorily. 
Satisfactory performance is determined by the application and the characteristics of the particular 
system. F o r example, audio amplifiers are often compared on the basis of their bandwidth. A n ideal 
high-fidelity audio amplifier has a flat frequency response from 20 to 20,000 H z . That is. it has a 
passband or bandwidth of 19.980 H z (usually rounded off to 20,000 FTz). Flat frequency response means 
that the magnitude ratio of output to input is essentially constant over the bandwidth. Hence signals in 
the audio spectrum are faithfully reproduced by a 20,000-Hz bandwidth amplifier. The magnitude ratio 
is the absolute value of the system frequency response function. 
The frequency response of a high-fidelity audio amplifier is shown in Fig. 10-2. The magnitude ratio 
is 0.707 of, or approximately 3 db below, its maximum at the cutoff frequencies 
Fig. 10-2 

233 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
db 
is the abbreviation for decibel, defined by the following equation: 
db = 20 l o g I 0 (magnitude ratio) 
(10.5) 
Often the bandwidth of a system is defined as that range of frequencies over which the magnitude 
ratio does not differ by more than — 3 db from is value at a specified frequency. But not always. In 
general, the precise meaning of bandwidth is made clear by the problem description. In any case, 
bandwidth is generally a measure of the speed of response of a system. 
The gain crossover frequency u{ defined in Equation (10.3) is often a good approximation for the 
bandwidth of a closed-loop system. 
The notion of signal sampling, and of uniform sampling lime T, were introduced in Chapters 1 and 
2 (especially in Section 2.4), for systems containing both discrete-time and continuous-time signals, and 
both types of elements, including samplers, hold devices and computers. The value of T is a design 
parameter for such systems and its choice is governed by both accuracy and cost considerations. The 
sampling theorem [9.10] provides an upper bound on T, by requiring the sampling rate to be at least 
1 
twice that of the highest frequency component /
m
a
x of the sampled signal, that is, T< 
. In 
^"fmax 
practice, we might use the cutoff frequency f.2 (as in F i g . 10-2) for / m a x , and a practical rule-of-thumb 
might be to choose T in the range 
< T< ——. Other design requirements, however, may require 
even smaller T values. O n the other hand, the largest value of T consistent with the specifications 
usually yields the lowest cost for system components. 
5. Cutoff Rate 
The cutoff rate is the frequency rate at which the magnitude ratio decreases beyond the cutoff 
frequency « t.. F o r example, the cutoff rate may be specified as 6 db/octave. A n octave is a factor-of-two 
change in frequency. 
6. Resonance Peak M 
The resonance peak M , a measure of relative stability, is the maximum value of the magnitude of 
the closed-loop frequency response. That is, 
(10.6) 
7. Resonant Frequency w 
The resonant frequency up is the frequency at which M occurs. 
EXAMPLE 10.2. The bandwidth BW, cutoff frequency 
resonance peak Mp, and resonant frequency u> for an 
underdamped second-order continuous system are illustrated in Fig. 10-3. 
Fig. 10-3 

234 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
Time-domain specifications are customarily defined in terms oT unit step, ramp, and parabolic 
responses. Each response has a steady state and a transient component. 
Steady stale performance, in terms of steady state error, is a measure of system accuracy when a 
specific input is applied. Figures of merit for steady state performance are, for example, the error 
constants AT . AT,,, and Ka defined in Chapter 9. 
Transient performance is often described in terms of the unit step function response. 
Typical 
specifications are: 
1. Overshoot 
The overshoot is the maximum difference between the transient and steady state solutions for a unit 
step input. It is a measure of relative stability and is often represented as a percentage of the final value 
of the output (steady state solution). 
The following four specifications are measures of the speed of response. 
2. Delay Time Td 
The delay time Td, interpreted as a time-domain specification, is often defined as the time required 
for the response to a unit step input to reach 50% of its final value. 
3. 
Rise Time Tr 
The rise time Tr is customarily defined as the time required for the response to a unit step input to 
rise from 10 to 90 percent of its final value. 
4. Settling Time Tj 
The settling time Ts is most often defined as the time required for the response to a unit step input 
to reach and remain within a specified percentage (frequently 2 or 5%) of its final value. 
5. 
Dominant Time Constant 
The dominant time constant 
T , an alternative measure for settling time, is often defined as the time 
constant associated with the term that dominates the transient response. 
The dominant lime constant is defined in terms of the exponentially decaying character of the 
transient 
response. 
For example, for first and second-order 
underdamped 
continuous 
systems, 
the transient terms have the form Ae~
ai 
and Ae~
a'cos(wllt 
+ <J>), respectively ( a > 0). In each case, the 
decay is governed by e 
The time constant r is defined as the time at which the exponent -at = - 1, 
that is, when the exponential reaches 37% of its initial value. Hence T = 
1/a. 
For continuous feedback control systems of order higher than two, the dominant time constant can 
sometimes be estimated 
from the lime constant of an underdamped 
second-order 
system which 
approximates the higher system. Since 
(10.7) 
I and un (Chapter 3) are the two most significant figures of merit, defined for second-order but often 
useful for higher-order systems. Specifications are often given in terms of f and u>n. 
This concept is developed more fully for both continuous and discrete-time systems in Chapter 14, 
in terms of dominant pole-zero approximations. 
EXAMPLE 10.3. 
The plot of the unit step response of an underdamped continuous second-order system in Fig. 
10-4 illustrates time-domain specifications. 

235 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
Fig. 10-4 
10.5 
SYSTEM 
COMPENSATION 
We assume first that G and H are fixed configurations of components over which the designer has 
no control. T o meet performance specifications for feedback control systems, appropriate compensation 
components {sometimes called equalizers) are normally introduced into the system. Compensation 
components may consist of either passive or active elements, several of which were discussed in 
Chapters 2 and 6. They may be introduced into the forward path (cascade compensation), or the 
feedback path (feedback compensation), as shown in F i g . 10-5: 
Fig. 10-5 
Feedback compensation may also occur i n minor feedback loops (Fig. 10-6). 
Fig. 10-6 

236 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N OF F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
Compensators are normally designed so that the overall system (continuous or discrete) has an 
acceptable transient response, and hence stability characteristics, and a desired or acceptable steady 
state accuracy (Chapter 9). These objectives are often conflicting, because small steady state errors 
usually require large open-loop gains, which typically degrade system stability. F o r this reason, simple 
compensator elements are often combined in a single design. They typically consist of combinations of 
components that modify the gain K a n d / o r time constants T , or otherwise add zeros or poles to GH. 
Passive compensators include passive physical elements such as resistive-capacitive networks, to modify 
K (K < 1), time constants, zeros, or poles; lag, lead, and lag-lead networks are examples (Chapter 6). 
The most common active compensator is the amplifier (K> 
1). A very general one is the P I D 
(proportional-integral-derivative) controller discussed in Chapter 2 and 6 (Examples 2.14 and 6.7), 
commonly used in the design of both analog (continuous) and discrete-time (digital) systems. 
10.6 
DESIGN METHODS 
Design by analysis is the design scheme developed in this book, because it is generally a more 
practical approach, with the exception that direct design of digital systems, discussed in Section 10.8, is 
a true synthesis technique. The previously mentioned analysis methods, reiterated below, are applied to 
design in Chapters 12, 14, 16, and 18. 
1. 
Nyquist Plot (Chapter 12) 
2. 
Root-Locus (Chapter 14) 
3. 
Bode Plot (Chapters 16) 
4. 
Nichols Chart (Chapter 18) 
Control system analysis and design procedures based on these methods have been automated in 
special-purpose computer software packages called Computer-Aided Design ( C A D ) packages. 
O f the four methods listed above, the Nyquist. Bode, and Nichols methods are frequency response 
techniques, because in each of them the properties of GH(co), that is, GH(ju) 
for continuous systems 
or GH(e
J"
T) 
for discrete-time systems [Equation (JO.J)}, are explored graphically as a function of 
angular frequency to. More importantly, analysis and design using these methods is performed in 
fundamentally the same manner for continuous and discrete-time systems, as illustrated in subsequent 
chapters. The only differences (in specific details) stem from the fact that the stability region for 
continuous systems is the left half of the s-plane, and that for discrete-time systems is the unit circle in 
the z-plane. A transformation of variables, however, called the w-transform. permits analysis and design 
of discrete-time systems using specific results developed for continuous systems. We present the major 
features and the results for the w-transform in the next section, for use in analysis and design of control 
systems in subsequent chapters. 
10.7 
T H E iv-TRANSFORM FOR DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN USING 
CONTINUOUS SYSTEM METHODS 
The H-'-transform was defined in Chapter 5 for stability analysis of discrete-time systems. It is a 
bilinear transformation between the complex w-plane and the complex z-plane defined by the pair; 
(10.8) 
where z = jx+jv. The complex variable w is defined as 
(10.9) 

237 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
The following relations among these variables are useful in the analysis and design of discrete-time 
control systems: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
O n the unit circle of the z-plane: 
(10.10) 
(10.11) 
(10.12) 
(10.13) 
(10.14) 
(10.15) 
(10.16) 
(10.17) 
Thus the region inside the unit circle i n the z-plane maps into the left half of the w-plane ( L H P ) ; the 
region outside the unit circle maps into the right half of the w-plane ( R H P ) ; and the unit circle maps 
onto the imaginary axis of the w-plane. Also, rational functions of z map into rational functions of w. 
For these reasons, absolute and relative stability properties of discrete systems can be determined 
using methods developed for continuous systems in the s-plane. Specifically, for frequency 
response 
analysis and design of discrete-time systems i n the w-plane. we generally treat the w-plane as if it were 
the s-plane. However, we must account for distortions in certain mappings, particularly angular 
frequency, when interpreting the results. 
F r o m Equation (10.17), we define an angular frequency u>w on the imaginary axis i n the w-plane by 
This new angular frequency uw in the w-plane is related to the true angular frequency co in the z-plane 
by 
(10.18) 
(10.19) 
The following properties of co„, are useful in plotting functions for frequency response analysis in the 
w-plane: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
(10.20) 
(10.21) 
(10.22) 
(10.23) 
The range 
is mapped into the range 
Algorithm for Frequency Response Analysis and Design Using the w-Transform 
The procedure is summarized as follows: 
1. 
Substitute 
for 
in the open-loop transfer function 
(10.24) 

238 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
2. 
Generate frequency response curves, that is, Nyquist Plots, Bode Plots, etc., for 
{10.25) 
3. 
Analyze relative stability properties of the system in the vt-plane (as if it were the .s-plane). For 
example, determine gain and phase margins, crossover frequencies, the closed-loop frequency response, 
the bandwidth, or any other desired frequency-response-related characteristics. 
4. 
Transform w-plane critical frequencies (values of w w) determined in Step 3 into angular 
frequencies (values of « ) in the true frequency domain (z-plane), using Equation (10.19). 
5. 
If this is a design problem, design appropriate compensators to modify GH'(joiw) 
to satisfy 
performance specifications. 
This algorithm is developed further and applied in Chapters 15 through 18. 
EXAMPLE 10.4. 
The open-loop transfer function 
(10.26) 
is transformed into the w-domain by substituting 
in the expression for 
which yields 
(10.27) 
Relative stability analysis of 
is postponed until Chapter 15. 
10.8 
ALGEBRAIC DESIGN OF DIGITAL SYSTEMS, INCLUDING DEADBEAT SYSTEMS 
When digital computers or microprocessors are components of a discrete-time system, compen­
sators can be readily implemented in software or firmware, thereby facilitating direct design of the 
system by algebraic solution for the transfer function of the compensator that satisfies given design 
objectives. F o r example, suppose we wish to construct a system having a given closed-loop transfer 
function C/R, 
which might be defined by requisite closed-loop characteristics such as bandwidth, 
steady state gain, response time, etc. Then, given the plant transfer function G2(z). the required forward 
loop compensator Gy(z) 
can be determined from the relation for the closed-loop transfer function of 
the canonical system given in Section 7.5: 
(10.28) 
Then the required compensator is determined by solving for 
(10.29) 
EXAMPLE 10.5. 
The unity feedback (H= 1) system in Fig. 10-7, with r=0.1-see uniform and synchronous 
sampling, is required to have a steady state gain (C/R)(l) = 1 and a rise time Tr of 2 sec or less. 
Fig. 10-7 

239 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
The simplest 
that satisfies the requirements is 
However, the required compensator would be 
which has infinite gain, a zero at z = 0.5, and no poles, which is unrealizable. For realizability (Section 6.6), Gl 
must have at least as many poles as zeros. Consequently, even with cancellation of the poles and zeros of G-, by 
zeros and poles of C , , C/R must contain at least n — m poles, where n is the number of poles and m is the 
number of zeros of G2 • 
The simplest realizable C/R has the form: 
As shown in Problem 10.10, the rise time for a first-order discrete-time system, like the one given by C/R above, is 
Solving for a, we get 
Then 
and, for the steady state gain 
to be 
Therefore the required compensator is 
Wc see that G, has added a pole to 
making the system type 1 This is due to the requirement that 
the steady state gain equal 1. 
Deadbeat systems are a class of discrete-time systems that can be readily designed using the direct 
approach described above. By definition, the closed-loop transient response of a deadbeat system has 
finite length, that is, it becomes zero, and remains zero, after a finite number of sample times. In 
response to a step input, the output of such a system is constant at each sample time after a finite 
period. This is termed a deadbeat response. 
EXAMPLE 10.6. 
For a unity feedback system with forward transfer function 
introduction of a feedforward compensator with 
results in the closed-loop transfer function: 
The impulse response of this system is 
The step response is 
and 
at 

240 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N OF F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
In general, systems can be designed to exhibit a deadbeat response with a transient response n — m 
samples long, where m is the number of zeros and n is the number of poles of the plant. However, to 
avoid intersample ripple (periodic or aperiodic variations) in mixed continuous/discrete-time systems, 
where G2(z) has a continuous input a n d / o r output, the zeros of G2(z) should not be cancelled by the 
compensator as in Example 10.5. The transient response i n these cases is a minimum of n samples i n 
length and the closed loop transfer function has n poles at z = 0. 
EXAMPLE 10.7. 
For a system with 
let 
Then 
For a deadbeat response, we choose 
and therefore 
There are many possible solutions for a, b, and K and one is a = 0.3, b = -0.75, and A~ - 0.45. 
If it is required that the closed-loop system be type /, it is necessary that Gl(z)G2(z) 
contain / poles at z = 1. 
If <J2(Z) has the required number of poles, they should be retained, that is, not cancelled by zeros of G^z). If 
G2(z) does not have all the required poles at z = 1, they can be added in G'i(z). 
EXAMPLE 10.8. 
For the system with 
suppose a type 2 closed-loop system with deadbeat response is desired. This can be achieved with a compensator of 
the form: 
which adds a pole at z = 1. Then 
If a deadbeat response is desired, we must have 
and therefore 
and 
giving 
and 

241 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
Solved Problems 
10.1. 
The graph of Fig. 10-8 represents the input-output characteristic of a controller-amplifier for a 
feedback control system whose other components are linear. What is the linear range of e(t) 
for 
this system? 
Fig. 10-8 
The amplifier-controller operates linearly over the approximate range 
10.2. 
Determine the gain margin for the system in which GH\ 
Writing 
I in polar form, we have 
Then 
Hence, by Equation 
gain margin 
10.3. 
Determine the phase margin for the system of Problem 10.2. 
We have 
only when 
Therefore 
radians 
10.4. 
Determine the average value of 
over the frequency range 
is given by Equation (10.4). 
for 
and 
Therefore 
10.5. 
Determine the bandwidth for the system with transfer function 
We havp 
A sketch of 
versus 
is given in Fig. 10-9. 

242 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N OF F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
Fig. 10-9 
is determined from 
Since 
is a strictly decreasing function of 
positive frequency, we have BW 
rad. 
10.6. How many octaves are between (a) 200 Hz and 800 Hz, (b) 200 Hz and 100 Hz, (c) 10,048 
rad/sec (rps) and 100 Hz? 
(a) Two octaves. 
(b) One octave. 
(c) 
1600 Hz. Hence there are four octaves between 10,048 rps and 100 Hz. 
10.7. Determine the resonance peak M and the resonant frequency a> for the system whose transfer 
function is 
Setting the derivative of 
equal to zero, we get 
Therefore 
10.8. The output in response to a unit step function input for a particular continuous control system is 
What is the delay time 
The output is given as a function of time. Therefore, the time-domain definition of Td presented in 
Section 10.4 is applicable. The final value of the output is ]imt _xc(t) = 1. Hence Td (at 50% of the final 
value) is the solution of 0.5 = 1 - e~
Tj, and is equal to log„(2), or 0.693. 
10.9. Find the rise time 
At 10% of the final value, 0.1 = 1 - e''
1; hence tx = 0.104 sec. At 90% of the final value, 0.9 = 1 - <r'
2; 
thus r 2 = 2.302 sec. Then Tr = 2.302 - 0.104 = 2.198 sec. 
10.10. Determine the rise time of the first-order discrete system 
For a step input, the output transform is 
with 
and the time response is y(k) = l—a
k 
for k = 0,1,... . Since y(co) = 1, the rise time Tr is the time 
required for this unit step response to go from 0.1 to 0.9. Since the sampled response may not have the 
exact values 0.1 and 0.9, we must find the sampled values that bound these values. Thus, for the lower 
value, y(k) < 0.1, or 1 - a
k < 0.1 and therefore a
k > 0.9. Similarly for y(k + Tr/T) = \ - a
k + T '
/
T > 0.9, 
a * + r P / r < o . i . 

243 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N OF F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 10] 
Dividing the two expressions, we get 
or 
Then, by taking logarithms of both sides, we get 
10.11. Verify the six properties of the vv-transform in Section 10.7. Equations (10.10) through (10.17). 
From 
and 
Thus 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
means 
which implies 
means 
which implie.' 
means 
which implies 
The sixth property follows from elementary trigonometric identities. 
10.12. Show that the transformed angular frequency w v, is related to the real frequency w by Equation 
(10.19). 
From Problem 10.11, |z| = 1 also implies that n = j[v/(n + 1)] = ju„. [Equation (10.17)]. But |z| = 1 
implies that z = e
!uT = cos to 77 + /' sin to7 = \i +jv [ quation (10.15)}. Therefore 
Finally, substituting the following half-angle identities of trigonometry into the last expression: 
we have 

244 
A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 10 
10.13. F o r the uniformly and synchronously sampled system given in Fig. 10-10, determine G j ( z ) so 
that the system is type 1 with a deadbeat response. 
Fig. 10-10 
The forward loop z-transform, assuming fictitious sampling of the output c(t) (sec Section 6.8), is 
determined from Equation (6.9): 
where 
Let <7[(z) have the form G}(z) = (z - e
 
1 )/(z + b). Then, if wc also assume a fictitious sampler at the 
input r(t), we can determine the closed-loop z-domain transfer function: 
For a deadbeat response, 
Then 
and 
Since 
For this system, with continuous input and output signals, (C/R)(z) determined above gives the closed-loop 
input-output relationship at the sampling times only. 
Supplementary Problems 
10.14. Determine the phase margin for GH 
10.15. Find the bandwidth for GH = 6Q/s(s + 2)(s + 6) for the closed-loop system. 
10.16. Calculate the gain and phase margin for GH = 432/i-(^
2 + 13* + 115). 
10.17. Calculate the phase margin and bandwidth for GH = 640,A(.T + 4)(.v + 16) for the closed-loop system. 

245 
A N A L Y S I S A N D DESIGN O F F E E D B A C K C O N T R O L S Y S T E M S 
C H A R 10] 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
10.14. 
10.15. 
10.16. 
10.17. 
Gain margin = 34, phase margin = 65° 

246 
Chapter 11 
Nyquist Analysis 
11.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Nyquist analysis, a frequency response method, is essentially a graphical procedure for determining 
absolute and relative stability of closed-loop control systems. Information about stability is available 
directly from a graph of the open-loop frequency response function GM(u), once the feedback system 
has been put into canonical form. 
Nyquist methods are applicable to both continuous and discrete-time control systems, and the 
methodological development for Nyquist analysis is presented here for both types of systems, with some 
emphasis given to continuous systems, for pedagogical purposes. 
There are several reasons why the Nyquist method may be chosen to determine information about 
system stability. The methods of Chapter 5 (Routh, Hurwitz, etc.) are often inadequate because, with 
few exceptions, they can only be used for determining absolute stability, and are only applicable to 
systems whose characteristic equation is a finite polynomial in s or z. F o r example, when a signal is 
delayed by T seconds somewhere in the loop of a continuous system, exponential terms of the form 
e
 
T v appear in the characteristic equation. The methods of Chapter 5 can be applied to such systems if 
e~
Ts 
is approximated by a few terms of the power series 
but this technique yields only approximate stability information. The Nyquist method handles systems 
with time delays without the necessity of approximations, and hence yields exact results about both 
absolute and relative stability of the system. 
Nyquist techniques are also useful for obtaining information about transfer functions of compo­
nents or systems from experimental frequency response data. The Polar Plot (Section 11.5) may be 
directly graphed 
from sinusoidal steady state measurements on the components 
making up the 
open-loop transfer 
function. This feature is very useful in the determination of system stability 
characteristics when transfer functions of loop components are not available i n analytic form, or when 
physical systems are to be tested and evaluated experimentally. 
In the next several sections we present the mathematical preliminaries and techniques necessary for 
generating Polar Plots and Nyquist Stability Plots of feedback control systems, and the mathematical 
basis and properties of the Nyquist Stability Criterion. The remaining sections of this chapter deal with 
the interpretation and uses of Nyquist analysis for the determination of relative stability and evaluation 
of the closed-loop frequency response. 
11.2 
PLOTTING COMPLEX FUNCTIONS OF A COMPLEX VARIABLE 
A real function of a real variable is easily graphed on a single set of coordinate axes. For example, 
the real function f(x). 
x real, is easily plotted in rectangular coordinates with x as the abscissa and 
f(x) 
as the ordinate. A complex function of a complex variable, such as the transfer function P(s) with 
j = CT + ju, cannot be plotted on a single set of coordinates. 
The complex variable s = a +joi depends on two independent quantities, the real and imaginary 
parts of s. Hence s cannot be represented by a line. The complex function P(s) also has real and 
imaginary parts. It too cannot be graphed in a single dimension. Similarly, the complex variable 
z=p+jv 
and discrete-time system complex transfer 
functions P(z) 
cannot be graphed in one 
dimension. 

247 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
In general, in order to plot P(s) with s — a + ju>. two two-dimensional graphs are required. The first 
is a graph of ju 
versus o called the .v-plane, the same set of coordinates as those used for plotting 
pole-zero maps in Chapter 4. The second is the imaginary part of P(s) 
(Im P) versus the real part of 
P(s) 
( R e /
3 ) called the P(A )-plane. The corresponding coordinate planes for discrete-time systems are 
the i-plane and the P(-)-plane. 
The correspondence between points in the two planes is called a mapping or transformation. For 
example, points in the .y-plane are mapped into points of the P(.s)-plane by the function P (Fig. 11-1). 
Fig. 11-1 
In general, only a very specific locus of points in the .v-plane (or the z-plane) is mapped into the 
P(.v)-plane [or the P ( z )-plane]. For Nyquist Stability Plots this locus is called the Nyquist Path, the 
subject of Section 11.7, 
For 
the special case a — 0, .v = j « , the .v-plane degenerates into a line, and P{ju>) may be 
represented in a P( yw)-plane with w as a parameter. Polar Plots are constructed in the P( / « ) - p l a n e 
from this line (s =y'w) in the .v-plane. 
EXAMPLE 11.1. 
Consider the complex function P(s) = s
1 + 1. The point .y0 = 2 +j4 is mapped into the point 
P(i„) = P(2 + J4) = (2 f _/4)
2 + 1 = - 11 + jl6 (Fig. 11-2). 
Fig. 11-2 
11.3 
DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions are required in subsequent sections. 
Definition 11.1: 
If the derivative of P at s0 defined by 
exists at all points in a region of the .v-plane, that is, if the limit is finite and unique, 
then P is analytic in that region [same definition for P(z) 
in the z-plane, with z 
replacing s and z 0 replacing ,v0]. 

248 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP 11 
Transfer functions of practical physical systems (those considered in this book) are analytic in the 
finite s-plane (or finite z-plane) except at the poles of P(s) [or poles of P(z)\ 
In subsequent 
developments, when there is no danger of ambiguity, and when a given statement applies to both P(s) 
and P{z), then P{s) or P(z) may be abbreviated as P with no argument. 
Definition 11.2: 
A point at which P [P(s) or P{z)\ is not analytic is a singular point or singularity of 
P [P(s) or P{z)\. 
A pole of P [P(s) or P(z)] is a singular point. 
Definition 11.3: 
A closed contour in a complex plane is a continuous curve beginning and ending at 
the same point (Fig. 11-3). 
Fig. 11-3 
Definition 11.4: 
A l l points to the right of a contour as it is traversed in a prescribed direction are 
said to be enclosed by it (Fig. 11-4). 
Fig. 11-4 
Definition 11.5: 
A clockwise (CW) traverse around a contour is defined as the positive direction 
(Fig. 11-5). 
Fig. 11-5 
Definition 11.6: 
A closed contour in the .P-plane is said to make n positive encirclements of the 
origin if a radial line drawn from the origin to a point on the P curve rotates in a 
clockwise ( C W ) direction through 360n degrees in completely traversing the closed 

249 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
path. If the path is traversed in a counterclockwise ( C C W ) direction, a negative 
encirclement is obtained. The total number of encirclements A^, is equal to the C W 
minus the C C W encirclements. 
EXAMPLE 11.2. 
The P-plane contour in Fig. 11-6 encircles the origin once. That is, NQ = 1. Beginning at point 
a, we rotate a radial line from the origin to the contour in a C W direction to point c. The angle subtended is 
+ 270°. From c to d the angle increases, then decreases, and the sum total is 0°. From d to e and back to d again, 
the angle swept out by the radial line is again 0°. d to c is 0° and c to a is clearly +90°. Hence the total angle is 
270° + 90° = 360°. Therefore Nu = 1. 
Fig. 11-6 
11.4 
PROPERTIES OF THE MAPPING P(s) or P(z) 
A l l mappings P [P(s) or P(z)] considered in the remainder of this chapter have the following 
properties. 
1. 
P is a single-valued function. That is, every point in the s-plane (or the z-plane) maps into one 
and only one point in the P-plane. 
2. 
s-plane (z-plane) contours avoid singular points of P. 
3. 
P is analytic except possibly at a finite number of points (singularities) in the s-plane (or the 
z-plane). 
4. 
Every closed contour in the s-plane (or the z-plane) maps into a closed contour in the /"-plane. 
5. 
P is a conformal mapping. This means that the direction of and the angle between any two 
intersecting curves at their point of intersection in the s-plane (or the z-plane) are preserved by 
the mapping of these curves into the P-plane. 
6. 
The mapping P obeys the principle of arguments. That is, the total number of encirclements N0 of 
the origin made by a closed P contour in the P-plane, mapped from a closed s-plane (or 
z-plane) contour, is equal to the number of zeros Z
0 minus the number of poles P0 of P 
enclosed by the the s-plane (or z-plane) contour. That is, 
(11.1) 
7. 
If the origin is enclosed by the P contour, then 7V0 > 0. If the origin is not enclosed by the P 
contour, then /V 0 < 0. That is, 
enclosed 
not enclosed 
The sign of A' 0 is easily determined by shading the region to the right of the contour in the 
prescribed direction. If the origin falls in a shaded region, N{) > 0; if not, A
r
0 < 0. 
EXAMPLE 11.3. 
The principle of conformal mapping is illustrated in Fig. 11-7. Curves C, and C2 are mapped 
into C{ and C{. The angle between the tangents to these curves at sa and P(.ia) is equal to a, and the curves turn 
right at sit and at P(slt). as indicated by the arrows in both graphs. 

250 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-7 
EXAMPLE 11.4. 
A certain transfer function P(s) is known to have one zero in the right half of the j-plane, and 
this zero is enclosed by the s-plane contour mapped into the P(j)-plane in Fig. 11-8. Points 5 1 , i 2 > * 3 and 
P(si), P(s2), P(s3) 
determine the directions of their respective contours. The shaded region to the right of the 
/"(jj-plane contour indicates that N0 < 0, since the origin does not he in the shaded region. But, clearly, the P(s) 
contour encircles the origin once in a C C W direction. Hence N0= - 1 . Thus the number of poles of P(s) enclosed 
by the .s-plane contour is P0 = Z 0 — N0 = 1 — (— 1) = 2. 
Fig. 11-8 
11.5 
POLAR PLOTS 
A continuous system transfer function P(s) 
may be represented in the frequency domain as a 
sinusoidal transfer function by substituting j'co for s i n the expression for P(s). 
The resulting form 
P(ju) 
is a complex function of the single variable co. Therefore it may be plotted in two dimensions, 
with co as a parameter, and written in the following equivalent forms: 
(77.2) 
(11.3) 
Polar Form: 
Euler Form: 
is the magnitude of the complex function 
and 
is its phase angle, 

251 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
is the real part, and 
is the imaginary part of 
Therefore 
may also be written as 
Rectangular or Complex Form: 
(11.4) 
A Polar Plot of P(ju) 
is a graph of Im P(jio) 
versus ReP(ju) 
in the finite portion of the 
/>( /w)-plane for - oo < co < oo. A t singular points of P(./co) (poles on the y'w-axis), \P(jw)\ -> cc. A 
Polar Plot may also be generated on polar coordinate paper. The magnitude and phase angle of 
P(ju) 
are plotted with co varying from - co to + oo. 
The locus of P(ju) is identical on either rectangular or polar coordinates. The choice of coordinate 
system may depend on whether P(ju>) is available in analytic form or as experimental data. If P(ju) is 
expressed analytically, the choice of coordinates depends on whether it is easier to write P(ju>) in the 
form of Equation (11.2), in which case polar coordinates are used, or in the form of Equation (11.4) for 
rectangular coordinates. Experimental data on P(y'w) are usually expressed in terms of magnitude and 
phase angle. In this case, polar coordinates are the natural choice. 
EXAMPLE 11.5. 
The Polar Plots in Fig. 11-9 are identical; only the coordinate systems arc different. 
Fig. 11-9 
For discrete-time systems, Polar Plots are defined in the frequency domain in the same manner. 
Recall that we can write z = e
sT (see Section 4.9). Therefore a discrete transfer function P(z) = 
P(e
sl) 
and, if we set s = ju. P(z) becomes P(e
juT). 
The Polar Plot of P(e
J"
T) 
is a graph of Im 
P(e^
T) 
versus R e /
> ( t " "
j T ) in the finite portion of the P(e'^
T)-p[ane, 
for — cc < co < cc. 
We often discuss Polar Plots, their properties, and many results dependent on these in subsequent 
sections in a unified manner for both continuous and discrete-time systems. T o do this, we adopt for 
our general transfer function P the unified representation for frequency response functions given i n 
Equation (10.1) for GH, that is, we use the generic representation P(u) defined by 
for continuous systems 
for discrete-time systems 
In these terms, Equations (11.2) through (11.4) become 

252 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
We use this unified notation in much of the remainder of this chapter, and in subsequent chapters, 
particularly where the results are applicable to both continuous and discrete-time systems. 
11.6 
PROPERTIES OF POLAR PLOTS 
The following are several useful properties of Polar Plots of 
1. 
The Polar Plot for 
where a is any complex constant, is identical to the plot for P(oi) with the origin of coordinates 
shifted to the point — a= 
— (Re a + j Im a). 
2. 
The Polar Plot of the transfer function of a time-invariant, linear system exhibits conjugate 
symmetry. That is, the graph for — oo < w < 0 is the mirror image about the horizontal axis of 
the graph for 0 < « < oc. 
3. 
The Polar Plot may be constructed directly from a Bode Plot (Chapter 15), if one is available. 
Values of magnitude and phase angle at various frequencies « on the Bode Plot represent 
points along the locus of the Polar Plot. 
4. 
Constant increments of frequency are not generally separated by equal intervals along the Polar 
Plot. 
EXAMPLE 11.6. 
For a = 1 and P = GH, the Polar Plot of the function 1 + GH is given by the plot for GH, with 
the origin of coordinates shifted to the point - I + jO in rectangular coordinates (Fig. 11-10). 
Fig. 11-10 
EXAMPLE 11.7. 
To illustrate plotting of a transfer function, consider the open-loop continuous system transfer 
function 
Letting s = joi and rewriting GH{ ju>) in the form of Equation (11.2) (polar form), wc have 

253 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Substitution of several other positive values of to yields a semicircular locus for 0 < to < oo. The graph for 
— oo < co < 0 is the mirror image about the diameter of this semicircle. It is shown in Fig. 11-11 by a dashed line. 
Note the strikingly unequal increments of frequency between the arcs ab and be. 
Fig. 11-11 
Polar Plots are not very difficult to sketch for very simple transfer functions, although they are 
usually a little more difficult to determine for discrete-time systems, as illustrated i n Example 11.11. But 
the computations can be very laborious for complicated P(s) or P(z). O n the other hand, widely 
available computer programs for frequency response analysis, or more generally for plotting complex 
functions of a complex variable, typically generate accurate Polar Plots quite conveniently. 
11.7 
THE NYQUIST PATH 
For continuous systems, the Nyquist Path is a closed contour i n the .v-plane, enclosing the entire 
right half of the i-plane ( R H P ) . For discrete-time systems, the corresponding Nyquist Path encloses the 
entire z-plane outside the unit circle. 
For continuous systems, in order that the Nyquist Path should not pass through any poles of P(s), 
small semicircles along the imaginary axis or at the origin of P(s) are required i n the path if P(s) has 
poles on the y'to-axis or at the origin. The radii p of these small circles are interpreted as approaching 
zero i n the limit. 
T o enclose the R H P at infinity, and thus any poles in the interior of the R H P , a large semicircular 
path is drawn in the R H P and the radius R of this semicircle is interpreted as being infinite in the limit. 

254 
NYQUIST A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
The generalized Nyquist Path in the s-plane is illustrated by the ^-plane contour in Fig. 11-12. It is 
apparent that every pole and zero of P(s) in the RHP is enclosed by the Nyquist Path when it is mapped 
into the P(.y)-plane. 
Fig. 11-12 
The various portions of the Nyquist Path can be described analytically in the following manner. 
Path 
Path 
Path 
Path 
Path 
Path 
Path 
Path 
(77.5) 
(77.6) 
(11.8) 
(11.9) 
(11.10) 
(U.ll) 
(11.12) 
The generalized Nyquist Path in the z-plane is given in Fig. 11-13. Every pole and zero of P(z) 
outside the unit circle is enclosed by the Nyquist Path when it is mapped into the P(z)-plane. In 
traversing the unit circle as a function of increasing angular frequency w, any poles of P(z) on the unit 
circle, which may include "integrators" at z = l (corresponding to z = e
o
r = l 
when 5 = 0), are 
excluded by infinitesimal circular arcs. For example, one pair of complex conjugate poles on the unit 
circle is shown in Fig. 11-13, circumvented by arcs of radius p - » 0 . The remainder of the z-plane 
outside the unit circle is enclosed by the large circle of radius R -» ao shown in Fig. 11-13. 

255 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11-13 
The unit circle in the z-plane has a practical feature not shared by the Nyquist Path in the .v-plane, 
one that facilitates drawing Polar Plots, as well as having other consequences in designing digital 
systems. First, we define the angular sampling frequency w ! = 2 w / 7 ' (radians per unit time). The 
advantage is that the unit circle repeats itself every angular sampling frequency cov as w increases. This 
is shown in Fig. 11-14(0), which illustrates that the portion of the j'w-axis in the .v-plane between 
Fig. 11-14 
( A ) 

256 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
—jois/2 and +ju,/2 maps into the entire unit circle in the z-plane. This property is useful in drawing 
Polar 
Plots of functions 
P(z) = P(e
JuT), 
because the same Polar Plot is obtained 
for 
nus <«<(« 
+ l)ws, for any n = ±1, ±2,... 
. Also, since the circular arc from co = 0 to us/2 
is the 
mirror image of that from co = — co3./2 to 0, the function Pie-'"
7) 
need only be evaluated from 
w = — w,/2 to 0 to obtain a complete Polar Plot, taking advantage of the symmetry of the mapping 
(Property 2, Section 11.6). 
It is sometimes also convenient to treat the Polar Plot mapping as a function of wT rather than co. 
Then the strip —(us/2)T < uiT < 0 is equivalent to — IT < wT < 0 (in radians), because w,/2 = 77/7'; this 
strip is mapped into the lower half of the unit circle in polar coordinates, from - 1 8 0 ° (-IT radians) to 
0° or radians [Fig. 11-14(6)]. 
11.8 
T H E NYQUIST STABILITY PLOT 
The Nyquist Stability Plot, an extension of the Polar Plot, is a mapping of the entire Nyquist Path 
into the P-plane. It is constructed using the mapping properties of Sections 11.4 and 11.6 and, for 
continuous systems, Equations (77.5) through (11.8) and Equation (11.12). A carefully drawn sketch is 
sufficient for most purposes. 
A general construction procedure is outlined for continuous systems in the following steps. 
Step 1: 
Check P(s) for poles on the y^-axis and at the origin. 
Step 2: 
Using Equation (77.5) through (11.7), sketch the image of path ad in the P(s)-plane. If 
there are no poles on the yco-axis, Equation (11.6) need not be employed. In this case, Step 
2 should read: Sketch the Polar Plot of P(joi)-
Step 3: 
Draw the mirror image about the real axis ReP of the sketch resulting from Step 2. This is 
the mapping of path fi. 
Step 4: 
Use Equation (11.8) to plot the image of path def. This path at infinity usually plots into a 
point in the P(s)-plane. 
Step 5: 
Employ Equation (11.12) to plot the image of path ija. 
Step 6: 
Connect all curves drawn in the previous steps. Recall that the image of a closed contour 
is closed. The conformal mapping property helps by determining the image in the 
P(s)-plane of the corner angles of the semicircles in the Nyquist Path. 
The procedure is similar for discrete-time systems, with the Nyquist Path given in Fig. 11-13 
instead, as illustrated in Example 11.11 and Problems 11.65 through 11.72. 
11.9 
NYQUIST STABILITY PLOTS OF PRACTICAL FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS 
For Nyquist stability analysis of linear feedback control systems, P(w) is equal to the open-loop 
transfer function GH(u). The most common control systems encountered in practice are those classified 
as type 0,1,2,.... / systems (Chapter 9). 
EXAMPLE 11.8. 
Type 0 continuous system 
By definition, a type 0 system has no poles at the origin. This particular system has no poles on the /'co-axis. 
The Nyquist Path is given in Fig. 11-15. 

257 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11-15 
Fig. 11-16 
The Polar Plot for this loop transfer function was constructed in Example 11.7. and it is shown in Fig. 11-16. 
This plot is the image of the 7'tj-axis, or path fad of the Nyquist Path, in the GH(s (-plane. The semicircular path def 
at infinity is mapped into the G/7(i)-planc in the following manner. Equation (11.8) implies substitution of 
5 = l i m R _ x 
Re'° into the expression for GH(s), where 90° < 6 < - 90°. Hence 
By the elementary properties of limits, 
But since 
then 
and the infinite semicircle plots into a point at the origin. Of course, this computation was unnecessary for this 
simple example because the Polar Plot produces a completely closed contour in the G//(i')-plane. In fact. Polar 
Plots of all type 0 systems exhibit this property. The Nyquist Stability Plot is a replica of the Polar Plot with the 
axes relabeled, and is given in Fig. 11-17. 
Fig. 11-17 
EXAMPLE 11.9. 
Type 1 continuous system 
There is one pole at the origin. The Nyquist Path is given in Fig. 11-18. 

258 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-18 
Path 
and 
At extreme values of w we have 
As u> increases in the interval 0 < L O < O O , the magnitude of 67/ decreases from x to 0 and the phase angle 
decreases steadily from —90° to —180°. Therefore the contour does not cross the negative real axis, but 
approaches it from below as shown in Fig. 11-19. 
Fig. 11-19 
Fig. 11-20 
Path 
is the mirror image about Rc GH of path 
Since points 
and 
meet at the origin, the origin is 
clearly the image of path del. Application of Equation (11.8) is therefore unnecessary. 
Path 
where wc have used the fact that (pe'* + 1) -* 1 as p -» 0. Hence path ija maps into a semicircle of infinite radius. 
For point /, GH = ao/90°; 
for point j, GH = O Q / 0
0 ; and for point a, GH = oo/-9Q°. The resulting Nyquist 
Stability Plot is given in Fig. 11-20. 
Path i'j'a' could also have been determined in the following manner. The Nyquist Path makes a 90° turn to 
the right at point 
hence by conformal mapping, a 90° right turn must be made at. i' in the GH(sYplane. The 
same goes for point a'. Since both /' and a' arc points at infinity, and since the Nyquist Stability Plot must be a 
closed contour, a CW semicircle of infinite radius must join point /' to point a'. 

259 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Type / Continuous Systems 
The Nyquist Stability Plot of a type / system includes / infinite semicircles in its path. There are 
180/ degrees i n the connecting arc at infinity of the G//(s)-plane. 
EXAMPLE 11.10. The type 3 system with 
has three infinite semicircles in its Nyquist Stability Plot (Fig. 11-21). 
Fig. 11-21 
Discrete-Time Systems 
Nyquist Stability Plots of discrete-time systems are drawn in the same manner as above, the only 
difference being that the Nyquist Path is that given in F i g . 11-13, instead of Fig. 11-12. 
EXAMPLE 11.11. 
Consider the type 1 digital control system with open-loop transfer function 
The Polar Plot of GH is determined by first mapping the lower half of the unit circle in the z-plane into the 
G/7-plane. This is readily accomplished with the aid of the mapping illustrated in Fig. ll-14(ft), that is, we evaluate 
GH(e'"
T) for increasing values of coT, from - 1 8 0 ° to 0° (or — -n to 0 radians). For given values of K and T, say 
K=l 
and 7 = 1 , 
For hand calculations, a combination of the Polar Form, Euler Form, and Complex Form are useful in evaluating 
GH(e
J"
T) at different values of co, because e
j"
T = l/coT(rad) = cos(coT) + j s i n ( t o r ) = Re(e
jaT) + j Jm(e
JaT). At 
<o = — 77 rad (—180°), we have 

260 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Then, at 
Similarly, we find that GII(e
J2') docs not exist, but l i m ^ 
36irGII(e
J<') 
= lira,,,^nGH(e-'") = 
x/90°. 
To complete the sketch of this half of the Polar Plot, we need to evaluate GH(e'
u) at a few more values of to. 
We readily find CH{e
 
/
m
m ) = 1 5 9 / 9 0 . 5 ° , GU(e "*
/n) 
= 1 . H / I 2 7 ° , and G W ( e -
; '
/ , , J = Q . 7 7 9 / T 5 9
0 . The result 
is shown as the dashed curve from a' to b' in Fig. 1 1 - 2 2 , the mapping of a to b in Fig. 11-13. The remaining 
portion of the Polar Plot, for co = 0 to TT, from g' to a' in Fig. 11-22, is the mirror image of a' to b' about the real 
axis, by Property 2 of Section 11.6. This portion, from g' to a', is drawn as a solid curve, keeping with the 
convention that the Polar Plot is highlighted for positive values of to, 0 < to77< (2n - ljw, n = 1. 2 
Fig. 
1 1 - 2 2 
The Nyquist Stability Plot is determined by completing the mapping of Fig. 11-13 segments h to <\ c to d, d 
to <?, and / to g, to the (7//-plane. Using the mapping properties of Section 11.4 and limit calculations, GH(e'") 
makes a right turn at b\ from s o / 9 0 ° to <x/()° at c', then to ii/0° 
at 
and at e', and o c / 0 ° at / ' to ^ / - 90° 
at g', using limit operations for radii p and R in Fig. 1 1 - 1 3 . For example, lim^ , ( i C f f ( z = 1 +pe'") for 
- 90° < 6 < 0
a, provides the mapping of the arc from b to c in Fig. 11-13 into the arc from b' (oc/90°) 
to c ' ( o c / 0 ° ) 
in Fig. 1 1 - 2 2 . 
11.10 
T H E NYQUIST STABILITY CRITERION 
A linear closed-loop continuous control system is absolutely stable if the roots of the characteristic 
equation have negative real parts (Section 5.2). Equivalently, the poles of the closed-loop 
transfer 
function, or the zeros of the denominator, 1 + GII(s), of the closed-loop transfer function, must lie in 

261 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
the left-half plane (LHP). For continuous systems, the Nyquist Stability Criterion establishes the 
number of zeros of 1 + GH(s) in the RHP directly from the Nyquist Stability Plot of GH(s). For 
discrete-time control systems, the Nyquist Stability Criterion establishes the number of zeros of 
1 + GH(z) outside the unit circle of the z-plane, the region of instability for discrete systems. 
For either class of systems, continuous or discrete-time, the Nyquist Stability Criterion may be 
stated as follows. 
Nyquist Stability Criterion 
The closed-loop control system whose open-loop transfer function is GH is stable if and only if 
(11.14) 
(11.13) 
where 
_ (number of poles (> 0) of GH in the R H P for continuous systems 
0 
| number of poles (> 0) of GH outside the unit circle (of the z-plane) for discrete-time systems 
N = total number of C W encirclements of the ( - 1 , 0 ) point (i.e., GH = -1) in the 
G//-plane (continuous or discrete) 
If N > 0, the number of zeros Z 0 of 1 -I- GH in the RHP for continuous systems, or outside the unit 
circle for discrete systems, is determined by 
If 7V"<0, the (-1,0) point is not enclosed by the Nyquist Stability Plot. Therefore N < 0 if the 
region to the right of the contour in the prescribed direction does not include the (— 1,0) point. Shading 
this region helps significantly in determining whether TV < 0. 
If 
< 0 and Pa = 0, then the system is absolutely stable if and only if N — 0; that is, if and only if 
the (-1,0) point does not lie in the shaded region. 
EXAMPLE 11.12. 
The Nyquist Stability Plot for GH(s) - l/s(s+ 1) was determined in Example 11.9 and is 
shown in Fig. 11-23. The region to the right of the contour has been shaded. Clearly, the ( — 1,0) point is not in the 
shaded region; therefore it is not enclosed by the contour and so A' < 0. The poles of GH(s) arc at s = 0 and 
s = — 1, neither of which are in the RHP; hence P0 = 0. Thus 
and the system is absolutely stable. 
Fig. 11-23 
Fig. 11-24 
EXAMPLE 11.13. The Nyquist Stability Plot for Gll(s) = l/s(s - 1) is given in Fig. 11-24. The region to the 
right of the contour has been shaded and the (-1,0) point is enclosed; then N > 0. (It is clear that N = 1.) The 
poles of GH arc at s = 0 and s = +1, the latter pole being in the R H P . Hence Pa = 1. 

262 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
indicates that the system is unstable. From Equation (11.14) we have 
zeros of 1 + GH in the RHP. 
EXAMPLE 11.14. 
The Nyquist Stability Plot for the discrete-time open-loop transfer function 
was determined in Example 11.11 and is repeated in Fig. 11-25 for K= 1. The region to the right of the contour has 
been shaded and the (-1,0) point is not enclosed for K= 1. Thus 
< 0 and from Equation (11.13) there are no 
poles outside the unit circle of the z-plane, that is, P0 = 0. Hence N = -P0 = 0 and the system is therefore stable. 
Fig. 11-25 
11.11 
RELATIVE STABILITY 
The results in this section and the next are stated in terms of GH(u), for either continuous 
[GH(ju)] or discrete-time [GH(e
j"
T)} systems. 
The relative stability of a feedback control system is readily determined from the Polar or Nyquist 
Stability Plot. 
The (angular) phase crossover frequency ww is that frequency at which the phase angle of GH(u) is 
- 1 8 0 ° , that is, the frequency at which the Polar Plot crosses the negative real axis. The gain margin is 
given by 
gain margin 
These quantities are illustrated in Fig. 11-26. 

263 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11-26 
Fig. 11-27 
The (angular) gain crossover frequency to, is that frequency at which \GH(u)\ = 1. The phase 
margin < £ P M is the angle by which the Polar Plot must be rotated to cause it to pass through the ( - 1 , 0 ) 
point. It is given by 
These quantities are illustrated in Fig. 11-27. 
11.12 
M- AND TV-CIRCLES* 
The closed-loop frequency response of a unity feedback control system is given by 
(77.75) 
The magnitude and phase angle characteristics of the closed-loop frequency response of a unity 
feedback control system can be determined directly from the Polar Plot of G(to). This is accomplished 
by first drawing lines of constant magnitude, called M-circles, and lines of constant phase angle, called 
TV-circles, directly onto the G(to)-plane, where 
(77.76) 
(77.77) 
The intersection of the Polar Plot with a particular M-circle yields the value of M at the frequency 
to of G(to) at the point of intersection. The intersection of the Polar Plot with a particular TV-circle 
yields the value of TV at the frequency to of G(to) at the intersection point. M versus to and TV versus to 
are easily plotted from these points. 
*The letter symbols M, N used in this section for M- and ^-circles are not equal to and should not be confused with the 
manipulated variable M = M(s) denned in Chapter 2 and with the number of encirclements N of the (-1,0) point of Section 
11.10. It is unfortunate that the same symbols have been used to signify more than one quantity. But in the interest of being 
consistent with most other control system texts, we have maintained the terminology of the classical literature and have now 
pointed this out to the reader. 

264 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Several M-circles are superimposed on a typical Polar Plot in the G(w)-plane in Fig. 11-28. 
Fig. 11-28 
The radius of an M-circle is given by 
(11.18) 
The center of an M-circle always lies on the ReG(w)-axis. The center point is given by 
radius of M-circle 
center of M-circle 
(11.19) 
The resonance peak Mp is given by the largest value of M of the /W-circle(s) tangent to the Polar 
Plot. (There may be more than one tangency.) 
The damping ratio \ for a second-order continuous system with 0 < f < 0.707 is related to M by 
(11.20) 
Several A'-circles are superimposed on the Polar Plot shown i n Fig. 11-29. The radius of an A
r-circle 
is given by 
radius of 
N-circle 
(11.21) 
The center of an /V-circle always falls on the line Re G 
The center point is given by 
center of A^-circle 
(11.22) 

265 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11 29 
Solved Problems 
COMPLEX FUNCTIONS OF A COMPLEX VARIABLE 
11.1. What are the values of 
and 
11.2. M a p the imaginary axis in the s-piane onto the 
•plane, using the mapping 
function 
We have s = /to, - oo < co < oo. Therefore P(jw) = ( / t o )
2 = —to
2. Now when co - » — oo, P(Ju) —* — x 
(or - oo
1, if you prefer). When to -» + oo, P(ju) -» - oo; and when co = 0, P(/0) = 0. Thus as /to increases 
along the negative imaginary axis from -700 toward jQ, P(ju) increases along the negative real axis from 
- 0 0 to 0. When y'to increases from jO to +/oc, P(J<J>) decreases back to - 0 0 , again along the negative 
real axis. The mapping is plotted in the following manner (Fig. 11-30): 
Fig. 11-30 

266 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
The two lines in the 
plane are actually superimposed, but they arc shown here separated for 
clarity. 
11.3. M a p the rectangular region in the v-plane bounded by the lines 
onto the 7
J(.v)-plane using the transformation 
We have 
Since a varies over all real numbers (— oo < a < co) on the line a> = 0, so does n + 1 on P(a) = (o + 1) —J2. 
Therefore u> = 0 maps onto the line -j2 in the /*(i)-plane. Similarly, o = 0 maps onto the line P(s) = 1, 
w = 1 maps onto the line P(s) = - / ' l , and a = 2 onto the line P(s) = 3. The resulting transformation is 
illustrated in Fig. 11-31. 
Fig. 11-31 
This type of mapping is called a translation mapping. Note that the mapping would be exactly the 
same if s = a + y'co were replaced by z = p + jv in this example. 
11.4. F i n d the derivative of 
at the points 
and 
At 
we have 
Similarly, if 
ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS AND SINGULARITIES 
11.5. Is P(s) = s
2 an analytic function in any region of the s-plane? If so, which region? 
From the preceding problem (dP/ds)\s_Sn 
= 2s0. Hence .v
2 is analytic wherever 2s(j is finite (Definition 
11.1). Thus s
2 is analytic in the entire finite region of the .v-plane. Such functions are often called entire 
functions. Similarly, z
2 is analytic in the entire finite region of the z-plane. 
11.6. Is P(s) = \/s 
analytic in any region of the .v-plane? 
This derivative is unique and finite for all s0 ¥= 0. Hence 1 /s is analytic at all points in the i-plane except 
the origin, s = s{) = 0. The point s= 0 is a singularity (pole) of l/.v. Singularities other than poles exist, but 
not in the transfer functions of ordinary control system components. 
and 

267 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.7. Is 
analytic in any region of the s-plane? 
First put 
Then 
If the limit exists it must be unique and should not depend on how s approaches .s0, or cquivalcntly how 
[(a — o()) + j(cc - oin)] approaches zero. So first let s - » s n along the /o>-axis and obtain 
Now let s -»s„ along the a-axis; that is. 
Hence the limit Joes not exist for arbitrary nonzero values of o 0 and con, and therefore |_T | — is not analytic 
anywhere in the .s-plane except possibly at the origin. When s() = 0, 
rhereforc P(s) = |jj" is analytic only at the origin, s = 0, 
11.8. If P(s) is analytic at .v0, prove that it must be continuous at s 0. That is, show that 
l i m P ( s ) 
= 
P(s0). 
Since 
for 
because 
exists by hypothesis [i.e., P(s) is analytic]. Therefore 
11.9. Polynomial functions are defined by Q(s) = a„s" + a„_ls"'
 
1 4- • • • +als + a(), where alt + 0, n 
is a positive integer called the degree of the polynomial, and a{), «j, 
a„ arc constants. Prove 
that Q(s) is analytic in every bounded (finite) region of the s-plane. 
First consider s": 
Thus s" is analytic in every finite region of the s-plane. Then, by mathematical induction, s"~ s"~
2,..., s 
are also analytic. Hence, by the elementary theorems on limits of sums and products, wc sec that Q(s) is 
analytic in every finite region of the s-planc. 

268 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
11.10. Rational algebraic functions are defined by P(s) = N(s)/D(s), 
where N(s) and D(s) are 
polynomials. Show that P(.s) is analytic at every point s where D(s) 4- 0; that is, prove that the 
transfer functions of control system elements that take the form of rational algebraic functions 
are analytic except at their poles. 
The overwhelming majority of linear control system elements are in this category. The fundamental 
theorem of algebra, "a polynomial of degree n has n zeros and can be expressed as a product of n tinear 
factors," helps to put P(s) in a form more recognizable as a control system transfer function; that is, P(s) 
can be written in the familiar form 
where 
are zeros 
are poles, and 
From the identity given by 
where 
we get 
where wc have used the results of Problems 11.8, 11.9, and Definition 11.1. Therefore the derivative of P(s) 
exists {P(s) is analytic) for all points s where D(s) ^ 0. 
Note that wc have determined a formula for the derivative of a rational algebraic function (the last 
part of the above equation) in terms of the derivatives of its numerator and denominator, in addition to 
solving the required problem. 
11.11. Prove that e
 
r / is analytic in every bounded region of the .y-p!ane. 
In complex variable theory e~"
r is defined by the power series 
By the ratio test, as k -» oo we have 
Hence the radius of convergence of this power series is infinite. The sum of a power series is analytic within 
its radius of convergence. Thus e~
tT is analytic in every bounded region of the ,?-plane. 

269 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.12. Prove that e~
slP(s) 
is analytic wherever P(s) is analytic. Hence systems containing a combina­
tion of rational algebraic transfer functions and time-delay operators (i.e., e~
sT) are analytic 
except at the poles of the system. 
By Problem 11.11, e~
sT is analytic in every bounded region of the s-plane; and by Problem 11.10, 
P{s) is analytic except at its poles. Now 
Therefore e
 sTP(s) is analytic wherever Pis) is analytic. 
11.13. Consider the function given by P(s) = e
 
sT(s
2 + 2s 4- 3 ) / ( s
2 - 2s + 2). Where are the singulari­
ties of this function? Where is P(s) analytic? 
The singular points are at the poles of P(s). Since s
2 - 2s + 2 = (s - 1 + jl)(s - 1 - jl), the two poles 
are given by -px = 1 — j l and —p2 = 1 + jl. P(s) is analytic in every bounded region of the s-planc except 
at the points s = —px and s = —/?2. 
CONTOURS AND ENCIRCLEMENTS 
11.14. What points are enclosed by the following contours (Fig. 11-32)? 
Fig. 11-32 
By shading the region to the right of each contour as it is traversed in the prescribed direction, we get 
Fig. 11-33. A l l points in the shaded regions are enclosed. 
Fig. 11-33 
(a) 
(b) 
(o) 
(b) 

270 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
11.15. What contours of Problem 11.14 are closed'! 
Clearly, the contour of part (b) is closed. The contour of part (a) may or may not close upon itself at 
infinity in the complex plane. This cannot be determined from the given graph. 
11.16. What is the direction (positive or negative) of each contour in Problem 11.14(a) and (/>)? 
Using the origin as a base, each contour is directed in the counterclockwise, negative direction about 
the origin. 
11.17. Determine the number of encirclements N0 of the origin for the contour in Fig. 11-34. 
Fig. 11-34 
Beginning at the point a, we rotate a radial line from the origin to the contour in the direction of the 
arrows. Three counterclockwise rotations of 360° result in the radial line returning to the point a. Hence 
N.. = - 3 
11.18, Determine the number of encirclements Nu of the origin for the contour in Fig. 11-35. 
Fig. 11-35 
Fig. 11-36 
Beginning at point a, + 180° is swept out by the contour when b is reached for the first time. In going 
from b to e and back to b, the net angular gain is zero. Returning to a from b yields +180°. Thus 
^ , = +1. 

271 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.19. Determine the number of encirclements N of the ( — 1,0) point (i.e., the —1 point on the real 
axis) for the contour of Problem 11.17. 
Again beginning at point a, we rotate a radial line from the ( — 1,0) point to the contour in the 
direction of the arrows as shown in Fig. 11-36. In going from a to b to c, the radial line sweeps out 
somewhat less than —360°. But from c to d and back to b, the angle increases again toward the value 
reached in going only from a to b. Then from b to e to a the resultant angle is — 360°. Thus TV = — 1. 
PROPERTIES OF THE MAPPING P 
11.20. A r e the following functions single-valued: (a) P(s) = s
2, (b) P(s) = s
1 / 2 ? 
(67) 
Substitution of any complex number s into P(s) = s
2 yields a unique value for P(s). Hence P(s) = s
2 
is a single-valued function. 
(b) In polar form we have s = \s\e
j9, where 6 = arg(s). Therefore s
1/2 = \s\
1/2e'
e/2. 
Now if we increase 6 
by 2Tr we return to the same point s. But 
P(s) = \s\
i/2e'
ie+2^/
2 
= \s\
l/2eJ
e/
2e^ 
= P(s)e^ 
which is another point in the P(s)-plane. Hence P(s) = s
i/2 
has two points in the P(.s)-plane for 
every point in the .s-plane. It is not a single-valued function; it is a multiple-valued function (with two 
values). 
11.21. Prove that every closed contour containing no singular points of P(s) in the s-plane maps into a 
closed contour in the P(^)-plane. 
Suppose not. Then at some point s0 where the .s-plane contour closes upon itself the P(.s)-piane 
contour is not closed. This means that one (nonsingular) point sQ in the j-plane is mapped into more than 
one point in the P(.s)-plane (the images of the point s0). This contradicts the fact that P(s) is a 
single-valued function (Property 1, Section 11.4). 
11.22. Prove that P is a conformal mapping wherever P is analytic and dP/ds + 0. 
Consider two curves: C in the .s-plane and C , the image of C, in the P(.s)-plane. Let the curve in the 
.s-plane be described by a parameter t; that is, each / corresponds to a point s = s(t) along the curve C. 
Hence C is described by P[s(t)\ in the P(.s)-plane. The derivatives ds/dt and dP/dt represent tangent 
vectors to corresponding points on C and C Now 
where we have used the fact that P is analytic at some point s0 = s(t0). Put dP/dt = rxe-'*, dP/ds = r2e
Jn, 
and ds/dt = r3e
je. Then 
Equating angles, we have <?>(•%) = #(•%) + «(«o)
 = ^ o ) +
 aT&(dP/ds)\s=So, 
and we see that the tangent to 
C at s0 is rotated through an angle aig(dP/ds)\s_Sa 
at P(sQ) on C in the P(s)-plane. 
Now consider two curves Cx and C2 intersecting at s0, with images C{ and C in the P(s)-plane (Fig. 
11-37). 
Let 6, be the angle of inclination of the tangent to Cx, and 92 for C2. Then the angles of inclination for 
C[ and C{ are 6{ + aig(dP/ds)\s_ 
, and 02 + zrg(dP/ds)\s_ 
. Therefore the angle (8X - 02) between Cx 
and C 2 is equal in magnitude and sense to the angle between C[ and C{, 
Note that arg(dP/ds)\s_So is indeterminate if (dP/ds)\s_ 
= 0. 

272 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-37 
11.23. Show that P(s) = e
 
s
T is conformal in every bounded region of the s-plane. 
e
 
s
T is analytic (Problem 11.11). Moreover, (d/ds)(e *
T)= - Te
 : , T i=0 in any bounded (finite) 
region of the s-plane. Then by Problem 11.22, P(s) = e~
sT is conformal. 
11.24. Show that P{s)e~
sT 
is conformal for rational P(s) and dP/ds + 0. 
By Problem 11.12, Pe
 s l is analytic except at the poles of P. By Problem 11.12, 
Suppose {d/ds)[Pe
 
<r] = 0. Then since e
 s
l + 0 for any finite s, we have dP/ds -TP = 0 whose general 
solution is P(s) = ke
sJ, k constant. But P is rational and e
sT is not. Hence (d/ds)[Pe'
 j / ] * 0. 
11.25. T w o s-plane contours C\ and C 2 intersect in a 90° angle in Fig. 11-38. The analytic function 
P(s) maps these contours into the 7
J(.s)-plane and dP/ds + 0 at sQ. Sketch the image of contour 
C2 i n a neighborhood of P{s0). The image of C , is also given. 
Fig, 11-38 
By Problem 11.22, P is conformal; hence the angle between C[ and C{ is 90°. Since Q makes a left 
turn onto C, at s„, then C{ must also turn left at P(s(j) (Fig. 11-39). 

273 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11-39 
11.26. Prove Equation (77.7): N0 = Z0- 
P0. 
The bulk of the proof is somewhat more involved than can be handled with the complex-variable 
theory presented in this book. So we assume knowledge of a well-known theorem of functions of a complex 
variable and continue from there. The theorem states that if C is a closed contour in the s-plane, P(s) an 
analytic function on C and within C except for possible poles, and P(s) =/= 0 on C, then 
where Z
0 is the total number of zeros inside C, P0 the total number of poles inside C, and P' = dP/ds. 
Multiple poles and zeros are counted one for one; that is, a double pole at a point is two poles of the total, 
a triple zero is three zeros of the total. 
Now since d[ln P(s)] = [P'(s)/P(s)] ds and In P(s) = ln|P(s)| +/arg7
J(s), we have 
Now since ln|7'(s)| returns to its original value when we go once around C, the first term in the last 
equation is zero. Hence 
Since C is closed, the image of C in the 7
>(s)-plane is closed, and the net change in the angle argP(s) 
around the P(s) contour is 2IT times the number of encirclements N0 of the origin in the P(s)-plane. Then 
Z 0 — PQ = 2N0tt/2ir = N0. This result is often called the principle of the argument. Note that this result 
would be the same if we replaced s by z in all of the above. Therefore Equation (77.7) is valid for 
discrete-time systems as well. 
11.27. Determine the number 7V0 of P-plane contour encirclements for the complex-plane contour 
mapped into the P-plane shown in Fig. 11-40. 

274 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-40 
Therefore 
11.28. Determine the number of zeros Z
0 enclosed by the complex-piane contour in Fig. 11-41, where 
P 0 = 5. 
Fig. 11-41 
iV,, = 1 was computed in Problem 11,18 for the given f-planc contour. Since P() = 5. then Z„ = 
AS, + ^ = 1 + 5 = 6. 
11.29. Determine the number of poles Pa enclosed by the complex-plane contour in Fig. 11-42. where 
Z o = 0 . 
Fig. 11-42 
Clearly, 
Hence 
11.30. Determine N0 [Equation (11.1)] for the transfer function (transformation) and s-plane contour 
of F i g . 11-43. 

275 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
The pole-zero map of P(s) is given in Fig. 11-44. Hence three poles (two at s = 0 and one at s = — 1) 
and no zeros are enclosed by the contour. Thus Pn = 3, Zn = 0, and Nn = — 3. 
Fig. 11-44 
11.31. Is the origin enclosed by the contour in Fig. 11-45? 
Fig. 11-45 
The region to the right of the contour has been shaded. The origin falls in a shaded region and is 
therefore enclosed by the contour. 
11.32. What is the sign of N0 in Problem 11.31? 
Since the origin is enclosed by the contour in a clockwise direction, A',, > 0. 
POLAR PLOTS 
11.33. Piove Property 1 of Section 11.6. 
Let 
and 
where 
and 
are real. Then 
and the image of any point 
in the 
•plane 
In the 

276 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
(P(to) +ia)-plane. Hence the image of a P(to) contour is simply a translation (see Problem 11.3). Clearly, 
translation of the contour by a units is equivalent to translation of the axes (origin) by - a units. 
11.34. Prove Property 2 of Section 11.6. 
The transfer function P(s) of a constant-coefficient linear system is, in general, a ratio of polynomials 
with constant coefficients. The complex roots of such polynomials occur in conjugate pairs; that is, if a + jb 
is a root, then a - jb is also a root. If we let an asterisk (*) represent complex conjugation, then 
a+jb = (a-jb)*, and if a = 0, then jb = (-jb)*. Therefore P(ju) = P(-ju)* 
or P(-ju) = P(ja)*. 
Graphically this means that the plot for P(—y'to) is the mirror image about the real axis of the plot for 
P(yto) since only the imaginary part of P(ju) changes sign. 
11.35. Sketch the Polar Plot of each of the following complex functions: 
(a) 
P(ju) = to
2/45°, (b) P(ju) = to
2(cos45° + jsin45°), 
(c) P(jto) = 0.707to
2 + 0.707/to
2. 
(a) 
co
2
//45° is in the form of Equation (11.2). Hence polar coordinates are used in Fig. 11-46. 
(b) P(ju) = to
2(cos45° + j sin45°) = co
2(0.707 + 0.707/) 
That is, P(jw) is in the form of Equation (11.3) or (11.4). Hence rectangular coordinates is the 
natural choice as shown in Fig. 11.47. 
Note that this graph is identical with that of part (a) except for the coordinates. In fact, 
co
2(0.707 + 0.707y) = to
2/45°. 
(c) 
Clearly, (c) is identical with (b), and therefore with (a). Among other things, this problem has 
illustrated how a complex function of frequency to can be written in three different but mathemati­
cally and graphically identical forms: the polar form, Equation (11.2); the trigonometric or Euler 
form, Equation (11.3); and the equivalent rectangular (complex) form, Equation (11.4). 
Fig. 11-46 
Fig. 11-47 
11.36. Sketch the Polar Plot of 
The Polar Plot of 0.707to
2(l + j) was drawn in Problem 11.35(5). By Property 1 of Section 11.6, the 
required Polar Plot is given by that of Problem 11.35(6) with its origin shifted to —a = —1 as shown in 
Fig. 11-48. 
Fig. 11-48 

277 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11} 
11.37. Construct a Polar Plot from the set of graphs of the magnitude and phase angle of P(jto) 
in Fig. 
11-49, representing the frequency response of a linear constant-coefficient system. 
Fig. 11-49 
The graphs shown above differ little from Bode representations, discussed in detail in Chapter 15. The 
Polar Plot is constructed by mapping this set of graphs into the 7
>(/'u)-planc. It is only necessary to choose 
values of co and corresponding values of |P(7«)| and £ ( t o ) from the graphs and plot these points in the 
7
>(y'co)-plane. For example at to = 0, \P(ju>)\ = 10 and <f>(to) = 0. The resulting Polar Plot is given in Fig. 
11-50. 
Fig. 11-50 

278 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. LI 
The portion of the graph for - co < to < 0 has been drawn using the property of conjugate symmetry 
(Section 11.6). 
11.38. Sketch the Polar Plot for 
Substituting /to for s, and applying Equation (11.2), we obtain 
For to = 0 and to -* oo, we have 
Clearly, as to increases from zero to infinity, the phase angle remains negative and decreases to — 9 0 ° , and 
the magnitude decreases monotonically to zero. Thus the Polar Plot may be sketched as shown in Fig. 
11-51. The dashed line represents the mirror image of the plot for 0 < to < oo (Section 11.6, Property 2). 
hence it is the Polar Plot for — oc < w < 0. 
Fig. 11-51 

279 
NYQUIST ANALYSIS 
C H A P . 11] 
T H E NYQUIST PATH 
11.39. Prove that the infinite semicircle, portion def of the Nyquist Path, maps into the origin P(s) = 0 
in the P(.v)-plane for all transfer functions of the form: 
where n > 0, K is a constant, and —pt is any finite pole. 
For 
Since 
then clearly 
11.40. Prove that the infinite semicircle, portion def of the Nyquist Path, maps into the origin P(s) = 0 
in the /"(.yj-plane for all transfer functions of the form; 
where 
is a constant, and 
and 
are finite poles and zeros, respectively. 
For m 
Since 
then 
NYQUIST STABILITY PLOTS 
11.41. Prove that a continuous type / system includes / infinite semicircles in the locus of its Nyquist 
Stability Plot. That is, show that portion ija of the Nyquist Path maps into an arc of 180/ degrees 
at infinity in the /
>(.?)-plane. 
The transfer function of a continuous type / system has the form: 
where B^O) and 5,(0) arc finite and nonzero. If we let Bl(s)/B2(s) = F(s), then 

280 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
where F(Q) is finite and nonzero. Now put s = pe'°. as required by Equation (11.12). Clearly, 
lim,_. [ )F(pe'
f') = F(0). Then P(pe'
e) = F(pe'V^'" 
and 
At 6 = - 9 0 ° , the limit is co • e'
m. At 8 = +90°, the limit is oo • e
_ J , 9 t > /. Hence the angle subtended in the 
P(.?)-planc, by mapping the locus of the infinitesimal semicircle of the Nyquist Path in the neighborhood of 
the origin in the s-plane, is 90/—(-90/) = 180/ degrees, which represents / infinite semicircles in the 
P(i)-plane. 
11.42. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for the open-loop transfer function given by 
The Nyquist Path for this type 0 system is shown in Fig. 11-52. 
Fig. 11-52 
Fig. 11-53 
Since there arc no poles on the y'to-axis. Step 2 of Section 11.8 indicates that the Polar Plot of G!l{ y'to) 
yields the image of path ad (and hence fad) in the GA/(s)-plane. Letting s y'to for 0 < to < x , we get 
For 0 < to < x , the Polar Plot passes through the third and fourth quadrants because <j> = -[tan 
' ( t o / / ? , ) 
+ tan '(«//?•,)] varies from 0° to 180° when to increases. 
From Problem 11.39, path def plots into the origin P(s) = 0. Therefore the Nyquist Stability Plot is a 
replica of the Polar Plot. This is easily sketched from the above derivations, and is shown in Fig. 11-53. 
11.43. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for G7/(s) 
The Nvquist Path for this simple type 1 system is shown in Fig. 11-54. 
Fig. 11-54 
Fig. 11-55 

281 
NYQUIST ANALYSIS 
C H A P . 11] 
For path 
and 
Path 
maps into the origin (sec Problem 11.39). 
Path 
is the mirror image of a'a" about the real axis. 
The image of path ija is determined from Equation 
by letting 
where 
For point 
then 
maps into 
point 
then 
maps into 
Similarly, a maps into a' at oo/ -90°. Path i'j'a' could also have been obtained from the conformal 
mapping property of the transformation as explained in Example 11.9 plus the statement proved in 
Problem 11.41. 
The resulting Nyquist Stability Plot is shown in Fig. 11-55. 
11.44, Sketch the Nyquist Stability Piot for (SH(s) = 1 / S ( J +p1)(s + p2), 
Pi,p2>0-
The Nyquist Path for this type 1 system is the same as that for the preceding problem. For path ad, 
s = /'to, 0 < to < oo, and 
Since the phase angle changes sign as to increases, the plot crosses the real axis. At intermediate values of 
frequency, the phase angle <j> is within the range - 90° < 4> < — 270°. Hence the plot is in the second and 
third quadrants. An asymptote of G//(/to) for to-» 0 is found by writing 67/(/to) as a real plus an 
imaginary part, and then taking the limit as to -»0: 
Hence the line 67/= -(px+ p2)/p\p\ 
is an asymptote of the Polar Plot. 
Path def maps into the origin (sec Problem 11.39). Path /'/' is the mirror image of a'd' about the real 
axis. Path i'j'a' is most easily determined by the conformal mapping properly and the fact that a type 1 
system has one infinite semicircle in its path (Problem 11.41). The resulting Nyquist Stability Plot is shown 
in Fig. 11-56. 
Fig. 11-56 

282 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
(CHAP. 11 
11.45. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH(s) = l/s
2. 
The Nyquist Path for this type 2 system is the same as that for the preceding problem, except there are 
two poles at the origin instead of one. For ad. 
The Polar Plot clearly lies along the negative real axis, increasing from - x to 0 as to increases. Path def 
maps into the origin and path ija maps into two infinite semicircles at infinity (see Problem 11.41). Since the 
Nyquist Path makes right turns at / and a. so does the Nyquist Stability Plot at /' and a'. The resulting 
locus is shown in Fig. 11-57. 
Fie. 11-57 
11.46. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for 
The Nyquist Path for this type 2 system is the same as that for the previous problem. For ad. 
For 0 < to < x the phase angle varies continuously from -1X0° to - 2 7 0 ° ; thus the plot lies in the second 
quadrant. The remainder of the Nyquist Path is mapped into the 677-plane as in the preceding problem. 
The resulting Nyquist Stability Plot is shown in Fig. 11-58. 
Fig. 11-58 

283 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.47. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH(s) 
There are four poles at the origin in the s-plane, and the Nyquist Path is the same as that of the 
previous problem. The Polar Plot for this system was determined in Problem 11.38. The remainder of the 
Nyquist Path is mapped using the results of Problems 11.39 and 11.41, and the conformal mapping 
property. The resulting Nyquist Stability Plot is given in Fig. 11-59. 
Fig. 11-59 
11.48. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH(s) 
The e
 
A term represents a time delay of T seconds in the forward or feedback path. For example, a 
signal flow graph of such a system can be represented as in Fig. 11-60. 
Fig. 11-60 

284 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
The Nyquist Stability Plot for 1 /(s + 1) was drawn in Example 11.8. The plot is modified by inclusion 
of the e 
term in the following manner, For path ad. 
The limit of G7/(yio) as to -» oc does not exist. But l i m u ^ y \ G H ( /to)| = 0 and 
G W ( / t o ) 
decreases 
monotonically as to increases. The phase angle term 
revolves repeatedly about the origin between 0° and — 360° as to increases. Therefore the Polar Plot is a 
decreasing spiral, beginning at (1/p)/J° 
and approaching the origin in a CW direction. The points where 
the locus crosses the negative real axis are determined by letting <J> = —180° = -IT radians: 
or 6 0 ^ . = p tan(7to_), which is easily solved when p and T arc known. The remainder of the Nyquist Path is 
mapped using the results of Problems 11.41 and 11.42. The Nyquist Stability Plot is shown in Fig, 11-61. 
The image of path fa (s = —y'to) has been omitted for clarity. 
Fig. 11-61 
11.49. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH(s) = l / ( . v
2 + «
2 ) . 
The poles of GH(s) arc at s = ±ja = + ju>(). The Nyquist Path for this system is therefore as shown in 
Fig. 11-62. 
For path ab, to < a and 
For path 
then 

C H A P . 11] 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
285 
Fig. 11-62 
Fig. 11-63 
At 
the limit is 
it is 
it is 
For path 
and 
Path def maps into the origin by Problem 11.39, and f'g'h'a' 
is the mirror image of a'b'c'd' about the 
real axis. The resulting Nyquist Stability Plot is shown in Fig. 11-63. 
11.50. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH 
The Nyquist Path for this type 1 system is the same as that for Problem 11.43. For path ad. 
where we have used 
Now 
Thus the locus comes down in the first quadrant, crosses the positive real axis into the fourth quadrant, and 
approaches the origin from an angle of —90°. 
Path def maps into the origin, and ija maps into one semicircle at infinity. The resulting plot is shown 
in Fig. 11-64, 
Fig. 11-64 

286 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
NYQUIST STABILITY CRITERION 
11.51. Prove the Nyquist Stability Criterion. 
Equation (11.1) states that the number of C W encirclements N0 of the origin made by a closed P 
contour in the P-plane, mapped from a closed complex-plane contour, is equal to the number of zeros Z 0 
minus the number of poles P0 of P enclosed by the complex-plane contour: N0 = Z 0 — PQ. This has been 
proven in Problem 11.26. 
Now let P = 1 + GH. Then the origin for 1 + GH in the G/7-plane is at GH= -1. (See Example 11.6 
and Problem 11.33.) Hence let N denote the number of C W encirclements of this — 1 + j0 = (— 1,0) point, 
and let the complex-plane contour be the Nyquist Path defined in Section 11.7. Then N = Z0 — P0, where 
Z 0 and P0 are the number of zeros and poles of 1 + GH enclosed by the Nyquist Path. P 0 is also the 
number of poles of GH enclosed, since if GH = N/D, then 1 + GH = 1 + N/D = (D + N)/D. That is, GH 
and 1 + GH have the same denominator. 
We know from Chapter 5 that a continuous (or discrete) feedback system is absolutely stable if and 
only if the zeros of the characteristic polynomial 1 + GH (the roots of the characteristic equation 
1 + GH = 0) are in the L H P (or unit circle), that is, Z 0 = 0. Therefore N = — P 0, and clearly P 0 > 0. 
11.52. Extend the Nyquist Stability Criterion to a larger class of continuous linear systems than those 
already considered in this chapter. 
The Nyquist Stability Criterion has been extended by Desoer [5]. The following statement is a 
modification of this generalization, found with its proof in the reference. 
A Generalized Nyquist Stability Criterion: Consider the linear time-invariant system described by the 
block diagram in Fig. 11-65. If g(t) satisfies the conditions given below and the Nyquist Stability Plot of 
G(s) does not enclose the ( — 1,0) point, then the system is stable. If the (-1,0) point is enclosed, the 
system is unstable. 
Fig. 11-65 
1. 
G(s) represents a causal, linear time-invariant system element. 
2. 
The input-output relationship for g(t) is 
where ca(t), the free response of the system g(t), is bounded for all t > 0 and all initial conditions, and 
approaches a finite value dependent upon the initial conditions as t —> oo. 
3. 
The unit impulse response g(t) is 
where k > 0, l(r) is the unit step function, gy(t) is bounded and integrable for all t > 0, and gx(t) —> 0 
as t —> oo. 
These conditions are fulfilled very often by physical systems described by ordinary and partial 
differential equations, and differential-difference equations. The form of the closed-loop block diagram 
given in Fig. 11-65 is not necessarily restrictive. Many systems of interest can be transformed into this 
configuration. 

287 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.53. Suppose the Nyquist Path for GH(s) = \/s(s + p) were modified so that the pole at the origin is 
enclosed as shown in Fig. 11-66. H o w does this modify application of the Nyquist Stability 
Criterion? 
Fig. 11-66 
Fig. 11-67 
The Polar Plot remains the same, but the image of path ija makes left instead of right turns at /' and 
a', just as in the Nyquist Path. The Nyquist Stability Plot is therefore given by Fig. 11-67. Clearly, N = - 1. 
But since the pole of GH at the origin is enclosed by the Nyquist Path, then PQ = 1, and Z0 = N+ P0 = 
- 1 + 1=0. Therefore the system is stable. Application of the Nyquist Stability Criterion does not depend 
on the path chosen in the s-plane. 
11.54. Is the system of Problem 11.42 stable or unstable? 
Shading the region to the right of the contour in the prescribed direction yields Fig. 11-68. It is clear 
that N = 0. The ( — 1,0) point is not in the shaded region. Now, since px > 0 and p2>G, then P0 = 0. 
Therefore N = — P0 = 0, or Z 0 = N + P0 = 0, and the system is stable. 
Fig. 11-68 
Fig. 11-69 
11.55. Is the system of Problem 11.43 stable or unstable? 
The region to the right of the contour has been shaded in Fig. 11-69. The (— 1,0) point is not enclosed, 
and N = 0. Since P0 = 0, then Z 0 = P0 + N = 0, and the system is stable. 

288 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
11.56. Determine the stability of the system of Problem 11.44. 
The region to the right of the contour has been shaded in Fig, 11-70. If the ( - 1,0) point lies to the left 
of point k, then N = 0; if it lies to the right, then N = 1. Since P0 = 0, then Z
0 = 0 or 1. Hence the system is 
stable if and only if the (—1,0) point lies to the left of point k. Point k can be determined by solving for 
G//( _/<*>„), where 
<J„ is easily determined from this equation when />, and p2 are given, 
Fig. 11-70 
11.57. Determine the stability of the system of Problem 11.46. 
The region to the right of the contour has been shaded in Fig. 11-71. Clearly, N = 1, P(j = 0, and 
Z 0 = 1 + 0 = 1. Hence the system is unstable for all p > 0. 
Fig. 11-71 

289 
NYQUIST ANALYSIS 
CHAP. 11] 
11.58. Determine the stability of the system of Problem 11.47. 
The region to the right of the contour has been shaded in Fig. 11-72. 
It is clear that N > 0. Since P0 = 0 for p > 0, then TV * -P0. Hence the system is unstable. 
Fig. 11-72 
RELATIVE STABILITY 
11.59. Determine: (a) the phase crossover frequency u„, (b) the gain crossover frequency alt (c) the 
gain margin, and (d) the phase margin for the system of Problem 11.44 with px = 1 and p2 = \. 
(a) 
Letting o> = to„, we have 
or 
Hence 
O) 
From \GH(uj)\ = 1, we have l/w^fwj + l)(wj + 0.25) = 1 or 
= 0.82. 
(c) 
The gain margin l/\GH(u„)\ 
is easily determined from the graph, as shown in Fig. 11-73. It can also 
be calculated analytically: \GH(u„)\ 
= |G7/< ;'0.707)| = 4/3; hence gain margin = 3/4. 

290 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-73 
Fig. 11-74 
(cl) The phase margin is easily determined from the graph, or calculated analytically: 
Hence 
Negative phase margin means that the system is unstable. 
11.60. Determine the gain and phase margins for the system of Problem 11.43 (GH = \/s). 
The Nyquist Stability Plot of 1/s never crosses the negative real axis as shown in Fig. 11-74: hence the 
gain margin is undefined for this system. The phase margin is <f>PM = 90°. 
M - AND A'-CIRCLES 
11.61. Prove Equations (11.18) and (11.19), which give the radius and center of an M-circle, 
respectively. 
Let G(o)) = x + jy. Then 
Squaring both sides and rearranging yields 
For 
M = constant, 
these arc equations of circles 
with 
radii 
\M/(M~ - l)|and 
centers 
at ( M
Z/(M
: 
- 1),0). 
11.62. Prove Equation (11.20). 
The transfer function G for the second-order continuous system whose signal flow graph is shown in 
Fig. 11-75 is G= w
2/.s(.f + 2fu„). Now 

2 9 1 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
Fig. 11-75 
To find to.,, we maximize the above expression: 
from which 
Hence for 
11.63. Prove Equations (11.11) and (11.22), which give the radius and center of an TV-circle. 
Let 
Then 
which yields 
and 
For ,V equal to a constant parameter, this is the equation of a circle with radius 
and center 
at 
11.64. F i n d M and f for the unity feedback system given by G = l/s(s +1). 
The general open-loop transfer function for the second-order system is C 
Then 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 
11.65. Determine the Polar Plot for 
for a sampling period 
T=\. 
The solution requires mapping the strip from - / t o [ / 2 to 
on the ./'co-axis of the \-planc or, 
cquivalently, to = - w to to = IT radians on the unit circle of the r-plane, into the 7
>{t
; , /")-plane. We have 
P(e 
" ) = 0 . 5 / o ° . and P(e'")= 0 0 / ± 9 0 ° . Evaluation of P(e-'") for several values of to between -w 
and 0 results in a straight line parallel to the imaginary axis in the P-plane, as shown in Fig. 11-76, where 
the segments a to b and g to a map the corresponding segments of the unit circle in Fig. 1 1 - 1 3 . 

292 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-76 
11.66. Determine the Polar Plot of the type 0 discrete-time system open-loop transfer function 
for K = 1 and 77= 1. 
In this case, the Polar Plot has been drawn by computer, as illustrated in Fig. 11-77. The computer 
program evaluates GH(e
JtJ) for values of to7"= to in the range - I T t o i radians, separates each result into 
real and imaginary parts (Complex Form), and then generates the rectangular plot from these coordinates. 
Fig. 11-77 
11.67. Determine the Polar Plot of the type 1 discrete-time system open-loop transfer function 
for 
BSE 

293 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
As in Problem 11.66, the Polar Plot given in Fig. 11-78 was generated by computer, exactly in the same 
manner as described in the previous problem. 
Fig, 11-78 
11.68. Determine the absolute stability of the system given in Examples 11.11 and 11.14, for K > 2 and 
77= 1. 
The Nyquist Stability Plot for K = 2 is given in Fig. 11-79. The region to the right has been shaded 
and the plot goes directly through (-1,0). Thus N > 0 and TV * - P ( ) , which is zero for this problem. 
Therefore the system is marginally stable for K =2. For K>2, 
the (-1,0) point is completely enclosed, 
TV = 1, and the closed-loop system is unstable. 
Fig. 11-79 

294 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
11.69. Determine the Nyquist Stability Plot of the system given in Problem 11.65. 
We note that P(z) = z/(z — 1) has a pole at 1, so we must begin by mapping the segment b to c of the 
infinitesimal semicircle near z = 1 in Fig. 11-13 into the P-plane. Overall, we have a conformal mapping, so 
the plot must turn right at b'. Between b and c, z = 1 + pe'*, with <j> increasing from - 90° to 0°. 
Therefore 
Therefore the arc from b to c in the z-plane maps into the infinite semicircle b' to c', from + 90° back to 
0°, shown in Fig. 11-80. To obtain the mapping of the line from c to d in Fig. 11-13, we note that this is the 
mapping of P(z) from z = 1 /o° 
to z = oo/o° (constant angle 
that is, 
where we have replaced z in P(z) by 1 + a, in obtaining the limit. The resulting mapping is shown as the 
line from c' to d' (oo -> 1) in Fig. 11-80. 
Fig. 11-80 
The infinite circle from 0° to - 3 6 0 ° , from d to e in Fig. 11-13, maps into an infinitesimal semicircle 
around the point z = 1 in the P-plane, because 
and P -> 1 as R -» oo for any <£, and a few evaluations of arg P(i?e
7 < f') at values of <#> between 0° and 
— 360° show that the limit is approached from values in the first quadrant of P when 0 < <j> < —180°, and 
the fourth quadrant when - 1 8 0 ° <<#><-360°, with P(Re*) = 1/(1 + l/R) < 1 for R > 0 at <J> = 180°. 
The resulting arc is shown as d' to e' in Fig. 11-80. 
Arc e' to / ' in Fig. 11-80 is obtained in the same manner as that for c' to d', taking the limits of 
(a + l ) / a as a -> oo and 0. And the final closure of the Nyquist Stability Plot, arc / ' to g', is obtained in 
the same manner as that from b' to c', as shown. 

295 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . II] 
11.70. For GH = P = z/(z - 1) in Problem 11.69, is the closed-loop system stable? 
The region to the right of the contour in Fig. 11-80 has been shaded and it does not enclose the (-1,0) 
point. Therefore N < 0. The only pole of GH is at z = 1. which is not outside the unit circle. Thus P„ = 0, 
N = - P„ = 0, and the system is absolutely stable. 
11.71. Determine the stability of the system given in Problem 11.66. 
The open-loop transfer function is 
The Polar Plot of GH is given in Fig. 11-77, which is the mapping of arcs a to /; and g to a of Fig. 11-13. 
There are no poles of GH on the unit circle, so the infinitesimal arcs b to c and / to g In Fig. 11-13 are not 
needed. Setting z = 1 + a and using the same limiting procedures illustrated in Problem 11.70, the straight 
lines to and from infinity, h to d and e to / in Fig. 11-13, map into the lines from b to d and e to / 
between ~ReGH\ and \ . Similarly, with z replaced by 1 + Re^ and R—>x, the infinite arc from d to e 
maps into the infinitesimal semicircle about Re GH = \ , all as shown in Fig. 11-81. 
Fig. 11-81 
The (-1,0) point is not enclosed by this contour, as shown, N = 0, P ( ) = 0, and the closed-loop system 
is absolutely stable. 
11.72. Determine the stability of the system given in Problem 11.67. 
The open-loop transfer function is 
The Polar Plot of GH is given in Fig. 11-78. Completion of the closed contour mapping of the exterior of 
the unit circle in the z-plane (Fig. 11-13) closely parallels that described in Problem 11.69 and Example 
11.11. In this case, the (-1,0) point is enclosed once by the contour, that is, N = l. Since P 0 = 0 and 
Z„ = /V + P„ = 1, then one zero of 1 + GH is outside the unit circle of the z-planc and the closed-loop 
system is therefore unstable (Fig. 11-82). 

296 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
Fig. 11-82 
Supplementary Problems 
11.73. Let 7 = 2 and p = 5 in the system of Problem 11.48. Is this system stable? 
11.74. Is the system of Problem 11.49 stable or unstable? 
11.75. Is the system of Problem 11.50 stable or unstable? 
11.76. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.77. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.78. Find the closed-loop frequency response of the unity feedback system described by G 
using M- and TV-circles. 
11.79. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.80. Sketch the Nyquist Stability Plot for GH 

297 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 11] 
11.81. Sketch the Polar Plot for 67/ --
11.82. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
H-83. 
sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.84. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.85. Sketch the Polar Plot for Gh 
11.86. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.87. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.88. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.89. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.90. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11-91- Sketch the Polar Plot for GH-
11.92. Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11 93. 
Sketch the Polar Plot for GH 
11.94. The various portions of the Nyquist Path for continuous systems arc illustrated in Fig.. 11-12 and the 
different segments are defined mathematically by Equations (11.5) through (11.12). Write the correspond­
ing equations for each segment of the Nyquist Path for the discrete-time systems given in Fig. 11-13. (One 
of these was given in Example 11.11. Also sec Problems 11.69 and 11.70.) 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
11.73. Yes 
11.74. 
Unstable 
11.75. 
Unstable 

298 
N Y Q U I S T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 11 
11.76. 
11.77. 
11.79. 
11.80. 

299 
Chapter 12 
Nyquist Design 
12.1 
DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
Design by analysis i n the frequency domain using Nyquist techniques is performed in the same 
general manner as all other design methods in this book: appropriate compensation networks are 
introduced in the forward or feedback paths and the behavior of the resulting system is critically 
analyzed and reanalyzed. In this manner, the Polar Plot is shaped and reshaped until performance 
specifications are met. The procedure is greatly facilitated when computer programs for generating 
Polar Plots are used. 
Since the Polar Plot is a graph of the open-loop frequency response function GH(tc), many types of 
compensation components can be used in either the forward or feedback path, becoming part of either 
G or H. Often, compensation in only one path, or a combination of both cascade and feedback 
compensation, can be used to satisfy specifications. Cascade compensation is emphasized in this 
chapter. 
12.2 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
It was pointed out in Chapter 5 that an unstable feedback system can sometimes be stabilized, or a 
stable system destabilized, by appropriately adjusting the gain factor K of GH. The root-locus method 
of Chapters 13 and 14 vividly illustrates this phenomenon, but it is also evidenced in Nyquist Stability 
Plots. 
EXAMPLE 12.1. 
Figure 12-1 indicates an unstable continuous system when the gain factor is AT,, where 
A sufficient decrease in the gain factor to J 
stabilizes the system, as illustrated in Fig. 12-2. 
Further decrease of K does not alter stability. 

300 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
Fig. 12-2 
EXAMPLE 12.2. 
The type 1 discrete-time control system with 
is unstable, as shown in Fig. 11-79 and Problem 11.68. That is, the open-loop transfer function 
was found to be unstable for K>2. 
Therefore gain factor compensation can be used to stabilize G/7,, by 
attenuating the gain factor Kx = 1 of GHl by a factor less than 0.5. For example, if the attenuator is given a value 
of 0.25, the resulting GH = GH2 would have the Nyquist Stability Plot in Fig. 11-25, shown in Example 11.14 to 
represent a stable system. 
EXAMPLE 12.3. 
The stable region for the ( - 1,0) point in Fig. 12-3 is indicated by the portion of the real axis in 
the unshaded area: 
Fig. 12-3 

301 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
If the ( - 1,0) point falls in the stable region, an increase or decrease in K can cause enough shift in the GH contour 
to the left or the right to destabilize the system. This can happen because a shaded (unstable) region appears both 
to the left and the right of the unshaded (stable) region. This phenomenon is called conditional stability
7. 
Although absolute stability can often be altered by adjustment of the gain factor alone, other 
performance criteria such as those concerned with relative stability usually require additional compen­
sators. 
i2.3 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION USING M-CIRCLES 
The gain factor K of G for a unity feedback system can be determined for a specific resonant peak 
M 
by the following procedure which entails drawing the Polar Plot once only. 
Step 1: 
Draw the Polar Plot of G ( w ) for K=\. 
Step 2: 
Calculate ^ , given by 
02.1) 
Step 3: 
Draw
7 a radial line A B at an angle ^ below the negative real axis, as shown in Fig. 12-4. 
Step 4: Draw the M 
circle tangent to both G ( w ) and line AB at C. Then draw
7 a line CD 
perpendicular to the real axis shown in the example Polar Plot shown in Fig. 12-5. 
Step 5: Measure the length of line AD along the real axis. The required gain factor K for the 
specified M is given by 
(12.2) 
If the Polar Plot of G for a gain factor K' other than K= 1 is already available, it is not necessary 
to repeat this plot for A" = 1. Simply apply Steps 2 through 5 and use the following formula for the gain 
factor necessary to achieve the specified M : 
(12.3) 

302 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
12.4 
LEAD COMPENSATION 
The transfer function for a continuous system lead network, presented in Equation (6.2), is 
where 
The Polar Plot of P, 
for 
is shown in Fig. 12-6. 
Fig. 12-6 
For some systems in which lead compensation is applicable, appropriate choice of the zero at —a 
and the pole at - b permits an increase in the open-loop gain factor K, providing greater accuracy (and 
sometimes stability), without adversely affecting transient performance. Conversely, for a given 
K, 
transient performance can be improved. In some cases, both steady state and transient response can be 
favorably modified with lead compensation. 
The lead network provides compensation by virtue of its phase lead property in the low-to-
medium-frequency range and its negligible attenuation 
at high frequencies. The low-to-medium-
frequency range is defined as the vicinity of the resonant frequency « . Several lead networks may be 
cascaded if a large phase lead is required. 
Lead compensation generally increases the bandwidth of a system. 
EXAMPLE 12.4. 
The Polar Plot for 
is given in Fig. 12-7. The system is stable and the phase margin 4>VM is greater than 45°. For a given application, 
<pvtrl is too large, causing a longer than desired delay time Tj in the system transient response. The steady state 
error is also too large. That is, the velocity error constant KI: is too small by a factor of A > 1. We shall modify this 
system by a combination of gain factor compensation, to meet the steady state specification, and phase lead 
compensation, to improve the transient response. Assuming If{s) = 1, Equation (9.12) yields 
Fig. 12-7 

303 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
and hence 
Putting 
the open-loop transfer function becomes 
The system represented by GH2 has the desired velocity constant Kl2 = \Krl. 
Let us now consider what would happen to Kv2 of GH2 if a lead network were introduced. The lead network 
acts like an attenuator at low frequencies. That is, 
since a/b < 1. Therefore if a lead network is used to modify the transient response, the gain factor Kl of GHl must 
be increased \(b/a) 
times in order to meet the steady state requirement. The gain factor part of the total 
compensation should therefore be larger than that which would be called for if only the steady state specification 
has to be met. Hence we modify GII2, yielding 
As is often the case, increasing the gain factor by an amount as large as \(h/a) times destabilizes the system, as 
shown in the Polar Plots of GIIU GH2, and GII2 in Fig. 12-8. 
Fig. 12-8 
Now let us insert the lead network and determine its effects. C / / 3 becomes 
First, lim A . ^[sGH^sy] = XKrl convinces us that the steady state specification has been met. In fact, in the very 
low frequency region we have 
Hence the 67/ 4 contour is almost coincident with the GII2 contour in the very low frequency range. 
In the very high frequency region. 
Therefore the GH4 contour is almost coincident with GH2 for very high frequencies. 

304 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
In the mid-frequency range, where the phase lead property of the lead network substantially alters the phase 
characteristic of G / / 4 , the GH4 contour bends away from the GH2 and toward the Glh locus as co is increased. 
This effect is better understood if wc write G / / 4 in the following form: 
where 
|P, , a d(./to)| = y( to
2 + a
2)/(co
2 + ft
2) , <ji((o) = tan '(to/a) - tan" '(co/*), a/b <\PLcild(ju)\< 
1, 0° < 
^>(co) < 90°. Therefore the lead network modifies GH3 as follows. G7/ 3 is shifted downwards beginning at GH?( pc) 
in a counterclockwise direction toward G/7 2 due to the positive phase contribution of Pi<:jnl 
[0° < <j>(u)< 90°]. In 
addition, it is attenuated [0 < |.r\ t. adOto)|
 < 1]- The resulting Polar Plot for G / ^ is illustrated in Fig. 12-9. 
Fig. 12-9 
The system represented by G / / 4 is clearly stable, and <£>;,M is less than 45°, reducing the delay time Td of the 
original system represented by GHl. By a trial-and-error procedure, the zero at - a and the pole at -h can be 
chosen such that a specific M can be achieved. 
A block diagram of the fully compensated system is shown in Fig. 12-10. Unity feedback is shown for 
convenience only. 
Fig. 12-10 
12.5 
LAG COMPENSATION 
The transfer function for a continuous system lag network, presented in Equation (6.3), is 
where a < b. The Polar Plot of PL 
for 0 < to < oc is shown in Fig. 12-11. 

305 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
Fig. 12-11 
The tag network usually provides compensation by virtue of its attenuation property in the high 
frequency portion of the Polar Plot, since P L a g ( 0 ) = 1 and P L a g ( c c ) = a/b < 1. Several lag networks can 
be cascaded to provide even higher attenuation, if required. The phase lag contribution of the lag 
network is often restricted by design to the very low frequency range. Several general effects of lag 
compensation are: 
1. 
The bandwidth of the system is usually decreased. 
2. 
The dominant time constant r of the system is usually increased, producing a more sluggish 
system. 
3. 
F o r a given relative stability, the value of the error constant is increased. 
4. 
F o r a given value of error constant, relative stability is improved. 
The procedure for using lag compensation to improve system performance is essentially the same as 
that for lead compensation. 
EXAMPLE 12.5. 
Let us redesign the system of Example 12.4 using gain factor plus lag compensation. The 
original open-loop transfer function is 
The gain factor compensation transfer function is 
Since P
L . = 
1, introduction of the lag network after the steady state criterion has been met by gain factor 
compensation docs not require an additional increase in gain factor. 
Introducing the lag network, we get 
Now 
vhere Kri = K\/P\P2- Therefore the steady state specification is met by GH{. 
In the very low frequency region. 
Hence GH{ is almost coincident with GH2 at very low frequencies, with the lag property of this network 
manifesting itself in this range. 
In the very high frequency region, 
Therefore, the GH; contour lies above or below the GHl contour in the range, if A > h/a or A < b/a. respectively. 
If A = b/a, the GH{ and GHt contours coincide. 

306 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
(CHAP. 12 
In the mid-frequency range, the attenuation effect of PL 
increases as co becomes larger, and there is relatively 
small phase lag. 
The resulting Polar Plot (with X = b/a) and a block diagram of the fully compensated system are given in 
Figs. 12-12 and 12-13. 
Fig. 12-12 
Fig. 12-13 
12.6 
LAG-LEAD COMPENSATION 
The transfer function for a continuous system lag-lead network, presented in Equation (6.4), is 
where 
The Polar Plot of 
is shown in 
Fig. 12-14. 
Fig. 12-14 
Lag-lead compensation has all of the advantages of both lag compensation and lead compensation, 
and only a minimum of their usually undesirable characteristics. Satisfaction of many system specifica­
tions is possible without the burden of excessive bandwidth and small dominant time constants. 

307 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
It is not easy to generalize about the application of lag-lead compensation or to prescribe a method 
for its employment, especially using Nyquist techniques. But, for illustrative purposes, we can describe 
how it alters the properties of a simple type 2 system in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 12.6. 
The Nyquist Stability Plot for 
is given in Fig. 12-15. Clearly, the system is unstable, and no amount of gain factor compensation can stabilize it 
because the contour for 0 < to < oo always lies above the negative real axis. Lag compensation is also inapplicable 
for basically the same reason, 
Fig. 12-15 
Fig. 12-16 
Lead compensation may succeed in stabilizing the system, as shown in Fig. 12-16. But the desired application 
for the compensated system may call for a lower bandwidth than can be achieved with a lead network. 
If a lag-lead network is used, the open-loop transfer function becomes 
and the Polar Plot is shown in Fig. 12-17. This system is conditionally stable if the ( - 1,0) point falls on the real 
axis in the unshaded region. By trial and error, the parameters of the lag-lead network can be chosen to yield good 
transient and steady state performance for this previously unstable system, and the bandwidth will be smaller than 
that of the lead-compensated system. A computer program control system design (CAD) package, or any program 
that readily generates Polar Plots, can be used to help accomplish this task quickly and effectively. 
Fig. 12-17 

308 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
12.7 
OTHER COMPENSATION SCHEMES AND COMBINATIONS OF COMPENSATORS 
M a n y other types of physical networks can be used to compensate feedback control systems. 
Compensation networks can also be implemented in software, as part of the control algorithm in a 
computer-controlled system. P I D controllers are a popular class of such controllers (see Examples 2.14 
and 6.7 and Section 10.5). 
Combinations of gain factors and lead or lag networks were used as compensators in Examples 12.4 
and 12.5, and a lag-lead compensator alone was used in Example 12.6 Other combinations are also 
feasible and effective, particularly where steady state error requirements cannot be met by gain factor 
compensation alone. This is often the case when the open-loop transfer function has too few 
"integrators," that is, denominator terms of the form s' for continuous systems, or ( z - 1 ) ' for 
discrete-time systems as illustrated in the next example. 
EXAMPLE 12.7. 
Our goal is to determine an appropriate compensator G,(z) for the digital system shown in 
Fig. 12-18. The resulting closed-loop system must meet the following performance specifications: 
1. 
Steady stale error e(») = I - c(a=) < 0.02, for a unit ramp input. 
2. 
Phase margin <^ P M > 30°. 
3. 
Gain crossover frequency o>, > 10 rad/sec.
! ! 
F i g . 12-18 
The sampling period for this system is 7 = 0.1 see (sampling angular frequency w s = 2TT/0.1 = 20 7r rad/scc). 
Wc note first that the plant is a type 0 system, because there is no "integrator" term of the form (z — l)' in 
the denominator of G,(z) for / > l (see Section 9.8). To meet the first performance specification, it is 
immediately clear tliat the overall open-loop system type must be increased by a factor of at least I, that is, the 
compensated system must be at least type l , to achieve a finite steady state error for a unit ramp input. Therefore 
we add a single pole at z = I, as G\, as a first step in determining appropriate compensation: 
Now, from the table in Section 9.9, the steady state error for a unit ramp input is <?(«) = T/K,, 
and the velocity 
error constant is K; = 3(2)(4)/8(4) = -j. Therefore e(=°) = 0.15, which is larger than the value of 0.02 required by 
performance specification l . 
The next obvious question is whether the addition of gain factor compensation would be sufficient to 
complete the design. This would require a gain increase by at leasl a factor of A = 0.1/(0.02X0
 = T> yielding 
To check the remaining performance criteria (2 and 3) the gain crossover frequency to, and phase margin <J>PM can 
be evaluated from their defining equations in Section 11.11. Wc have 
and 
satisfies the equation 
Now, to, and <PPM could be determined graphically from a Nyquist Stability Plot of C['G2, 
as illustrated in Fig. 
11-16. But a less difficult task is to solve for <0[ and <f>PM from their defining equations, preferably using a computer 
*See Problem 12.16 for further discussion of this performance specification and its relationship to system bandwidth BW 

309 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
program capable of complex numerical calculations. This can be done by first substituting e'"'
! for z in G['G2(z), 
using the Polar Form, Euler Form, and/or Complex Form substitutions [Equations (11.2) through (11.4)]. and 
then solving for to, 7" such that G i " 6 : = 1. Trial-and-error solution for to, 7" can be helpful in this regard, which we 
used to find « , P = 2.54 rad after several trials, resulting in G!'G-,(u,) = -0.72 4 /0.7 and 
Clearly, to, = 2.54/0.1 = 25.4 > 10 rad/sec satisfies performance specification 3, but not the phase margin 
requirement 2, because <£I>M = - 4 4 . 4 ^ 30°, the negative phase margin also indicating that the closed-loop system 
with G['G2 is unstable. 
Introduction of a lag compensator might solve the remaining constraint, because it increases the phase margin 
without affecting the steady state error. The transfer function of a digital lag compensator was given in Example 
6.12, Equation (6.11), as 
(12.4) 
where zt < pt. Note that P, 
(1) = P i . ^ e ' " ) = 1, which explains why the lag network does not affect the steady 
state response of this type 1 system. The Polar Plot of P L l 0 is shown in Fig. 12-26. 
The problem now is to choose appropriate values of zr and p, to render <£ P M > 30° and toj > 10 rad/sec. 
Again, we accomplished this readily by trial and error, using a computer to evaluate the simultaneous solution for 
zt and /> of the two relations \G{" G,(10)| = 1 and 
where G{"G2 = Pi.aA(G'i'G2). 
These equations have multiple solutions and, often, good choices for pr and : c arc 
values close to 1, because P L 
then has minimal effect on the phase of G['G2 at higher frequencies. The pole and 
zero of P, 
effectively cancel each other at high frequencies when their values arc close to 1. After several trials, we 
obtained a = 0.86 and b = 0.97, and a final compensator: 
fhc resulting Polar Plot (for 0 < to < n) for the compensated system G{G2 is shown with <j>1)M > 30° in Fig. 12-19. 
Fig. 12-19 
Example 12.7 is reworked by root-locus techniques in Example 14.5, and also by Bode methods in 
Example 16.6, the latter solution using the tv-lransform introduced in Section 10.7. 

310 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
Solved Problems 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
12.1. 
Consider the open-loop transfer function GH = —3/(s 
+ l)(.v + 2). Is the system represented by 
GH stable or unstable? 
Unstable. The characteristic equation is determined from 1 + GH = 0 and is given by s
2 + 3s - 1 = 0. 
Since all the coefficients do not have the same sign, the system is unstable (see Problem 5.27). 
12.2. 
Determine the minimum value of gain factor to stabilize the system of the previous problem. 
Let GH be written as GH = K/(s + \)(s + 2). Then the characteristic equation is s
2 + 3s• + 2 + K = 0 
and the Routh table (see Section 5.3) is 
Hence the minimum gain factor for stability is 
where t is any small positive number. 
12.3. 
The solution of the previous problem also tells us that the system of Problems 12.1 and 12.2 is 
stable for all K> 
— 2. Sketch Polar Plots of this system, superimposed on the same coordinate 
axes, for Kx = — 3 and A\ = — 1. What general comments can you make about the transient 
response of the stable system? Assume it is a unity feedback system. 
The required Polar Plots are shown in Fig. 12-20. The A/-circle tangent to the plot for K = - 1 has 
infinite radius; thus M = 1. This means that the peak overshoot is zero (no overshoot), and the system is 
either critically damped or overdamped. 
Fig. 12^20 
12.4. 
Is the system represented by the characteristic equation 
ever condi­
tionally stable? Why? 
Yes. The gain factor range for stability of this system was determined in Example 5.3 as - 1 < K < 8. 
Since both limits are finite, an increase in the gain factor above 8 or a decrease below - 1 destabilizes the 
system. 

311 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
12.5. 
Determine the gain factor AT of a unity feedback system whose open-loop transfer function is 
given by G = K/(s 
+ l)(s + 2) for a resonant peak specified by M = 2. 
From Equation (12.1) we have ¥ = sin
_ 1(-j) = 30°. The line AB drawn at an angle of 30° below the 
negative real axis is shown in Fig. 12-21, a replica of Fig. 12-20 for K = — 1. 
Fig. 12-21 
The circle denoted by Mp = 2 has been drawn tangent to both AB and the Polar Plot of K= — 1. Using 
the scale of this Polar Plot, line AD has a length equal to 0.76. Therefore Equation (12.3) yields 
It is also possible to compute a positive value of gain for Mp = 2 from a Polar Plot of G(s) for any positive 
value of K. The Polar Plot for K= 1 is the same as that in Fig. 12-21, but rotated by 180°. 
MISCELLANEOUS COMPENSATION 
12.6. 
What kind of compensation is possible for a system whose Polar Plot is given by F i g . 12-22? 
Lead, lag-lead, and simple gain factor compensation are capable of stabilizing the system and 
improving the relative stability. 
Fig. 12-22 
12.7. 
Consider the unity feedback system whose open-loop transfer function is given by 

312 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
H o w would the inclusion of a minor feedback loop with a transfer function K2s 
(K2 > 0), as 
shown in the block diagram in Fig. 12-23, affect the transient and steady state performance of 
the system? 
Fie. 12-23 
Combining the blocks in the inner loop yields a new unity feedback system with an open-loop transfer 
function 
The Polar Plots for G and C are sketched in Fig. 12-24. 
The phase margin is clearly larger for the two-loop feedback system G'. Hence the peak overshoot is 
smaller, or the damping ratio is larger, and the transient response is superior to that of the uncompensated 
system. The steady state performance however, is generally slightly worse. For a unit step input the steady 
state error is zero, as for any type 1 system. But the steady state error for a unit ramp or velocity input is 
larger [see Equations (9.4) and (9.5)]. The compensation scheme illustrated by this problem is called 
derivative or tachometric feedback, and the control algorithm is derivative (D) control. 
12.8. 
Determine a type of compensator that yields a phase margin of approximately 45° when added 
to the fixed system components defined by 
A n additional requirement is that the high-frequency response of the compensated system is to 
be approximately the same as that of the uncompensated system. 
The Polar Plot for GH is sketched in Fig. 12-25. It is very close to the negative imaginary axis for 
almost all values of to. 

313 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
Fig. 12-25 
The phase margin is almost 90°, and either an increase in gain factor and/or a lag compensator is 
capable of satisfying the phase margin requirement. But since the lag network may be designed to provide 
attenuation at high frequencies and lag in the low-frequency range, a combination of both would be idea! 
and sufficient (see Example 12.5), as shown in Fig. 12-25. Of course a lag-plus-gain factor compensator is 
not necessary for meeting the design requirements. There are probably an infinite number of different 
networks or transfer functions capable of satisfying these specifications. The lag network and amplifier, 
however, are convenient due to their standardization, availability, and case of synthesis. 
12.9. 
Outline the design of a servomechanism capable of following a constant velocity input with zero 
steady state error and approximately 25% maximum overshoot in the transient state. The fixed 
plant is given by G2 = 50/s
2(s + 5). 
Since the plant is type 2, it is capable of following a constant velocity input with zero steady state error 
(see Chapter 9). However, the closed-loop system is unstable for any value of gain factor (see Example 
12.6). Since no demands on bandwidth have been made, lead compensation should be sufficient (again see 
Example 12.6) to stabilize the system and meet the transient specification. But two lead networks in series 
are probably required because the phase margin of the unstable system is negative, and 25% overshoot is 
equivalent to about +45° phase margin. Most standard lead networks have a maximum phase lead of 
approximately 54° (see Fig. 16-2). 
Detailed design would be very tedious using Nyquist analysis, if performed manually, because the 
Polar Plot usually must be drawn in some detail several times before converging to a satisfactory solution. 
If a computer is not available to facilitate this process, this problem may be solved much more easily using 
the design methods introduced in Chapters 14, 16, and 18. Actually, two compensating lead networks, each 
with a transfer function of approximately P, c. K l = (s + 3)/(s + 20), would satisfy the specifications. If the 
maximum steady state acceleration error were also specified, a preamplifier would be required with the lead 
networks. For example, if Ku = 50, then a preamplifier of gain 5(20/3)
2 would be needed. This preamplifier 
should be placed between the two lead networks to prevent, or minimize, loading effects (sec Section 8.7). 
12.10. Outline a design for a unitv feedback system with a plant given by 
and the performance specifications: 
(1) 
(2) 

314 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
(3) 
The bandwidth B W of the compensated system must be approximately equal to or not 
much greater than that of the uncompensated system, because high-frequency "noise" 
disturbances are present under normal operating conditions. 
(4) 
The compensated system should not respond sluggishly; that is the predominant 
time 
constant T of the system must be maintained at a value approximately the same as that of 
the uncompensated system. 
A simple calculation clearly shows that the uncompensated system is unstable (e.g., try the Routh test). 
Therefore compensation is mandatory. But due to the stringent nature of the specifications, a detailed 
design for this system using Nyquist techniques requires too much effort, if done manually. The techniques 
of the next few chapters provide a much simpler solution. However, analysis of the problem statement 
indicates the kind of compensation needed. 
For G2, Kr = lim,._^nsG2(s) = 40. Therefore satisfaction of (2) requires a gain compensation of 5/4. 
But an increase in gain only makes the system more unstable. Therefore additional compensation is 
necessary. Lead compensation is probably inadequate due to (3), and lag compensation is not possible due 
to (4). Thus it appears that a lag-lead network and an amplifier would most likely satisfy all criteria. The lag 
portion of the lag-lead network would satisfy (3), and the lead portion (4) and (1). 
12.11. What is the effect on the Polar Plot of the system 
where 
when k finite nonzero poles are included in GH, i n 
addition to the original n poles? 
For low frequencies the Polar Plot is modified in magnitude only, since 
For high frequencies addition of k poles reduces the phase angle of GH by 
radians, since 
Therefore the portion of the Polar Plot near the origin is rotated clockwise by 
degrees when 
poles 
are added. 
12.12. D r a w the Polar Plot of the digital lag compensator given by Equation (12.4): 
Let 
and 
to simplify the task. 
At a few intermediate values. 
and 
The resulting 
Polar Plot, for 
radians is shown in Fig. 12-26. It is instructive to compare this Polar Plot ot the 
digital lag compensator with its continuous-time equivalent in Fig. 12-11. 

315 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
Fig. 12-26 
12.13. D r a w the Polar Plot of the particular digital lead compensator: 
where 
We have 
The remainder of the plot has been drawn by computer, by evaluating P]_c^(l/&) for values of the angle <J> 
in the range 0 < <f> < IT radians, for specific values a = 1 and h = 2. The result is given in Fig. 12-27. which 
should be compared with Fig. 12-6, the Polar Plot of a continuous system lead network. 
Fig. 12-27 
This form of the general digital lead compensator, given in Equation (6.9), has a gain factor 
This compensator is a direct digital analog of the continuous lead compensator P L c a d = (s + a)/(s 
b), in 
which the zeros and poles at - a and - b in the i-planc have been transformed directly into zeros and poles 
in z-plane z = e "' and pv = e~
bT, and the steady state gain (at to = 0) has been preserved as a/h. 
12.14. The closed-loop continuous system with both gain factor and lead compensation shown in F i g . 
12-28 is stable, with a damping ratio £ = 0.7 and dominant time constant T ~ 4.5 sec (see 

316 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[ C H A P . 1 2 
Fig. 
1 2 - 2 8 
Sections 4 . 1 3 and 1 0 . 4 ) . Redesign this system, replacing the controller (including summing 
junction) with a digital computer, and any other needed components for analog-digital data 
conversion. The new system should have approximately the same dynamic characteristics. 
The sampling rate of the digital components must be sufficiently fast to reproduce the signals 
accurately. The natural frequency to„ is estimated from Equation (10.7) as co„ = 1 / | T = l / ( 0 . 7 ) ( 4 . 5 ) = 0.317 
rad/sec. For a continuous system with this to„, a safe angular sampling frequency to, ~ 20to„ = 6.35 = 2IT 
rad/sec, equivalent to /, = 1 Hz, because to, = 2irfs. Therefore we choose 7 = 1 sec. 
We now replace the continuous lead compensator by the digital lead compensator given in Problem 
1 2 . 1 3 : 
where a = 0.2 and b •= 2 from Fig. 12-28. The factor of 0.55 can be obtained with the gain factor 
compensator for the continuous system, K = 0 . 8 1 , yielding an overall factor of 0.55 (0.81) = 0.45. The 
resulting design also needs samplers in the feedback and the input paths, and a zero-order hold in the 
forward path, all as shown in Fig. 12-29. 
Fig. 
1 2 - 2 9 
The digital transfer function P ] s, a d(z) can be implemented for digital computation as a difference 
equation between the input and output of PLead> using the methods described in Section 4.9. That is, write 
PLc!1(i(z) as a function of z "
1 instead of z, and treat z "
1 as a unit time-shift operator. Combining the gain 
factor 0.45 with Plj.ildl we obtain 
Then, cross-multiplying terms and letting z
 
1u(k) = u(k - 1), etc., we obtain the desired difference 
equation: 
12.15. Digitize the remaining continuous components i n Fig. 12-29 and compare the Polar Plot of: (a) 
the original continuous plant without compensation, G2(s) = l/s
2, 
(b) the compensated system 
of F i g . 12-28, GlG2(s), 
and (c) the digital system of Fig. 12-30, G , G 2 ( z ) . 

317 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 12] 
Hie combination of the zero-order hold and the plant G2(s) = 1 / s
2 can be digitized using Equation 
(6.9). 
The closed-loop discrete-time equivalent system is shown in Fig. 12-30. 
Nyquist Stability Plots (not shown) would indicate that the compensated systems are absolutely stable. 
To check relative stability, the Polar Plots of the three systems are shown superimposed in Fig. 1 2 - 3 1 , for 
to > 0 only. The phase margin of GtG2(s) is <f>PM = 5 3 ° , a substantial improvement over that of G2(s). The 
Polar Plots for Gfi2(s) and GxG2(z) are quite similar, over a wide range of co, and the phase margin for 
G1G2(z) is still quite good, <#>PM = 3 7 ° , 
Fig. 1 2 - 3 0 
Fig. 1 2 - 3 1 
12.16, Determine the closed-loop system bandwidth B W of the compensated 
system designed i n 
Example 12.7. 
Performance specification 3 was given in terms of the gain crossover frequency to,, as to, > 10 rad/sec. 
This may appear somewhat unrealistic, or artificial, given that a specific phase margin <J>PM = [180 + 
argC//(co 1)] degrees was also given in performance specification 2. Actually, the bandwidth (BW) of the 
closed-loop system would be the more likely frequency of interest in control system design. (These design 
criteria are discussed in Chapter 10.) However, as noted in Section 10.4, it is often the case that to; is a 
good approximation of the closed-loop system bandwidth BW, when it is given its common interpretation 
as the range of frequencies over which the magnitude ratio of the system, which in this case means 
\C/R\, 
does not fall more than 3 db from its steady state value, at co = 0 ( z = 1). For this problem 

318 
N Y Q U I S T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 12 
We easily find that 
Now, 3 db down from 1 is 0.707 [see Equation (70.5)]. Therefore the BW Is the frequency to B W that satisfies 
the equation: 
We quickly obtain the solution <oBW = 10.724 rad/sec by trial and error using a computer to evaluate the 
magnitude ratio at a few values of to in the vicinity of to, = 10. Thus the approximation tcl = to B V V is 
confirmed as a good one for the problem solved in Example 12.7. 
Supplementary Problems 
12.17. Determine a positive value of gain factor K when M = 2 for the system of Problem 12.5. 
12.18. Prove Equation (12.1). 
12.19. Prove Equations (12.2) and (72J). 
12.20. Design a compensator which yields a phase margin of approximately 45° for the system defined by 
G77 = 84/s(.s + 2)(s + 6). 
12.21. Design a compensator which yields a phase margin of about 40° and a velocity constant K,. = 40 for the 
system defined by Gil = (4 X W
5)/s(s + 20)(s + 100). 
12.22. What kind of compensation can be used to yield a maximum overshoot of 20% for the system defined by 
67/= ( 4 x W
4)/s
!(s+ 100)? 
12.23. Show that the addition of k finite zeros (z, ¥= 0) to the system of Problem 12.11 rotates the high-frequency 
portion of the Polar Plot by kv/2 
radians in the counterclockwise direction. 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
12.17. K = 31.2 
12.18. 
_ *
 + 
3
0 
12 21
 
s + 20 
A 
L..ul = 
^ 
, no preamplifier required 
12.22. Lag-lead, and possibly lead plus gain factor compensation. 

319 
Chapter 13 
Root-Locus Analysis 
13.1 
INTRODUCTION 
It was shown in Chapters 4 and 6 that the poles of a transfer function can be displayed graphically 
in the .v-plane or z-plane by means of a pole-zero map. A n analytical method is presented in this chapter 
for displaying the location of the poles of the closed-loop transfer function 
G 
1 + GH 
as a function of the gain factor K (see Sections 6.2 and 6.6) of the open-loop transfer function GH. This 
method, called root-locus analysis, requires that only the location of the poles and zeros of GH be 
known, and does not require factorization of the characteristic polynomial. 
Root-locus techniques permit accurate computation of the time-domain response in addition to 
yielding readily available frequency response information. 
The following discussion of root-locus analysis applies identically to continuous systems i n the 
j-plane and discrete-time systems in the z-plane. 
13.2 
VARIATION OF CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEM POLES: THE ROOT-LOCUS 
Consider the canonical feedback control system given in F i g . 13-1. The closed-loop transfer 
function is 
C 
G 
~R ~ \+GH 
H •* 
Fig. 13-1 
Let the open-loop transfer function GH be represented by 
KN 
GH = 
D 
where N and D are finite polynomials in the complex variable s or z and K is the open-loop gain 
factor. The closed-loop transfer function then becomes 
C 
G 
GD 
R ~ 1 + KN/D ~ D + KN 
The closed-loop poles are roots of the characteristic equation 
D + KN = 0 
(13.1) 
In general the location of these roots i n the .v-plane or z-plane changes as the open-loop gain factor K is 
varied. A locus of these roots plotted in the .v-plane or z-plane as a function of K is called a root-locus. 
F o r K equal to zero, the roots of Equation (13.1) are the roots of the polynomial D, which are the 
same as the poles of the open-loop transfer function GH. UK 
becomes very large, the roots approach 

320 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
those of the polynomial N, the open-loop zeros. Thus, as K is increased from zero to infinity, the loci of 
the closed-loop poles originate from the open-loop poles and terminate at the open-loop zeros. 
EXAMPLE 13.1. 
Consider the continuous system open-loop transfer function 
For / / = 1, the closed-loop transfer function is 
The closed-loop poles of this system are easily determined by factoring the denominator polynomial: 
The locus of these roots plotted as a function of K (for K> 0) is shown in the i-plane in Fig. 13-2. As observed in 
the figure, this root-locus has two branches: one for a closed-loop pole which moves from the open-loop pole at the 
origin to the open-loop zero at - 1, and from the open-loop pole at - 2 to the open-loop zero at - cc. 
Fig. 13-2 
In the example above, the root-locus is constructed by factoring the denominator polynomial of the 
system closed-loop transfer function. In the following sections, techniques are described which permit 
construction of root-loci without the need for factorization. 
13.3 
ANGLE AND MAGNITUDE CRITERIA 
In order for a branch of a root-locus to pass through a particular point p: in the complex plane, it 
is necessary that px be a root of the characteristic Equation (13.1) for some real value of K. That is. 
or, equivalently, 
(13.2) 
(13.3) 
Therefore the complex number GH(pl) 
must have a phase angle of 180° + 360/°, where / is an 
arbitrary integer. Thus we have the angle criterion 
(13.4a) 
which can also be written as 
(13.4b) 

321 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 131 
In order for pY to be a closed-loop pole of the system, on the root-locus, it is necessary that 
Equation (13.3) be satisfied with regard to magnitude i n addition to phase angle. That is, K must have 
the particular value that satisfies the magnitude criterion: \GH(pl)\ 
= 1, or 
(13.5) 
The angle and magnitude of GH at any point i n the complex s- or z-plane can be determined 
graphically as described in Sections 4.12 and 6.5. In this way, it is possible to construct the root-locus 
manually by a trial-and-error procedure of testing points in the complex plane. That is, the root-locus is 
drawn through all points which satisfy the angle criterion, Equation (13.4b), and the magnitude 
criterion is used to determine the values of K at points along the loci. Digital computer programs for 
routinely plotting root-loci are widely available. However, manual construction is simplified consider­
ably, using certain shortcuts or construction rules as described in the following sections. 
13.4 
NUMBER OF LOCI 
The number of loci, that is, the number of branches of the root-locus, is equal to the number of 
poles of the open-loop transfer function GH (for n>m). 
EXAMPLE 13.2. The open-loop transfer function of the discrete-time system GH(z) = K(z + \)/z
1(z + ^) has 
three poles. Hence there are three loci in the root-locus plot. 
13.5 
REAL AXIS LOCI 
Those sections of the root-locus on the real axis i n the complex plane are determined by counting 
the total number of finite poles and zeros of GH to the right of the points in question. The following 
rule depends on whether the open-loop gain factor K is positive or negative. 
Rule for K>0 
Points of the root-locus on the real axis lie to the left of an odd number of finite poles and zeros. 
Rule for K<0 
Points of the root-locus on the real axis lie to the left of an even number of finite poles and zeros. 
If no points on the real axis lie to the left of an odd number of finite poles and zeros, then no 
portion of the root-locus for K > 0 lies on the real axis. A similar statement is true for K < 0. 
EXAMPLE 13.3. 
Consider the pole-zero map of an open-loop transfer function GH shown in Fig. 13-3. Since all 
the points on the real axis between 0 and - 1 and between - 1 and - 2 lie to the left of an odd number of finite 
poles and zeros, these points are on the root-locus for K > 0. The portion of the real axis between — co and — 4 lies 
to the left of an odd number of finite poles and zeros; hence these points are also on the root-locus for K> 0. A l l 
portions of the root-locus for K > 0 on the real axis are illustrated in Fig. 13-4. A l l remaining portions of the real 
axis, that is, between - 2 and - 4 and between 0 and oo, lie on the root-locus for K< 0. 
Fig. 13-3 
Fig. 13-4 

322 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
13.6 
ASYMPTOTES 
For large distances from the origin in the complex plane, the branches of a root-locus approach a 
set of straight-line asymptotes. These asymptotes emanate from a point in the complex plane on the real 
axis called the center of asymptotes ac given by 
(13.6) 
where - p , . are the poles, - z , are the zeros, n is the number of poles, and m the number of zeros of 
GH. 
The angles between the asymptotes and the real axis are given by 
(13.7) 
for / = 0,1,2 
n - m - \ . This results in a number of asymptotes equal to n - m. 
EXAMPLE 13.4. 
The center of asymptotes for GH = K(s + 2)/s
2(s + 4) is located at 
Since n - m = 3 - 1 = 2, there are two asymptotes. Their angles with the real axis arc 90° and 270°. for K > 0, as 
shown in Fig. 13-5. 
Fig. 13-5 
13.7 
BREAKAWAY POINTS 
A breakaway point ah is a point on the real axis where two or more branches of the root-locus 
depart from or arrive at the real axis. Two branches leaving the real axis are illustrated in the root-locus 
plot in F i g . 13-6. Two branches coming onto the real axis are illustrated in Fig. 13-7. 
Fig. 13-6 
Fig. 13-7 
The location of the breakaway point can be determined by solving the following equation for 
when 
are the poles and zeros of GH, respectively. The solution of this equation requires 

323 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
factorization of an (n + m — l)-order polynomial in a!t. Consequently, the breakaway point can only be 
easily determined analytically for relatively simple GH. However, an approximate location can often be 
determined intuitively; then an iterative process can be used to solve the equation more exactly (see 
Problem 13.20). Computer programs for factorization of polynomials could also be applied. 
EXAMPLE 13.5. 
To determine the breakaway points for GH 
the following equation must be 
solved for 
which reduces to 3tT,
: + 6ch + 2 = 0 whose roots are ah = —0.423, — 1.577. 
Applying the real axis rule of Section 13.5 for K > 0 indicates that there arc branches of the root-locus between 
0 and - 1 and between - oo and - 2 . Therefore the root at -0.423 is a breakaway point, as shown in Fig. 13-8. 
The value oh = -1.577 represents a breakaway on the root-locus for negative values of K since the portion of the 
real axis between - 1 and - 2 is on the root-locus for K < 0. 
13.8 
DEPARTURE AND ARRIVAL ANGLES 
The departure angle of the root-locus from a complex pole is given by 
(13.9) 
where argG/7' is the phase angle of GH computed at the complex pole, but ignoring the contribution of 
that particular pole. 
EXAMPLE 13.6. 
Consider the continuous system open-loop transfer function 
The departure angle of the root-locus from the complex pole at s = ~ 1 +_/ is determined as follows. The angle of 
GH for i
- = — 1 + /, ignoring the contribution of the pole at .v = — 1 + j, is - 45°. Therefore the departure angle is 
and is illustrated in Fig. 13-9. 
Fig. 13-9 

324 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
The angle of arrival of the root-locus at a complex zero is given by 
(13.10) 
where a r g G / V " is the phase angle of GH at the complex zero, ignoring the effect of that zero. 
EXAMPLE 13.7. 
Consider the discrete-time system open-loop transfer function 
The arrival anele of the root-locus for the comrilex zero at 
as shown in 
Fig. 13-10. 
Fig. 13-10 
13.9 
CONSTRUCTION OF THE ROOT-LOCUS 
A root-locus plot may be easily and accurately sketched using the construction rules of Sections 
13.4 through 13.8. A n efficient procedure is the following. First, determine the portions of the root-locus 
on the real axis. Second, compute the center and angles of the asymptotes and draw the asymptotes on 
the plot. Then determine the departure and arrival angles at complex poles and zeros (if any) and 
indicate them on the plot. Next, make a rough sketch of the branches of the root-locus so that each 
branch of the locus either terminates at a zero or approaches infinity along one of the asymptotes. The 
accuracy of this last step should of course improve with experience. 
The accuracy of the plot may be improved by applying the angle criterion in the vicinity of the 
estimated branch locations. The rule of Section 13.7 can also be applied to determine the exact location 
of breakaway points. 
The magnitude criterion of Section 13.3 is used to determine the values of K along the branches of 
the root-locus. 
Since complex poles must occur in complex conjugate pairs (assuming real coefficients for the 
numerator and denominator polynomials of GH), the root-locus is symmetric about the real axis. Thus 
it is sufficient to plot only the upper half of the root-locus. However, it must be remembered that, in 
doing this, the lower halves of open-loop complex poles and zeros must be included when applying the 
magnitude and angle criteria. 
Often, for analysis or design purposes, an accurate plot of the root-locus is required only in certain 
regions of the complex plane. In this case, the angle and magnitude criteria need only be applied in 
those regions of interest after a rough sketch has established the general shape of the plot. O f course, if 
a computer and appropriate software are available, plotting of even very complex root-loci can be a 
simple matter. 
EXAMPLE 13.8. 
The root-locus for the closed-loop continuous system with open-loop transfer function 
is constructed as follows. Applying the real axis rule of Section 13.5, the portions of the real axis between 0 and - 2 
and between —4 and — oo lie on the root-locus for K> 0. The center of asymptotes is determined from Equation 
(13.6) to be or. = - ( 2 + 4)/3 - - 2 , and there are three asymptotes located at angles of B = 60°, 180°, and 300°. 

325 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S T S 
C H A P . 13] 
Since two branches of the root-locus for K > 0 come together on the real axis between 0 and - 2, a breakaway 
point exists on that portion of the real axis. Hence the root-locus for 7C>0 may be sketched by estimating the 
location of the breakaway point and continuing the branches of the root-locus to the asymptotes, as shown in Fig. 
13-11, To improve the accuracy of this plot, the exact location of the breakaway point is determined from Equation 
(13.8): 
which simplifies to 
The appropriate solution of this equation is 
Fig. 13-11 
The angle criterion is applied to points in the vicinity of the approximate root-locus to improve the accuracy of 
the location of the branches in the complex part of the i-planc; the magnitude criterion is used to determine the 
values of K along the root-locus. The resulting root-locus plot for K > 0 is shown in Fig. 13-12. 
Fig. 13-12 
The root-locus for K < 0 is constructed in a similar manner. In this case, however, the portions of the real axis 
between 0 and oo and between - 2 and —4 lie on the root-locus; the breakaway point is located at -3.155; and 
the asymptotes have angles of 0°, 120°, and 240°. The root-locus for K < 0 is shown in Fig. 13-13. 

326 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
Fig. 13-13 
13.10 
T H E C L O S E D - L O O P T R A N S F E R F U N C T I O N A N D T H E T I M E - D O M A I N 
R E S P O N S E 
The closed-loop transfer function C/R is easily determined from the root-locus plot for a specified 
value of open-loop gain factor K. From this, the time-domain response c(t) may be determined for a 
given Laplace transformable input r(t) for continuous systems by inversion of C(s). For discrete 
systems, c(k) can be similarly determined by inversion of C(z). 
Consider the closed-loop transfer function C/R for the canonical unity (negative) feedback system 
(13.1!) 
Open-loop transfer functions which are rational algebraic expressions can be written (for continuous 
systems) as 
(13.12) 
G has the same form for discrete-time systems, with z replacing s in Equation (13,12). In Equation 
(13.12), -zj 
are the zeros, -pt 
are the poles of G, m < n, and N and D are polynomials whose roots 
are -zi 
and —pt, respectively. Then 
(13.13) 
and it is clear that 
and G have the same zeros but not the same poles (unless K = 0). Hence 
where — a. denote the n closed-loop poles. The location of these poles is by definition determined 
directly from the root-locus plot for a specified value of open-loop gain K. 
EXAMPLE 13.9. 
Consider the continuous system whose open-loop transfer function is 
The root-locus plot is given in Fig. 13-14. 

327 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
Fig. 13-14 
Several values of gain factor K arc shown at points on the loci denoted by small triangles. These points are the 
closed-loop poles corresponding to the specified values of K. For K= 2, the closed-loop poles arc -•• ax = —2+j and 
— «, = — 2 — j. Therefore 
When the system is not unity feedback, then 
and 
(13.14) 
(13.15) 
The 
closed-loop poles may be determined directly from the root-locus for a given K, but the 
closed-loop zeros are not equal to the open-loop zeros. The open-loop zeros must be computed 
separately by clearing fractions in Equation (13.14). 
EXAMPLE 13.10. 
Consider the continuous system described by 
and 
The root-locus plot for this example is the same as that for Example 13.9. Hence for K = 2, ax=2+j 
and 
a 2 = 2 — j. Thus 
EXAMPLE 13.11. 
For the discrete-time system with GH(z) = K/z(z - 1), the root-locus for K> 0 is shown in 
Fig. 13-15. For K = 0.25, the roots are at z = 0.5 and the closed-loop transfer function is 
Fig. 13-15 

328 
R O O T L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
13.11 
GAIN AND PHASE MARGINS FROM THE ROOT-LOCUS 
The gain margin is the factor by which the gain factor K can be multiplied before the closed-loop 
system becomes unstable. It can be determined from the root-locus using the following formula: 
value of K at the stability boundary 
design value of K 
(13.16) 
where the stability boundary is the y'w-axis i n the i-plane, or the unit circle i n the z-plane. If the 
root-locus does not cross the stability boundary, the gain margin is infinite. 
EXAMPLE 13.12. 
Consider the continuous system in Fig. 13-16. The design value for the gain factor is 8, 
producing the closed-loop poles (denoted by small triangles) shown in the root-locus of Fig. 13-17. The gain factor 
at the yw-axis crossing is 64; hence the gain margin for this system is 64/8 = 8. 
Fig. 13-16 
Fig. 13-17 
EXAMPLE 13.13. 
The root-locus for the discrete-time system of Example 13.11 crosses the stability boundary 
(unit circle) for K=l. For a design value of K= 0.25, the gain margin is 1/0.25 = 4. 
The phase margin can also be determined from the root-locus. In this case it is necessary to find the 
point u1 o n the stability boundary for which \GH\ = 1 for the design value of K; that is, 
It is usually necessary to use a trial-and-error procedure to locate cox. The phase margin is then 
computed from a r g C / / ( w 1 ) as 
(13.17) 
EXAMPLE 13.14. 
For the system of Example 13.12, \GH{ux)\ = 18/(7^ + 2)
3| = 1 when 
= 0; the phase angle 
of (7/7(0) is 0°. The phase margin is therefore 180°. 
EXAMPLE 13.15. 
For the continuous system of Fig. 13-18, the root-locus is shown in Fig. 13-19. The point on 
the yto-axis for which \GH(ux)\ = |24//w1(jwx + 4)
2| = 1 is at ux = 1.35; the angle of G/7(1.35) is -129.6°. 
Therefore the phase margin is <f>PM = 180° - 129.6° = 50.4°. 
Fig. 13-18 

329 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A R 13] 
Fig. 13-19 
13.12 
DAMPING RATIO FROM THE ROOT-LOCUS FOR CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS 
The gain factor K required to give a specified damping ratio £ (or vice versa) for the second-order 
continuous system 
is easily determined from the root-locus. Simply draw a line from the origin at an angle of plus or minus 
6 with the negative real axis, where 
(13.18) 
(See Section 4.13.) The gain factor at the point of intersection with the root-locus is the required value 
of A'. This procedure can be applied to any pair of complex conjugate poles, for systems of second or 
higher order. For higher-order systems, the damping ratio determined by this procedure for a specific 
pair of complex poles does not necessarily determine the damping (predominant time constant) of the 
system. 
EXAMPLE 13.16. 
Consider the third-order system of Example 13.15. The damping ratio f of the complex poles 
for K = 24 is easily determined by drawing a line from the origin to the point on the root-locus where K= 24, as 
shown in Fig. 13-20. The angle 6 is measured as 60°; hence 
This value of f is a good approximation for the damping of the third-order system with K =24 because the 
complex poles dominate the response. 
Solved Problems 
Fig. 13-20 
VARIATION OF SYSTEM CLOSED-LOOP POLES 
13.1. Determine the closed-loop transfer function and the characteristic equation of the unity negative 
feedback control system whose open-loop transfer function is G = K(s + 2)/(.v + l)(s + 4). 

330 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
The closed-loop transfer function is 
The characteristic equation is obtained by setting the denominator polynomial equal to zero: 
13.2. H o w would the closed-loop poles of the system of Problem 13.1 be determined for K — 2 from its 
root-locus plot? 
The root-locus is a plot of the closed-loop poles of the feedback system as a function of K. Therefore 
the closed-loop poles for K = 2 are determined by the points on the root-locus which correspond to K = 2 
(one point on each branch of the locus). 
13.3. H o w can a root-locus be employed to factor the polynomial s
2 + 6s + 18? 
Since the root-locus is a plot of the roots of the characteristic equation of a system, Equation (13.1), as 
a function of its open-loop gain factor, the roots of the above polynomial can be determined from the 
root-locus of any system whose characteristic polynomial is equivalent to it for some value of K. For 
example, the root-locus for GH = K/s(s + 6) factors the characteristic polynomial s
2 + 6s + K. For K= 18 
this polynomial is equivalent to the one wc desire to factor. Thus the desired roots are located on this 
root-locus at the points corresponding to K= 18. 
Note that other forms for GH could be chosen, such as GH — K/(s + 2)(s + 4) whose closed-loop 
characteristic polynomial corresponds to the one wc wish to factor, but now for K = 10. 
ArNCrLt; AINU MAGNITUDE CKI1EK1A 
13.4. Show that the point px = - 0 . 5 satisfies the angle criterion, Equation (13.4), and the magnitude 
criterion, Equation (13.5), when K — 1.5 in the open-loop transfer function of Example 13.1. 
or 
Thus as illustrated on the root-locus plot of Example 13.1, the point p} = —0.5 is on the root-locus and is a 
closed-loop pole for K= 1.5. 
13.5. Determine the angle and magnitude of GH 
for GH = K 
What value of K satisfies 
and for 
it is necessary that 
13.6. 
Illustrate the graphical composition of arg GH 
and 
in Problem 13.5. 

331 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
Fig. 13-21 
13.7. 
Show that the point pY 
is on the root-locus for 
and determine K at this point. 
The angle criterion, Equation (13.4b), is thus satisfied for 
and the point 
is on the 
root-locus. From Equation (13.5), 
NUMBER OF LOCI 
13.8. 
W h y must the number of loci equal the number of open-loop poles for m < nl 
Each branch of the root-locus represents the locus of one closed-loop pole. Consequently there must be 
as many branches or loci as there are closed-loop poles. Since the number of closed-loop poles is equal to 
the number of open-loop poles for m < n, the number of loci must equal the number of open-loop poles. 
13.9. 
H o w many loci are in the root-locus for 
Since the number of open-loop poles is three, there are three loci in the root-locus plot. 
REAL AXIS LOCI 
13.10. Prove the real axis loci rules. 
For any point on the real axis, the angle contributed to arg GH by any real axis pole or zero is cither 
0° or 180°, depending on whether or not the point is to the right or to the left of the pole or zero. The total 
angle contributed to argGH(s) by a pair of complex poles or zeros is zero because 
for all real values of s. Thus -argGH(s) for real values of s (s = o) may be written as 
where nr is the total number of finite poles and zeros to the right of o. In order to satisfy the angle 
criterion, nr must be odd for positive K and even for negative K. Thus for K> 0, points of the root-locus 
on the real axis lie to the left of an odd number of finite poles and zeros; and for K < 0, points of the 
root-locus on the real axis lie to the left of an even number of finite poles and zeros. 

332 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
13.11. Determine which parts of the real axis are on the root-locus of 
The points on the real axis which lie to the left of an odd number of finite poles and zeros are only 
those points bctw-een — 1 and - 2 . Therefore by the rule for K > 0, only the portion of real axis between 
- 1 and —2 lies on the root-locus. 
13.12. W h i c h parts of the real axis are on the root-locus for 
Points on the real axis between 0 and - 1 and between — 1 and - 2 lie to the left of an odd number of 
poles and zeros and therefore are on the root-locus for K> 0. 
ASYMPTOTES 
13.13. Prove that the angles of the asymptotes are given by 
(13.7) 
For points s far from the origin in the .s-plane, the angle contributed to arg GH by each of m zeros is 
Similarly, the angle contributed to argG/7 by each of n poles is approximately equal to -arg(s). Therefore 
where R = arg(.s). In order for s to be on the root-locus the angle criterion. Equation (13.4b), must be 
satisfied. Thus 
and, since 
radians 
are the same angle in the s-plane, then 
The proof is similar for the z-plane. 
13.14. Show that the center of asymptotes is given by 
113.6) 
The points on the root-locus satisfy the characteristic equation 
Dividing by the numerator polynomial N(s), this becomes 
for 
for 
for 
for 

333 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
(same for the z-plane, with z replacing s). When the first coefficient of a polynomial is unity, the second 
coefficient is equal to minus the sum of the roots (see Problem 5.26). Thus from D(s) = 0, bn_1 = £"_i/>,-. 
From N(s) = 0, am_1 =EJ1 1z I; and — (b„_l - am_1) is equal to the sum of n — m roots of the characteris­
tic equation. 
Now for large values of K and correspondingly large distances from the origin these 
— m roots 
approach the straight-line asymptotes and, along the asymptotes, the sum of the n — m roots is equal to 
— 
am-\)- Since bn_l — am_1 is a real number, the asymptotes must intersect at a point on the real 
axis. The center of asymptotes is therefore given by the point on the real axis where n — m equal roots add 
up to -(/>„_! - am_1). Thus 
For a more detailed proof, see reference [6]. 
13.15. F i n d the angles and center of, and sketch the asymptotes for 
GH 
The center of asymptotes is 
There are three asymptotes located at angles of 
and 
as shown in Fig. 13-22. 
Fig. 13-22 
13.16. Sketch the asymptotes for 
and 
for 
The center of asymptotes is ac = — (0 + 2 + 1 +j +l—j)/4= 
— 1. 
For K> 0, the angles of the asymptotes are B = 45°, 135°, 225°, and 315° as shown in Fig. 13-23. 
For K< 0, the angles of the asymptotes are B = 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270° as shown in Fig. 13-24. 
Fig. 13-23 
Fig. 13-24 

334 
ROOT-LOCUS A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
BREAKAWAY POINTS 
13.17. Show that a breakaway point ah satisfies 
(13.8) 
A breakaway point is a point on the real axis where the gain factor K along the real axis portion of the 
root-locus is a maximum for poles leaving the real axis, or a minimum for poles coming onto the real axis, 
(sec Section 13.2). The gain factor along the root-locus is given by 
(13.5) 
On the real axis, s = a (or z = ft) and the magnitude signs may be dropped because D{o) and N(v) are 
both real. Then 
To find the value of o for which K is a maximum or minimum, the derivative of K with respect to a is set 
equal to zero: 
By repeated differentiation and factorization, this can be written as 
Finally, dividing both sides by 
yields the required result. 
13.18. Determine the breakaway point for 
The breakaway point satisfies 
from which 
13.19. Find the breakaway point for 
From Equation (13.8), 
which gives tr,; + 4ah = 0. This equation has the solution tr,, = 0 and <sh = — 4; a,,= - 4 is a breakaway point 
for K > 0 and ah = 0 is a breakaway point for K < 0, as shown in Fig. 13-25. 
Fig. 13-25 

335 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
13.20. F i n d the breakaway point between 0 and -1 for 
The breakaway point must satisfy 
If this equation were simplified, a third-order polynomial would be obtained. To avoid solving a third-order 
polynomial, the following procedure may be used. As a first guess, assume ah = -0.5 and use this value in 
the two terms for the poles furthest from the breakaway point. Then 
which simplifies to a,
2 + 3.92afc + 1.46 = 0 and has the root a,, = -0.43 between 0 and - 1 . This value i: 
used to obtain a better approximation as follows: 
The second computation did not result in a value much different from the first. A reasonable first guess 
can often result in a fairly accurate approximation with only one computation. 
DEPARTURE AND ARRIVAL ANGLES 
13.21. Show that the departure angle of the root-locus from a complex pole is given by 
(75.9) 
Consider a circle of infinitesimally small radius around the complex pole. Clearly, the phase angle 
argGT/' of GH, neglecting the contribution of the complex pole, is constant around this circle. If 6D 
represents the departure angle, the total phase angle of GH at the point on the circle where the root-locus 
crosses it is 
since — 6D is the phase angle contributed to arg GH by the complex pole. In order to satisfy the angle 
criterion, arg GH = arg GH' -8D = 180° or 0D = 180° + arg GH' since +180° and - 180° are equivalent. 
13.22. Determine the relationship between the departure angle from a complex pole for K > 0 with that 
for K < 0. 
Since argGT/' changes by 180° if K changes from a positive number to a negative one, the departure 
angle for K< 0 is 180° different from the departure angle for K> 0. 
13.23. Show that the arrival angle at a complex zero satisfies 
(13.10) 
In the same manner as in the solution to Problem 13.21, the phase angle of GH in the vicinity of the 
complex zero is given by arg GH = arg GH" + 8A since 0A is the phase angle contributed to arg GH by the 
complex zero. Then applying the angle criterion yields 8A = 180° — argGH". 
13.24. Graphically determine arg GH' and compute the departure angle of the root-locus from the 
complex pole at s = — 2 +j for 
From Fig. 13-26, 
as shown in Fig. 
13-27. 

336 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
Fig. 13-26 
Fig. 13-27 
13.25. Determine the departure angles from the complex poles and the arrival angles at the complex 
zeros for the open-loop transfer function 
For the complex pole at s 
and 
Since the root-locus is symmetric about the real axis, the departure angle from the pole at 
For the complex zero s 
Thus the arrival angle at the complex zero 
CONSTRUCTION OF THE ROOT-LOCUS 
13.26. Construct the root-locus for 
The real axis from 
is on the root-locus. The center of asymptotes is at 
There arc three asymptotes (n - m = 3), located at angles of 60°, 180°, and 300°. The departure angle from 
the complex pole at s = - 2 +j computed in Problem 13.24 is - 4 5 ° . A sketch of the resulting root-locus is 
shown in Fig. 13-28. An accurate root-locus plot is obtained by checking the angle criterion at points along 
the sketched branches, adjusting the location of the branches if necessary, and then applying the magnitude 
criterion to determine the values of K at selected points along the branches. The completed rootTocus is 
shown in Fig. 13-29. 
Fig. 13-28 
Fig. 13-29 

337 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
13.27. Sketch the branches of the root-locus for the transfer function 
The real axis between — 1 and - 2 is on the root-locus (Problem 13.11). There are two asymptotes with 
angles of 90° and 270°. The center of asymptotes is easily computed as a{_ = -2.5 and the departure angle 
from the complex pole at s = — 3 + j as 72°. By symmetry, the departure angle from the pole at - 3 - j is 
- 72°. The branches of the root-locus may therefore be sketched as shown in Fig. 13-30. 
Fig. 13-30 
13.28. Construct the root-locus for K > 0 and K < 0 for the transfer function 
For this transfer function the center of asymptotes is simply o(. = - 2 ; and n - m = 4. Therefore for 
K > 0 the asymptotes have angles of 45°, 135°, 225°, and 315°. The real axis sections between 0 and - 1 
and between - 3 and - 4 he on the root-locus for K> 0 and it was determined in Problem 13.20 that a 
breakaway point is located at ah = -0.424. From the symmetry of the pole locations, another breakaway 
point is located at -3.576. This can be verified by substituting this value into the relation for the 
breakaway point, Equation (13.8). The completed root-locus for K > 0 is shown in Fig. 13-31. 
For K< 0, the asymptotes have angles of 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°. In this case the real axis portions 
between oo and 0, between - 1 and - 3, and between - 4 and - cc arc on the root-locus. There is only one 
breakaway point, located at - 2. The completed root-locus for K < 0 is shown in Fig. 13-32. 
Fig. 13-31 
Fig. 13-32 

338 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
13.29. Construct the root-locus for K > 0 for the discrete system transfer function 
This root-locus has two loci and one asymptote. The root-locus lies on the real axis for z < 0.5. The 
breakaway points are at z = 0 and z = 1. The completed root-locus is shown in Fig. 13-33. 
Fig. 13-33 
13.30. Construct the root-locus for 
for the discrete system transfer function 
This root-locus has two branches and two asymptotes. The breakaway point and the center of 
asymptotes are at z = 0.5. The root-locus is shown in Fig. 13-34. 
Fig. 13-34 
13.31. Construct the root-locus for K > 0 for the discrete-time system with H = 1 and forward transfer 
function 

339 
ROOT-LOCUS ANALYSIS 
C H A P . 13] 
The system has one more pole than zero, so the root-locus has only one asymptote, along the negative 
real axis. The root-locus is on the real axis between 0 and 1, between - \ and - \ , and to the left of — 1. 
Breakaway points are located between 0 and 1 and to the left of - 1 . By trial and error (or computer 
solution), breakaway points are found at z = 0.383 and z = -2.22. 
The root-locus is an ellipse between the breakaway points at z = 0.383 and z = -2.22. The point on 
the y>-axis, where arg C(z) = - 1 8 0 ° is found by trial and error to be z = y'0.85. Similarly, the point on the 
line z = — 1 +_/>, where argG(z) = —180° is z = - 1 + Jl.26. The root-locus is drawn in Fig. 13-35. The 
gain factor along the root-locus is determined graphically from the pole-zero map or analytically by 
evaluating G(z). 
Fig. 13-35 
THE CLOSED-LOOP TRANSFER FUNCTION AND THE TIME-DOMAIN RESPONSE 
13.32. Determine the closed-loop transfer function of the continuous system of Example 13.8 for 
given the following transfer functions for 
From the root-locus plot of Example 13.8, the closed-loop poles for &'=48 are located at s= — 6, 
For 
and 
F o r 
For 
and 
and 
Note that in this last case there are four closed-loop poles, while GH has only three poles. This is due to the 
cancellation of a pole of G by a zero of H. 
13.33. Determine the unit step response of the system of Example 13.1 with ^=1.5. 
The closed-loop transfer function of this system is 

340 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
For 
and the unit step response is 
13.34. Determine the relationship between the closed-loop zeros and the poles and zeros of G and H, 
assuming there are no cancellations. 
Let G = 7V[ /Dl and H = N2/D2, 
where Nx and Dx are numerator (zeros) and denominator (poles) 
polynomials of G, and N2 and D2 are the numerator and denominator polynomials of H. Then 
Thus the closed-loop zeros are equal to the zeros of G and the poles of H. 
GAIN AND PHASE MARGINS 
13.35. F i n d the gain margin of the system of Example 13.8 for K= 6. 
The gain factor at the /co-axis crossover is 48, as shown in Fig. 13-12. Hence the gain margin is 
48/6 = 8. 
13.36. Show how a Routh table (Section 5.3) can be used to determine the frequency and the gain at the 
yw-axis crossover. 
In Section 5.3 it was pointed out that a row of zeros in the s
l row of the Routh table indicates that the 
polynomial has a pair of roots which satisfy the auxiliary equation As
2 + 5 = 0, where A and B are the first 
and second elements of the s
2 row. If A and B have the same sign, the roots of the auxiliary equation are 
imaginary (on the /"-axis). Thus if a Routh table is constructed for the characteristic equation of a system, 
the values of K and to corresponding to j'to-axis crossovers can be determined. For example, consider the 
system with the open-loop transfer function 
The characteristic equation for this system is 
The Routh table for the characteristic polynomial is 
The s
l row is zero for K= 16. The auxiliary equation then becomes 
Thus for K = 16 the characteristic equation has solutions (closed-loop poles) at s = + j2, and the root-locus 
crosses the yco-axis at j2. 
13.37. Determine the phase margin for the system of Example 13.8 (Figure 13-12) for K= 6. 
First, the point on the y'co-axis for which \GH(ju>)\ = 1 is found by trial and error to be y'0.7. Then 
argG77(y0.7) is computed as - 1 2 0 ° . Hence the phase margin is 180° - 120° = 60°. 
13.38. Is it necessary to construct the entire root-locus i n order to determine the gain and phase 
margins of a system? 

341 
R O O T - L O C U S A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 13] 
No. Only one point on the root-locus is required to determine the gain margin. This point, at u^, 
where the root-locus crosses the stability boundary, can be determined by trial and error or by the use of a 
Routh table as described in Problem 13.36. To determine the phase margin, it is only necessary to 
determine the point on the stability boundary where \GH(ju)\ 
= 1. Although the entire root-locus plot is 
not necessary, it can often be helpful, especially In the case of multiple stability boundary crossings. 
DAMPING RATIO FROM THE ROOT-LOCUS FOR CONTINUOUS SYSTEMS 
13.39. Prove Equation ( 
The roots of 
and 
Then 
13.40. Determine the positive value of gain which results in a damping ratio of 0.55 for the complex 
poles on the root-locus shown in Fig. 13-12. 
The angle of the desired poles is 9 = cos"
 1 0.55 = 56.6°. A line drawn from the origin at an angle of 
55.6° with the negative real axis intersects the root-locus of Fig. 13-12 at K = 7. 
13.41. F i n d the damping ratio of the complex poles of Problem 13.26 for K= 3.5. 
A line drawn from the root-locus at K= 3.5 to the origin makes an angle of 53° with the negative real 
axis. Hence the damping ratio of the complex poles is f = cos 53° = 0.6. 
Supplementary Problems 
13.42. Determine the angle and magnitude of 
at the following points in the .?-p]ane: (a) 
(b) 
id) 
(e) 
13.43. Determine the angle and magnitude of 
at the following points in the .s-plane: (a) 
(b) 
U) 
(d) 
(e) 
13.44. For each transfer function, find the breakaway points on the root-locus: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
13.45. Find the departure angle of the root-locus from the pole at s 
for 

342 
ROOT-LOCUS A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 13 
13.46. Find the departure angle of the root-locus from the pole at s 
for 
13.47. Find the arrival angle of the root-locus to the zero at s 
for 
13.48. Construct the root-locus for K > 0 for the transfer function of Problem 13.44(a). 
13.49. Construct the root-locus for K> 0 for the transfer function of Problem 13.44(c). 
13.50. Construct the root-locus for K > 0 for the transfer function of Problem 13.45. 
13.51. Construct the root-locus for K> 0 for the transfer function of Problem 13.46. 
13.52. Determine the gain and phase margins for the system with the open-loop transfer function of Problem 
13.46 if the gain factor K is set equal to 20,000. 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
13.42. (a) a r g G W = - 9 9 ° , 
|C7/| = I.5; (b) argG// = - 1 5 3 ° , 
|G77| = 2.3; (c) arg GH = - 232°, [G//| = 1.8; 
(d) argG// = 0°, | G / / | = 1.7; (e) xcgGII = - 180°, \GH\ = 10.7 
13.43. (a) a r g G / / = - 3 8 ° , 
|G7/| = 0.68; (b) argC//= - 4 0 ° , |C/f| = 0.37; (c) a r g G 7 / = - 4 1 ° , 
|G77| = 0.60; 
{d) argCtf = - 5 6 ° , i C / / | = 0.95; (e) argG/f = +80°, | G / / | = 6.3 
13.44. (a) <j,,= -2.25, -7.07; (b) a,,= -3.27, -6.73; (c) ah = 0, - 3 
13.45. 6n = 124° 
13.46. 6D = 193° 
13.47. 0, = 28° 
13.52. Gain margin = 3.7; phase margin = 102° 

343 
Chapter 14 
Root-Locus Design 
14.1 
T H E DESIGN PROBLEM 
The root-locus method can be quite effective in the design of either continuous or discrete-time 
feedback control systems, because it graphically illustrates the variation of the system closed-loop poles 
as a function of the open-loop gain factor K. In its simplest form, design is accomplished by choosing a 
value of A' which results in satisfactory closed-loop behavior. This is called gain factor compensation 
(also see Section 12.2). Specifications on allowable steady state errors usually take the form of a 
minimum value of A , expressed in terms of error constants, for example, K 
K,„ and Ka (Chapter 9). 
If it is not possible to meet all system specifications using gain factor compensation alone, other forms 
of compensation can be added to the system to alter the root-locus as needed, for example, lag, lead, 
lag-lead networks, or P I D controllers. 
In order to accomplish system design in the .s-plane or the z-plane using root-locus techniques, it is 
necessary to interpret the system specifications in terms of desired pole-zero configurations. 
Digital computer programs for constructing root-loci can be very helpful in system design, as w
rell 
as analysis as indicated in Chapter 13. 
EXAMPLE 14.1. 
Consider the design of a continuous unity feedback system with the plant C = K/(s + l)(s + 3) 
and the following specifications: (1) Overshoot less than 20%, (2) K > 4, (3) 10 to 90% rise time less than 1 sec. 
The root-locus for this system is shown in Fig. 14-1. The system closed-loop transfer function may be written 
as 
Fig. 14-1 
where f and CJ„ can be determined from the root-locus for a given value of K, In order to satisfy the first 
specification, f must be greater than 0.45 (see Fig. 3-4). Then from the root-locus wc sec that K must be less than 
16 (see Section 13.12). For this system, Kp is given by K/3. Thus in order to satisfy the second specification, A' 
must be greater than 12. The rise time is a function of both f and to„. Suppose a trial value of K = 13 is chosen. In 
this case, f = 0.5, LJ„ = 4, and the rise time is 0.5 sec. Hence all the specifications can be met by setting K = 13. 
Note that if the specification on Kp was greater than 5.33, or the specification on rise time was less than 0.34 sec, 
all the specifications could not be met by simply adjusting the open-loop gain factor. 

344 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
14.2 
CANCELLATION COMPENSATION 
If the pole-zero configuration of the plant is such that the system specifications cannot be met by an 
adjustment of the open-loop gain factor, a more complicated cascade compensator, as shown in Fig. 
14-2, can be added to the system to cancel some or all of the poles and zeros of the plant. Due to 
realizability considerations, the compensator must have no more zeros than poles. Consequently, when 
poles of the plant are cancelled by zeros of the compensator, the compensator also adds new poles to 
the forward-loop transfer function. The philosophy of this compensation technique is then to replace 
undesirable with desirable poles. 
Fig. 14-2 
The difficulty encountered in applying this scheme is that it is not always apparent what open-loop 
pole-zero configuration is desirable from the standpoint of meeting specifications on closed-loop system 
performance. 
Some situations where cancellation compensation can be used to advantage are the following: 
1. 
If the specifications on system rise time or bandwidth cannot be met without compensation, 
cancellation of low-frequency poles and replacement with high-frequency poles is helpful. 
2. 
If the specifications on allowable steady state errors cannot be met. a tow-frequency pole can be 
cancelled and replaced with a lower-frequency pole, yielding a larger forward-loop gain at low
7 
frequencies. 
3. 
If poles with small damping ratios are present in the plant transfer function, they may be 
cancelled and replaced with poles which have larger damping ratios. 
14.3 
PHASE COMPENSATION: LEAD AND LAG NETWORKS 
A cascade compensator can be added to a system to alter the phase characteristics of the open-ioop 
transfer function in a manner which favorably affects system performance. These effects were illustrated 
in the frequency domain for lead, lag, and lag-lead networks using Polar Plots in Chapter 12, Sections 
12.4 through 12.7, which summarize the general effects of these networks. 
The pole-zero maps of continuous system lead and lag networks are shown in Figs. 14-3 and 14-4. 
Note that a lead network makes a positive, and a lag network a negative phase contribution. A lag-lead 
Fig. 14-3 
Fig. 14-4 

345 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
network may be obtained by appropriately combining a lag and a lead network in series, or from the 
implementation described in Problem 6.14. 
Since the compensated system root-locus is determined by the points in the complex plane for 
which the phase angle of G= GXG2 is equal to —180°, the branches of the locus can be moved by 
proper selection of the phase angle contributed by the compensator. In general, lead compensation has 
the effect of moving the loci to the left. 
EXAMPLE 14.2. 
The phase lead compensator Gl = (s + 2)/(s + 8) alters the root-locus of the system with the 
plant G2 = K/(s + l )
2 , as illustrated in Fig. 14-5. 
Fig. 14-5 
EXAMPLE 14.3. 
The use of simple lag compensation (one pole at - 1 , no zero) to alter the breakaway angles 
of a root-locus from a pair of complex poles is illustrated in Fig. 14-6. 
Fig. 14-6 
14.4 
MAGNITUDE COMPENSATION AND COMBINATIONS OF COMPENSATORS 
Compensation networks may be employed to alter the closed-loop magnitude characteristic 
(|(C//?)(w)|) of a feedback control system. The low-frequency characteristic can be modified by 
addition of a low-frequency pole-zero pair, or dipole, in such a manner that high-frequency behavior is 
essentially unaltered. 
EXAMPLE 14.4. 
The continuous system root-locus for GH = K/s(s + 2)
2 is shown in Fig. 14-7. 
Let us assume that this system has a satisfactory transient response with K= 3, but the resulting velocity error 
constant, Kr = 0.75, is too small. We can increase Kv to 5 without seriously affecting the transient response by 
adding the compensator G{ = (s + 0.l)/(s + 0.015) since 

346 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
Fig. 14-7 
Fig. 14-8 
The resulting root-locus is shown in Fig. 14-8. The high-frequency portion of the root-locus and the transient 
response are essentially unaffected because the closed-loop transfer function has a low-frequency pole-zero pair 
which approximately cancel each other. 
A low-frequency dipole for magnitude compensation of continuous systems can be synthesized with 
the pole at the origin using a proportional plus integral (PT) compensator, as shown in F i g . 14-9, with 
transfer function 
Fig. 14-9 
Combinations of various compensation schemes are sometimes needed 
to satisfy competing 
requirements on steady state and transient response performance specifications, as illustrated in the 
following example. This example, solved by root-locus methods, is a rework of a design problem solved 
by Nyquist methods in Example 12.7, and Bode methods i n Example 16.6. 
Mathcad EXAMPLE 14.5. 
Our goal is to determine an appropriate compensator Gy{z) for the discrete-time unity feedback 
system with 
The resulting closed-loop system must satisfy the following performance specifications: 
1. 
Steady slate error less than or equal to 0.02 for a unit ramp inpul 
2. 
Phase margin = <Ji p M > 3 0 ° 
3. 
Gain crossover frequency «! > 10 rad/sec, where T= 0.1 sec. 
In order to have a finite steady state error with a ramp input, the system must be type 1. The compensation 
must therefore provide a pole at z = 1. Consider the compensator 
Fhe forward-loop transfer function then becomes 
From Section 9.9, the velocity error coefficient is 

347 
ROOT-LOCUS DESIGN 
CHAP. 14] 
Now, in order for the system to have a steady state error of less than 0.02 with a ramp input, we must have 
Kr > 5, or K} > 7.5. To investigate the effects of added gain, wc consider the root-locus for 
where K= 3K{/&. This root-locus was constructed in Problem 13.31 and is repeated in Fig. 14-10. 
Fig. 14-10 
At the point z = -0.18+_/0.98 where the root-locus crosses the unit circle, u „ r = 1 . 7 5 rad and 
K=l.25 
( ^ = 8^/3 = 3.33). Since this is less than the gain Kx = 7.5 needed to make A",, = 5, simple gain factor 
compensation is insufficient. 
The next step is to evaluate the magnitude and phase of G[G2(z) at the required minimum gain crossover 
frequency, to, = 10, or to,r = 1 rad. This is the point z = e
JuT = e
1 on the unit circle. At this point, \G[G2(e')\
 
= 
1.66A: and arg GfC,(<?') = -142,5°. If the gain K were adjusted so that \G[G2(e*)\ = 1, that is, AT =0.6, the phase 
margin would be (180 - 142.5)° = 37.5° and the 30° requirement would be met. This requires that Kx = 8K/3 = 1.6, 
and the velocity constant becomes KL = 0.661KX = 1.067. 
To complete the design, additional gain must be added to increase the velocity constant to the required value 
of 5 at low frequencies, without significantly altering the desired high-frequency characteristics obtained so far. This 
requires an additional gain of 5/1.067 = 4.69, which can be supplied by a lag compensator. The lag compensator 
should have a gain at z = 1 that is 4.69 times as large as the gain at toT= 1, without adding more than 7.5° phase 
lag at toT= 1, to satisfy the requirement for <-J>PM > 30°. If a value of 0.97 is chosen for the pole of the lag 
compensator, the zero should be located so that 
or 
If we set 
then 
and 
The compensator then becomes 
Finally, for 
we need 
to account for the gain of the lag 
so 

348 
R O O T - L O C U S 
D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
compensator at usT = 1. The completed compensator is 
which is nearly the same design obtained by Nyquist methods in Example 12.7, 
14.5 
DOMINANT POLE-ZERO APPROXIMATIONS 
The root-locus method offers the advantage of a graphical display of the system closed-loop poles 
and zeros. Theoretically, the designer can determine the system response characteristics from the 
closed-loop pole-zero map. Practically, however, this task becomes increasingly difficult for systems with 
four or more poles and zeros. In some cases the problem can be considerably simplified if the response 
is dominated by two or three poles and zeros. 
Effects on System Time Responses 
The influence of a particular pole (or pair of complex poles) on the response is mainly determined 
by two factors: the relative rate of decay of the transient term due to that pole, and the relative 
magnitude of the residue at the pole. 
For continuous systems, the real part a of the pole p determines the rate at which the transient term 
due to that pole decays; the larger a, the faster the rate of decay. The relative magnitude of the residue 
determines the percentage of the total response due to that particular pole. 
EXAMPLE 14.6. Consider a system with closed-loop transfer function 
The step response of this system is 
The term in the response due to the pole at s{ ^ a] = - 5 decays five times as fast as the term due to the pole at 
s^ = tr-, = — 1. Furthermore, the residue at the pole at ^ =- - 5 is only \ that of the one at s2= — 1. Therefore for 
most practical purposes the effect of the pole at A-, = - 5 can be ignored and the system approximated by 
The pole at $\ = — $ has been removed from the transfer function and the numerator has been adjusted to maintain 
the same steady state gain ((C/R)(Q) = 1). The response of the approximate system is c(t) = 1 — e '. 
EXAMPLE 14.7. The system with the closed-loop transfer function 
has the step response 
In this case, the presence of a zero close to the pole at - 1 significantly reduces the magnitude of the residue at that 
pole. Consequently, it is the pole at - 5 which now dominates the response of the system. The closed-loop pole and 
zero effectively cancel each other and (C/R)(0) = 1 so that an approximate transfer function is 
and the corresponding approximate step response is c = 1 
For discrete-time systems with distinct (nonrepeated) poles px, p2 
, the transient portion 
yr(k) 
of the response due to a pole p has the form yT(k) = p
k, h = 0,1,2 
(see Table 4.2). Therefore each 

349 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
successive time sample is equal to the previous sample multiplied by p, that is. 
The magnitude of a distinct pole therefore determines the decay rate of the transient response, with the 
decay rate inversely proportional to \p\: the smaller the magnitude, the faster the rate of decay. For 
example, poles near the unit circle decay more slowly than poles near the origin, since their magnitudes 
arc smaller. 
For systems with repeated poles, the analysis is more complicated and approximations may not be 
appropriate. 
EXAMPLE 14.8. 
The discrete system with closed-loop transfer function 
has the step response 
For the term in the response due to the pole at z = 0.1, the sample value at time k is only 10% of the sample value 
at time k - 1, and it therefore decays five times faster than the term due to the pole at z = 0.5. The magnitude of 
the residue at z = ().l is 0.125, which is one-ninth as large as the magnitude of the residue 1.125 at z = 0.5. 
Consequently, for many practical purposes, the pole at z = 0.1 can often be ignored and the svstcm approximated 
by 
where the numerator has been adjusted to maintain the same steady state gain 
and the zero at z = 0 was deleted to maintain one more pole than zeros in the approximate system. This is 
necessary to give the same initial delay (one sample time) in the approximate system as in the original system. The 
step response of the approximate system is c(k) = 1 - (0.5)'', & = 0,1,2,... . 
Effects on Other System Characteristics 
The effect of a closed-loop real axis pole at -/>,. < 0 on the overshoot and rise time Tr of a 
continuous system also having complex poles -pe, 
- p* is illustrated in Figs. 14-11 and 14-12. For 
(14.1) 
Fig. 14-11 

350 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
Fig. 14-12 
the overshoot and rise time approach that of a second-order system containing only complex poles (see 
Fig. 3-4). Therefore pr can be neglected i n determining overshoot and rise time if f > 0.5 and 
(14.2) 
There is no overshoot if 
(14.3) 
and the rise time approaches that of a first-order system containing only the real axis pole. 
The 
effect of a closed-loop real axis zero at — zr < 0 on the overshoot and rise time Tr of a 
continuous system also having complex poles —pc. —p* is illustrated in Figs. 14-13 and 14-14. These 
graphs show that zr can be neglected in determining overshoot and rise time if '(, > 0.5 and 
(14.4) 
Fig. 14-13 

351 
ROOT-LOCUS D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
Fig. 14-14 
EXAMPLE 14.9. 
The closed-loop transfer function of a particular continuous system is represented by the 
pole-zero map shown in Fig. 14-15. Given that the steady state gain (C/R)(jO) =• 1, a dominant pole-zero 
approximation is 
Fig. 14-15 
This is a reasonable approximation because the pole and zero near s = — 2 effectively cancel each other and all 
other poles and zeros satisfy Equations (14.2) and (14.4) with -pt. = - 1 + 7 / 3 and f = 0.5. 

352 
ROOT L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
14.6 
POINT DESIGN 
If a desired closed-loop pole position px can be determined from the system specifications, the 
system root-locus may be altered to ensure that a branch of the locus will pass through the required 
point pv 
The specification of a closed-loop pole at a particular point in the complex plane is called 
point design. The technique is carried out using phase and magnitude compensation. 
EXAMPLE 14.10. 
Consider the continuous plant 
The closed-loop response must have a 10 to 90% rise time less than 1 sec, and an overshoot less than 20%. We 
observe from Fig. 3-4 that these specifications are met if the closed-loop system has a dominant two-pole 
configuration with f = 0.5 and <o„ = 2. Thus py is chosen at - 1 + j]/3 , which is a solution of 
for f = 0.5 and u>„ = 2. Clearly, p* = — 1—/i/3 is the remaining solution of this quadratic equation. The 
orientation of px with respect to the poles of G2 is shown in Fig. 14-16. 
Fig. 14-16 
The phase angle of G2 is - 2 4 0 ° at pv In order for a branch of the root-locus to pass through />,, the system 
must be modified so that the phase angle of the compensated system is - 1 8 0 ° at />,. This can be accomplished by 
adding a cascade lead network having a phase angle of 240° — 180° = 60° at pi, which is satisfied by 
as shown in the pole-zero map of the compensated open-loop transfer function Gfi-, in Fig. 14-17. The closed-loop 
pole can now be located at p{ by choosing a value for K which satisfies the root-locus magnitude criterion. 
Solution of Equation (13.5) yields K = 16. The root-locus or closed-loop pole-zero map of the compensated system 
should be sketched to check the validity of the dominant two-pole assumption. Figure 14-18 illustrates that the 
poles at pt and p* dominate the response. 
Fig. 14-17 
Fig. 14-18 

353 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
14.7 
FEEDBACK COMPENSATION 
A d d i t i o n of compensation elements to a feedback path of a control system can be employed in 
root-locus design in a manner similar to that discussed in the preceding sections. The compensation 
elements affect the root-locus of the open-loop transfer function in the same manner. But, although the 
root-locus is the same when the compensator is in either the forward or feedback path, the closed-loop 
transfer function may be significantly different. It was shown in Problem 13.34 that feedback zeros do 
not appear in the closed-loop transfer function, while feedback poles become zeros of the closed-loop 
transfer function (assuming no cancellations). 
EXAMPLE 14.11. 
Suppose a feedback compensator were added to a continuous system with the forward transfer 
function 
in an attempt to cancel the pole at - 1 and replace it with a pole at - 6 . Then the compensator would be 
H = (s + l)/(s 
+ 6), GH would be given by GH = K/(s + 4)(.v + 5)(s + 6) and the closed-loop transfer function 
would become 
Although the pole at - 1 is cancelled from GH, it reappears as a closed-loop pole. Furthermore, the feedback pole 
at — 6 becomes a closed-loop zero. Consequently, the cancellation technique does not work with a compensator in the 
feedback path. 
EXAMPLE 14.12. 
The continuous system block diagram in Fig. 14-19 contains two feedback paths. 
Fig. 14-19 
Fig. 14-20 
These two paths may be combined, as shown in Fig. 14-20. 
In this representation the feedback path contains a zero at s = - \/Kl. 
This zero appears in GH and 
consequently affects the root-locus. However, it does not appear in the closed-loop transfer function, which 
contains three poles no matter where the zero is located. 
The fact that feedback zeros do not appear in the closed-loop transfer function may be used to 
advantage in the following manner. If closed-loop poles are desired at certain locations in the complex 
plane, feedback zeros can be placed at these points. Since branches of the root-locus will terminate on 
these zeros, the desired closed-loop pole locations can be obtained by setting the open-loop gain factor 
sufficiently high. 

354 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
EXAMPLE 14.13. 
The continuous system feedback compensator 
is added to the system with the forward-loop transfer function 
in order to guarantee that the dominant closed-loop poles will be near 
The resulting root-locus is 
shown i n Fig. 14-21. 
Fig. 14-21 
If K is set at 100, the closed-loop transfer function is 
and the dominant complex pole pair 
are sufficiently close to 
Solved Problems 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
14.1. 
Determine the value of the gain factor K for which the system with the open-loop 
transfer 
function 
has closed-loop poles with a damping ratio 
The closed-loop poles will have a damping ratio of 0.5 when they make an angle of 60° with the 
negative real axis [Equation (13.18)]. The desired value of A is determined at the point where the 
root-locus crosses the f = 0.5 line in the .s-plane. A sketch of the root-locus is shown in Fig. 14-22. The 
desired value of K is 8.3. 

355 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
Fig. 14-22 
Fig. 14-23 
14.2. 
Determine a value of K for which the system with the open-loop transfer function 
satisfies the following specifications: 
gain margin 
For this system, K 
is equal to K/12. Hence, in order to satisfy the first specification, K must be 
greater than 24. The value of K at the /'co-axis crossover of the root-locus is equal to 100, as shown in Fig. 
14-23. Then, in order to satisfy the second specification, K must be less than 100/3 = 33.3. A value of K 
that will satisfy both specifications is 30. 
14.3. 
Determine a gain factor K for which the system in Example 13.11 has a gain margin of 2. 
As shown in Fig. 13-15, the gain at the stability boundary is K= 1. Therefore, in order to have a gain 
margin of 2. K must be 0.5. 
CANCELLATION COMPENSATION 
14.4. 
Can right-half .s-plane poles of a plant be effectively cancelled by a compensator with a right-half 
s-plane zero? 
No. For example, suppose a particular plant has the transfer function 
and a cascade compensator is added with the transfer function G} = (s — 1 
t)/(s + 1). The e term in the 
transfer function represents any small error between the desired zero location at +1 and the actual 
location. The closed-loop transfer function is then 
By applying the Hurwitz or Routh Stability Criterion (Chapter 5) to the denominator of this transfer 
function, it can be seen that the system is unstable for any value of K if e is less than (1 + K)/K, 
which is 
usually the case because c represents the error in the desired zero location. 
14.5. 
F o r the discrete-time unity feedback system with forward-loop transfer function 
determine a compensator Gv that provides a deadbeat response for the closed-loop system. 

356 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
For a deadbeat response (Section 10.8), wc want all closed-loop poles at z = 0. A pole-zero map of the 
system is shown in Fig. 14-24(a). If we cancel the pole at 2 = 0 and the zero at z = - 1, the root-locus will 
go through z = 0, as shown in Fig. 14-24(6). The resulting compensator is then 
(b) 
Fig. 14-24 
and the closed-loop transfer function is 
PHASE COMPENSATION 
14.6. It is desired to add to a system a compensator with a zero at .v = - 1 to produce 60° phase lead 
at s = — 2 + j3. H o w can the proper location of the pole be determined? 
With reference to Fig. 14-3, wc want the phase contribution of the network to be 6a - 6h = 60°. From 
Fig. 14-25, 6U = 108°. Hence 9h = 9U - 60° = 48° and the pole should be located at s = -4.7, as shown in 
Fig. 14-25. 
Fig. 14-25 
14.7. Determine a compensator that will change the departure angle of the root-locus from the pole at 
s = —0.5 +/' to - 135° for the plant transfer function 
The departure angle of the uncompensated system is - 2 7 ° . To change this to - 1 3 5 ° , a bg 
compensator with 108° phase lag at j- = -0.5 + / can be employed. The required amount of phase lag could 
be supplied by a simple lag compensator (one pole, no zero) with a pole at 
= -0.18, as shown in Fig. 
14-26(«), or by two simple lags in cascade with two poles at s = - 1.22, as shown in Fig. 14-26(/;). 

357 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14} 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 14-26 
14.8. 
Determine a compensator for the discrete-time system with 
that provides a phase crossover frequency OJW such that u^T— m/2 rad. 
Arg GH at z = e
l7!/1 = j is determined from the pole-zero map in Fig. 14-27 as - 225°. In order for the 
root-locus to pass through this point, we need to add 45° of phase lead, so that arg GH = ± 180°. This can 
be provided by the compensator 
Fig. 14-27 
The zero at z = 0 provides 90° of phase lead and the pole at z = — 1 provides 45° of lag, resulting in a net 
lead of 45°. 
MAGNITUDE COMPENSATION 
14.9. 
In Example 14.4, 
the velocity error constant 
Kv 
was increased by a factor of 6 \ without 
increasing the gain factor. H o w was this accomplished? 
It was assumed that the compensator G, had a high-frequency gain of 1 and a low-frequency (d.c.) 
gain of 6f, This compensator cannot be mechanized passively because a passive lag compensator has a d.c. 
gain of 1. Consequently, G s must include an amplifier. An alternative method would be to let Gx be the 
passive lag compensator 
and then amplify the gain factor by 6j. However, when root-locus techniques are employed it is usually 
more convenient to assume the compensator just adds a pole and zero, as was done in Example 14.4. 
Appropriate adjustments can be made in the final stages of design to achieve the simplest and/or least 
expensive compensator mechanization. 

358 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
DOMINANT POLE-ZERO APPROXIMATIONS 
14.10. Determine the overshoot and rise time of the system with the transfer function 
For this system, G J m = 1, f = 0.5, pr = 1, and pr/fa„ = 2. From Fig. 14-11 the percentage overshoot is 
about 8%. The rise time from Fig. 14-12 is 2.4 sec. The corresponding numbers for a system with the 
complex poles only are 18% and 1.6 sec. Thus the real axis pole reduces the overshoot and slows down the 
response. 
14.11. Determine the overshoot and rise time of the system with the transfer function 
For this system cofI = 1, f = 0.5, zr = 1, and zr/X,usn = 2. From Fig. 14-13 the percentage overshoot is 
31%. From Fig. 14-14 the 10 to 90% rise time is 1.0 sec. The corresponding numbers for a system without 
the zero are 18% and 1.6 sec. The real axis zero thus increases the overshoot and decreases the rise time, 
that is, speeds up the response. 
14.12. What is a suitable dominant pole-zero approximation for the following system? 
The real axis pole at s= - 6 and the real axis zero at s= - 8 satisfy Equations (14.2) and (14.4), 
respectively, with regard to the complex poles (fto„ = 1 and J > 0.5) and therefore may be neglected. The 
real axis pole at s = - 1 and the complex poles cannot be neglected. Hence a suitable approximation (with 
the same d.c. gain) is 
14.13. Determine a dominant pole approximation for the discrete-time system with transfer function 
The step response is given by 
The magnitude 0.33 of the residue at z = 0.2 is four times smaller than the magnitude 1.33 of the residue at 
z = 0.8. Also, the transient response due to the pole at z = 0.2 decays 0.8/0.2 = 4 times faster than that for 
the pole at z = 0.8. Thus the approximate closed-loop system should only have a pole at z = 0.8. However, 
to maintain a system response delay of two samples (the original system has two more poles than zeros), it 
is necessary to add a pole at z = 0 to the approximation. Then 
The step response of the approximate system is 
Note that the only effect of the pole at z = 0 on the response is to delay it by one sample. 

359 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
POINT DESIGN 
14.14. Determine A , a, and b so that the system with open-loop transfer function 
has a closed-loop pole at 
The angle contributed to arg GH(s1) by the poles at s = - 2 and s = - 4 is - 237°. To satisfy the angle 
criterion, the angle contributions of the zero at s= - a and the pole s = - b must total - 1 8 0 ° - f - 237°) 
= 57°. Since this is a positive angle, the zero must be farther to the right than the pole (b > a). Either a or 
b may be chosen arbitrarily as long as the remaining one can be fixed in the finite left-half j'-plane to give a 
total contribution of 57°. Let a be set equal to 2, resulting in a 90° phase contribution. Then b must be 
placed where the contribution of the pole is - 3 3 ° , A line drawn from px at 33° intercepts the real axis at 
6.6 = b, as shown in Fig, 14-28. 
Fig, 14-28 
The necessary value of K required to satisfy the magnitude criterion at px can now be computed using 
the chosen values of a and b. From the following calculation, the required value of K is 
14.15. Determine the required compensation for a system with the plant transfer function 
to satisfy the following specifications: (a) overshoot < 5%, (b) 10 to 90% rise time 7" r<150 
msec, (c) Kp > 6. 
The first specification may be satisfied with a closed-loop transfer function whose response is 
dominated by two complex poles with f > 0.7, as seen from Fig, 3-4. A wide variety of dominant pole-zero 
configurations can satisfy the overshoot specification; but the two-pole configuration is usually the simplest 
obtainable form. We also see from Fig. 3-4 that, if f = 0.7, the normalized 10 to 90% rise time is about 
u„Tr = 2.2. Thus, in order to satisfy the second specification with f = 0.7, we have Tr = 2.2/u„ < 0.15 sec or 
<o„ > 14.7 rad/sec. 
But let us choose u n = 17 so as to achieve some margin with respect to the rise time specification. Other 
closed-loop poles, which may appear in the final design, may slow down the response. Thus, in order to 
satisfy the first two specifications, we shall design the system to have a dominant two-pole response with 
J = 0.7 and <J„ = 17. A n .5-plane evaluation of argG2(pi), where px = - 12 + jll (corresponding to f = 0.7, 
CJ„ = 17), yields argC 2(/) 1) = - 2 4 5 ° . Then, to satisfy the angle criterion at px, wc must compensate the 
system with phase lead so that the total angle becomes —180°. Hence we add a cascade lead compensator 
with 245° - 180° = 65° phase lead at pv Arbitrarily placing the zero of the lead compensator at s = - 8 

360 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
results in Ba = 108° (see Fig. 14-3). Then, since we want &a - 6h = 65°, 6h = 108° - 65° = 43°. Drawing a 
line from pt to the real axis at the required 6h determines the pole location at s = - 2 5 . Addition of the 
lead compensator with a = 8 and b = 25 yields an open-loop transfer function 
The value of K necessary to satisfy the magnitude criterion at />, is K =3100. The resulting positional 
error constant for this design is K = 3100/(14)(20)(25) = 0.444, which is substantially less than the 
specified value of 6 or more. Kp could be increased slightly by trying other design points (higher to,,): but 
the required K cannot be achieved without some form of low-frequency magnitude compensation. The 
required increase is 6/0.444 = 13.5 and may be obtained with a low-frequency lag compensator with 
b/a = 13.5. The only other requirement is that a and b for the lag compensator must be small enough so as 
not to affect the high-frequency design accomplished with the lead network. That is, 
Let b = 1 and a = 0.074. Then the required compensator is 
To synthesize this compensator using a conventional lag network with the transfer function 
an additional amplifier with a gain of 13.5 is required; equivalently, the design value of K chosen above 
may be increased by 13.5, With cither practical mechanization, the total open-loop transfer function is 
The closed-loop poles and zeros are shown in Fig. 14-29. The low-frequency pole and zero effectively 
cancel each other. The real axis pole at s = - 35 will slightly affect the response of the system because 
/>,./£"u>„ for this pole is only about 3 [Equation (14.2)]. However, reference to Figs. 14-11 and 14-12 verify 
that the overshoot and rise time are still well within the specifications. If the system had been designed to 
barely meet the required rise time specification with the dominant two-pole approximation, the presence of 
the additional pole in the closed-loop transfer function may have slowed the response enough to dissatisfy 
the specification. 
Fig. 14-29 
FEEDBACK COMPENSATION 
14.16. A positional control system with a tachometer feedback path has the block diagram shown in 
Fig. 14-30. Determine values of Kv and K2 
which result in a system design which yields a 10 to 
90% rise time of less than 1 sec and an overshoot of less than 20%. 

361 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
Fig. 14-30 
A straightforward way to accomplish this design is to determine a suitable design point in the i-plane 
and use the point design technique. If the two feedback paths arc combined, the block diagram shown in 
Fig. 14-31 is obtained. 
Fig. 14-31 
For this configuration 
The zero location at s = —Kl/K2 
appears in the feedback path and the gain factor is K2. Thus for a fixed 
zero location (ratio of K1/K2), 
a root-locus for the system may be constructed as a function of K2. The 
closed-loop transfer function will then contain three poles, but no zeros. Rough sketches of the root-locus 
(Fig, 14-32) reveal that if the ratio K^/K2 
is set anywhere between 0 and 4, the closed-loop transfer 
function will probably contain two complex poles (if K-, is large enough) and a real axis pole near the value 
o\-KJK2. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 14-32 
A three-pole dominant configuration may then be appropriate for the design. A value of f = 0,5 for the 
complex poles will satisfy the overshoot requirement. For f = 0.5 and pr/Kun 
= 2, Fig. 14-12 shows a 
normalized rise time unTr = 23. Thus 7^ = 2.3/co„ < 1 sec or un > 2.3 rad/sec. If pr/twn 
turns out to be 
greater than 2, the rise time will be faster, and vice versa. In order to have a little margin in case pr/%o>„ is 
smaller than 2, let us choose a>n = 2.6. The design point in the s-plane is therefore px = 
—1.3+/2.3, 
corresponding to £ = 0.5 and to„ = 2.6. 

362 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 14 
From Fig. 14-33, the contribution of the poles at s = 0, - 2 . and - 4 to •a.vgGH(pl) is - 2 3 3 ° . The 
contribution of the zero must therefore be - 1 8 0 ° - ( - 233°) = 53° at p{ to satisfy the angle criterion at 
pv The zero location is determined at s = - 3 by drawing a line from py to the real axis at 53°. With 
K i /
K i =
 3>
 t
h
e gain factor at /?, for GH is 7.5. Thus the design values arc K2 = 7.5 and Kx = 22.5. The 
closed-loop real axis pole is to the left of, but near the zero located at s = — 3. Therefore pr/fa„ 
for this 
design is at least 3/1.3 =2.3. 
Fig. 14-33 
14.17. For the discrete-time svstem with forward-loon transfer function 
determine a feedback compensator that yields a closed-loop system with a deadbeat response. 
For a deadbeat response (Section 10.8), the closed-loop transfer function must have all its poles at 
2 = 0. Since poles cancelled by feedback zeros appear in the closed-loop transfer function, let H have a zero 
at z = 0. This eliminates the pole at z = 0 from the root-locus but it remains in the closed-loop transfer 
function. 
For realizability, H must also have at least one pole. If we place the pole of H at z = — 1, the resulting 
root-locus goes through z = 0. as shown in Fig. 14-34. Then, by setting A~= 1, all the closed-loop poles arc 
located at z = 0 and the system has a deadbeat response. 
Fig. 14-34 
Supplementary Problems 
14,18. For the system with the open-loop transfer function GH = K(s + a)/(s
2 - l)(s + 5) determine K and a 
such that the closed-loop system has dominant poles with I = 0.5 and tj„ = 2. What is the percentage 
overshoot of the closed-loop system with these values of K and al 

363 
R O O T - L O C U S D E S I G N 
C H A P . 14] 
14.19. Determine a suitable compensator for the system with the plant transfer function 
to satisfy the following specifications: (1) overshoot < 20%, (2) 10 to 90% rise time < 1 sec, (3) gain 
margin > 5. 
14.20. Determine suitable compensation for the system with the plant transfer function G2 = l/s(s + 4)
2 to satisfy 
the following specifications: (1) overshoot < 20%, (2) velocity error constant Kr > 10. 
14.21, For the system shown in the block diagram of Fig. 14-35, determine Kx and K2 such that the system has 
closed-loop poles a t = 
— 2 + j2. 
Fig. 14-35 
14.22. Determine a value of K for the system with the open-loop transfer function Gil = K/s(s
2 + 6s + 25) such 
that the velocity error constant Kv > 1, the closed-loop step response has no overshoot, and the gain 
margin > 5. 
14.23. Design a compensator for the system with the plant transfer function G2 = 63/s(s + 7)(s + 9) such that the 
velocity error constant Kr > 30, the overshoot is less than 20%, and the 10 to 90% rise time is less than 0.5 
sec. 
Answers to Supplementary Problems 
14.18. 
overshoot 
note that the system has a closed-loop zero at 
14.19. 
14.20. 
14.21. 
14.22. 
14.23. 

364 
Chapter 15 
Bode Analysis 
15.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The analysis of feedback control systems using the Bode method is equivalent to Nyquist analysis 
in that both techniques employ graphical representations of the open-loop frequency response function 
G7/(w), where GH(oi) refers to either a discrete-time or a continuous-time system. However, Bode plots 
consist of two graphs: the magnitude of GH(ic), 
and the phase angle of GH(a). 
both plotted as a 
function of frequency w. Logarithmic scales are usually used for the frequency axes and for 
\GH(a)\. 
Bode plots clearly illustrate the relative stability of a system. In fact, gain and phase margins are 
often defined in terms of Bode plots (see Example 10.1). These measures of relative stability can be 
determined for a particular system with a minimum of computational effort using Bode plots, especially 
for those cases where experimental frequency response data are available. 
15.2 
LOGARITHMIC SCALES AND BODE PLOTS 
Logarithmic scales are used for Bode plots because they considerably simplify their construction, 
manipulation, and interpretation. 
A logarithmic scale is used for the w-axes (abscissas) because the magnitude and phase angle may 
be graphed over a greater range of frequencies than with linear frequency axes, all frequencies being 
equally emphasized, and such graphs for continuous-time systems often result in straight lines (Section 
15.4)." 
The magnitude | P ( w ) | of any frequency response function P ( w ) for any value of w is plotted on a 
logarithmic scale in decibel (db) units, where 
(15.1) 
[Also see Equation (10.4).] 
EXAMPLE 15.1. If 
the magnitude is 
Since the decibel is a logarithmic unit, the db magnitude of a frequency response function composed 
of a product of terms is equal to the sum of the db magnitudes of the individual terms. Thus, when the 
logarithmic scale is employed, the magnitude plot of a frequency response function expressible as a 
product of more than one term can be obtained by adding the individual db magnitude plots for each 
product term. 
The db magnitude versus log w plot is called the Bode magnitude plot, and the phase angle versus 
log co plot is the Bode phase angle plot. The Bode magnitude plot is sometimes called the log-modulus 
plot i n the literature. 
EXAMPLE 15.2. The Bode magnitude plot for the continuous-time frequency response function 
may be obtained by adding the Bode magnitude plots for: 
and 

365 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
15.3 
T H E BODE FORM AND THE BODE GAIN FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
It is convenient to use the so-called Bode form of a continuous-time frequency response function 
when using Bode plots for analysis and design because of the asymptotic approximations in Section 
15.4. 
The Bode form for the function 
where / is a nonnegative integer, is obtained by factoring out all z, and p, and rearranging it in the 
form 
(15.2) 
The Bode gain KB is defined as the coefficient of the numerator in Equation (15.2): 
(15.3) 
15.4 
BODE PLOTS OF SIMPLE CONTINUOUS-TIME FREQUENCY RESPONSE FUNCTIONS 
AND THEIR ASYMPTOTIC APPROXIMATIONS 
The constant KB has a magnitude \KB\, a phase angle of 0° if KB is positive, and —180° if KB is 
negative. Therefore the Bode plots for KB are simply horizontal straight lines as shown in Figs. 15-1 and 
15-2. 
Fig. 15-1 
Fig. 15-2 
The frequency response function (or sinusoidal transfer function) for a pole of order I at the origin is 
(15.4) 
The bode plots for this function are straight lines, as shown in Figs. 15-3 and 15-4. 

366 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Fig. 15-3 
Fig. 15-4 
For a zero oj order I at the origin. 
(15.5) 
the Bode plots are the reflections about the 0-db and 0° lines of Figs. 15-3 and 15-4, as shown in Figs. 
1 5 - 5 a n d 1 5 - 6 

367 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
Fig. 15-5 
Fig. 15-6 
Consider the single-pole transfer 
function 
The Bode plots for its frequency 
response function 
are given in Figs. 15-7 and 15-8. Note that the logarithmic frequency scale is normalized in terms of p. 
(15.6) 

368 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Fig. 15-7 
Fig. 15-8 
T o determine the asymptotic approximations for these Bode plots, we see that for 
and for 

369 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
Therefore the Bode magnitude plot asymptotically approaches a horizontal straight line at 0 db as u/p 
approaches zero and - 20 log 1 0(w//>) as to/p approaches infinity (Fig. 15-7). Note that this high-
frequency asymptote is a straight line with a slope of - 2 0 db/decade, or - 6 db/octave when plotted 
on a logarithmic frequency scale as shown in Fig. 15-7. The two asymptotes intersect at the corner 
frequency to = p rad/sec. T o determine the phase angle asymptote, we see that for to//? «s 1, or to <zp, 
and for 
Thus the Bode phase angle plot asymptotically approaches 0 ° as u>/p approaches zero, and - 9 0 ° as 
u/p 
approaches infinity, as shown i n Fig. 15-8. A negative-slope straight-line asymptote can be used to 
j o i n the 0° asymptote and the - 9 0 ° asymptote by drawing a line from the 0 ° asymptote at to =p/5 
to 
the - 9 0 ° asymptote at to = 5p. Note that it is tangent to the exact curves at « = p. 
The 
errors introduced by these asymptotic approximations are shown i n Table 15-1 for the 
single-pole transfer function at various frequencies. 
Table 15-1. Asymptotic Errors for 
Magnitude error (db) 
Phase angle error 
The 
Bode plots and their asymptotic approximations for the single-zero frequency 
response 
function 
are shown in Figs. 15-9 and 15-10. 
(15.7) 
Fig. 15-9 

370 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Fig. 
15-11 
Fig. 15-10 

371 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
Fig. 15-12 
The Bode plots and their asymptotic approximations for the second-order frequency response 
function with complex poles. 
(15.8) 
are shown in Figs. 15-11 and 15-12. Note that the damping ratio f is a parameter on these graphs. 
The magnitude asymptote shown in Fig. 15-11 has a corner frequency at co = oin and a high-frequency 
slope twice that of the asymptote for the single-pole case of Fig. 15-7. The phase angle asymptote is 
similar to that of Fig. 15-8 except that the high-frequency portion is at —180° instead of —90° and the 
point of tangency, or inflection, is at - 90°. 
The Bode plots for a pair of complex zeros are the reflections about the 0 db and 0° lines of those 
for the complex poles. 
15.5 
CONSTRUCTION OF BODE PLOTS FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
Bode plots of continuous-time frequency response functions can be constructed by summing the 
magnitude and phase angle contributions of each pole and zero (or pairs of complex poles and zeros). 
The asymptotic approximations of these plots are often sufficient. If more accurate plots are desired, 
many software packages are available for rapidly accomplishing this task. 
For the general open-loop frequency response function 
(15.9) 
where / is a positive integer or zero, the magnitude and phase angle are given by 
(15.10) 

372 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
and 
(75.77) 
The Bode plots for each of the terms i n Equations (15.10) and (15.11) were given i n Figs. 15-1 to 15-12. 
If GH(joj) has complex poles or zeros, terms having a form similar to Equation (15.8) are simply added 
to Equations (15.10) and (15.11). The construction procedure is best illustrated by an example. 
EXAMPLE 15.3. 
The asymptotic Bode plots for the frequency response function 
Fig. 15-13 
Fig. 15-14 

373 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
are constructed using Equations (15.10) and (15.11): 
The graphs for each of the terms in these equations arc obtained from Figs. 15-1 to 15-12 and are shown in Figs. 
15-13 and 15-14. The asymptotic Bode plots for GH(ju) are obtained by adding these curves, as shown in Figs. 
15-15 and 15-16, where computer-generated Bode plots for the frequency response function are also given for 
comparison with the asymptotic approximations. 
Fig. 15-15 
Fig. 15-16 
15.6 
B O D E P L O T S O F D I S C R E T E - T I M E F R E Q U E N C Y R E S P O N S E 
F U N C T I O N S 
The factored form for the general open-loop discrete-time frequency response function is 
(15.12) 

374 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Simple asymptotic approximations, similar to those in Section 15.4, do not exist for the individual terms 
in Equation [15.12). Thus there is no particular advantage to a Bode form of the type in Equation 
(15.2) for discrete-time systems. In general, computers provide the most convenient way to generate 
Bode plots for discrete-time systems and several software packages exist to accomplish this task. 
For the general open-loop frequency response function Equation (15.12), the magnitude and phase 
angle are given by 
(15.13) 
and 
It is important to note that both the magnitude and phase angle of discrete-time frequency response 
functions are periodic in the real angular frequency variable w. This is true since 
thus e'"'
T is periodic in the frequency domain with period 2TT/T. Every term in both the magnitude and 
phase angle is thus periodic. It is therefore only necessary to generate Bode plots over the angular range 
— 7T < to7/< w radians; and the magnitude and phase angle are typically plotted as a function of the 
angle O J I rather than angular frequency to. 
Another useful property of a discrete-time frequency response function is that the magnitude is an 
even function of the frequency to (and to 7") and the phase angle is an odd function of to (and to77). 
EXAMPLE 15.4. 
The Bode plots for the discrete-time frequency response function 
are shown in Figs. 15-17 and 15-18. 
Fig. 15-17 

375 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
Fig. 15-18 
15.7 
RELATIVE STABILITY 
The relative stability indicators "gain margin" and "phase margin" for both discrete-time and 
continuous-time systems are defined in terms of the system open-loop frequency response in Section 
10.4. Consequently these parameters are easily determined from the Bode plots of GH(u>) as illustrated 
in Example 10.1, and in Example 15.4 above. Since 0 db corresponds to a magnitude of 1, the gain 
margin is the number of decibels that \GH(w)\ is below 0 db at the phase crossover frequency w„ 
( a r g G H ( f A v ) 
= 
- 1 8 0 ° ) . The phase margin is the number of degrees arg ( ? / / ( « ) is above —180° at the 
gain crossover frequency a1 
(\GH(ul)\ 
= \). 
Computer-generated 
Bode plots should be used 
to 
accurately determine u „ <ot and the gain and phase margins. 
In most cases positive gain and phase margins, as defined above, will ensure stability of the 
closed-loop system. However, a Nyquist Stability Plot (Chapter 11) may be sketched, or one of the 
methods of Chapter 5 can be used to verify the absolute stability of the system. 
EXAMPLE 15.5. 
The continuous-time system whose Bode plots are shown in Fig. 15-19 has a gain margin of 
8 db and a phase margin of 40°. 
Fig. 15-19 

376 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
EXAMPLE 15.6. 
For the system in Example 15.4, the gain margin is 39 db, the angle at the phase crossover 
frequency 
is ^ 7 " = 1.57 rad, the phase margin is 90°, and the angle at the gain crossover frequency 
is 
to, 77= 0.02 rad. all as illustrated in Figures 15-17 and 15-18. 
15.8 
CLOSED-LOOP FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
Although there is no straightforward method for plotting the closed-loop frequency 
response 
(C/R)(tc) 
from Bode plots of GH(ui), it may be approximated in the following manner, for both 
continuous and discrete-time control systems. The closed-loop frequency response is given by 
The open-loop frequency response of most systems is characterized by high gain for low frequencies and 
decreasing gain for higher frequencies, due to the usual excess of poles over zeros. Thus the closed-loop 
frequency response for a unity feedback system {H = 1) is approximated by a magnitude of 1 (0 db) and 
phase angle of 0° for frequencies below the gain crossover frequency uv 
F o r frequencies above w L, the 
closed-loop frequency response may be approximated by the magnitude and phase angle of G(u). 
An 
approximate closed-loop bandwidth for many systems is the gain crossover frequency GI1 (See Example 
12.7.) 
EXAMPLE 15.7. 
The open-loop Bode magnitude plot and approximate closed-loop Bode magnitude plot for the 
continuous-time unity feedback system represented by <7(yto) = 10/y'w(l + joi) are shown in Fig. 15-20. 
Fig. 15-20 

377 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
15.9 
BODE ANALYSIS OF DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS USING THE w-TRANSFORM 
The w-transform discussed in Section 10.7 can be used in the Bode analysis of discrete-time 
systems. The algorithm for Bode analysis using the w-transform is: 
1. 
Substitute (1 + w)/(\ 
— w) for z in the open-loop transfer function GH(z): 
2. 
Let w = /'wH. and generate Bode plots for GH'(juw), 
using the methods of Sections 15.3 through 
15.5. 
3. 
Analyze the relative stability of the system in the w-plane by determining the gain and phase 
margins, the gain and phase crossover frequencies, the closed-loop frequency response, the 
bandwidth, a n d / o r any other frequency-related characteristics of interest. 
4. 
Transform the critical frequencies determined in step 3 to the frequency domain of the z-plane 
using the transformation ccT = 2 t a n
_ 1 w H ; . 
EXAMPLE 15.8. 
The open-loop transfer function 
is transformed into the w-domain by letting 
which yields 
Note, in particular, that the minus sign contributes - 180° of phase angle, and the zero at + 1 contributes + 90° at 
^ = o
D. The Bode plots of GH'(jaH.) 
are shown in Figs. 15-21 and 15-22. 
Fig. 15-21 

378 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Fig. 15-22 
EXAMPLE 15.9. 
From the Bode plots of Example 15.8, the gain margin in the w-domain is 39 db and the phase 
crossover frequency is « „ = 1 rad/sec. Transforming back to the z-domain, the phase crossover frequency wT is 
obtained from 
Compare these results with those of Example 15.6, which arc the same. 
EXAMPLE 15.10. 
From the Bode plots of Example 15.8, the phase margin is 90° and the gain crossover 
frequency is conl =0.01 rad/sec. Transforming to the z-domain, the gain crossover frequency to, is obtained from 
Compare these results with those of Example 15.6, which are the same. 
With the wide availability of software for control systems analysis, use of the w-transform for Bode 
analysis of discrete-time systems is usually unnecessary. However, for design by analysis, as discussed i n 
Chapter 16 where insight gained from continuous-time system design techniques is transferred to 
discrete-time system design, the w-transform can be a very useftil tool. 
Solved Problems 
LOGARITHMIC SCALES 
15.1. Express the following quantities in decibel (db) units: (a) 2, (b) 4, (c) 8. (d) 20, (e) 25, ( / ) 140. 
(b) 
(c) 
From Equation (15.1), 

379 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
Note that since 4 = 2 x 2 . then for part (b) wc have 
and since 8 = 2 x 4 , then for part (c) wc have 
T H E B O D E F O R M A N D T H E B O D E GAIN F O R C O N T I N U O U S - T I M E S Y S T E M S 
15.2. 
Determine the Bode form and the Bode gain for the transfer function 
Factoring 2 from the numerator, 4 and 6 from the denominator and putting .y = /to results in the Bode 
form 
The Bode gain is 
15.3. 
When is the Bode gain equal to the d.c. gain (zero frequency magnitude) of a transfer function? 
The Bode gain is equal to the d.c. gain of any transfer function with no poles or zeros at the origin 
[/= 0 in Equation (I.\2)}. 
B O D E P L O T S O F S I M P L E F R E Q U E N C Y R E S P O N S E F U N C T I O N S 
15.4. 
Prove that the Bode Magnitude plot for (./to)' is a straight line. 
The Bode magnitude plot for 
is a plot of 
versus 
Thus 
Since the slope is constant for any /, the Bode magnitude plot is a straight line. 
15.5. 
Determine: (1) the conditions under which the Bode magnitude plot for a pair of complex poles 
has a peak at a nonzero, finite value of to; and (2) the frequency at which the peak occurs. 
The Bode magnitude is given by 
Since the logarithm is a monotonically increasing function, the magnitude in decibels has a peak 
(maximum) if and only if the magnitude itself is maximum. The magnitude squared, which is maximum 
when the magnitude is maximum, is 

380 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. If 
Taking the derivative of this function and setting it equal to zero yields 
or 
and the frequency at the peak is <o = to„y'l — 2f
2 . Since to must be real, by definition, the magnitude has a 
peak at a nonzero value co only if 1 - 2f
2 > 0 or f < 1/yfl = 0.707. For f > 0,707, the Bode magnitude is 
monotonically decreasing. 
CONSTRUCTION OF BODE PLOTS FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
15.6. 
Construct the asymptotic Bode plots for the frequency response function 
The asymptotic Bode plots arc determined by summing the graphs of the asymptotic representations 
for each of the terms of GH(ju>), as in equations (15.10) and (15.11). The asymptotes for each of these 
terms are shown in Figs. 15-23 and 15-24 and the asymptotic Bode plots for GH(jci) in Figs. 15-25 and 
15-26. The exact Bode plots generated by computer are shown for comparison. 

381 
Fig. 15-24 
Fig. 15-25 
Fig. 15-26 

382 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
15.7. Construct Bode plots for the frequency response function 
The asymptotic Bode plots are constructed by summing the asymptotic plots for each term of GH(joi), 
as in Equation (15.10) and (15.11), and are shown in Figs. 15-27 and 15-28. More accurate curves 
determined numerically by computer are also plotted for comparison. 
Fig. 15-27 
Fig. 15-28 

383 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
15.8. 
Construct the Bode plots for the open-loop transfer function GH 
With i = y'to, the Bode form for this transfer function is 
This function has a right-half plane pole [due to the term 1/(1 -ju)] 
which is not one of the standard 
functions introduced in Section 15.4. However, this function has the same magnitude as 1/(1 + y'to) and the 
same phase angle as 1 + ju. 
Thus for a function of the form 1/(1 —ju/p), 
the magnitude can be 
determined from Fig. 15-7 and the phase angle from Fig. 15-10. For this problem the phase angle 
contributions from the terms 1/(1 + jw) and 1/(1 — ju) cancel each other. The asymptotes for the Bode 
magnitude plot are shown in Fig. 15-29 along with a more accurate Bode magnitude plot. The Bode phase 
angle is determined solely from arg KB = arg( - 4) - 180° and the zero at w = 2, as shown in Fig, 15-30. 
Fig. 15-29 
Fig. 15-30 

384 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
RELATIVE STABILITY 
15.9. F o r the system with the open-loop transfer function of Problem 15.6, find tox, « „ , the gain 
margin, and the phase margin. 
Using the exact magnitude curve shown in Fig. 15-25, the gain crossover frequency is to, = 0.62. The 
phase crossover frequency w r is indeterminate because asgGH(ju) never crosses - 1 8 0 ° . (See Fig. 15-26.) 
ArgG//(yw 1) = argG//( J/0.62) is - 1 2 9 ° . Hence the phase margin is - 129° + 180° = 51°. Since to„ is 
indeterminate, the gain margin is also indeterminate. 
15.10. Determine the gain and phase margins for the systems with the open-loop frequency response 
function of Problem 15.7. 
From Fig. 15-27, &>, = 1.5; and from Fig. 15-28, argG//(y'io,) = - 1 4 4 ° . Therefore the phase margin is 
180° - 144° = 36°. From Fig. 15-28, to„ = 3.2; and the gain margin is read from Fig. 15-27 as 
-201og 1 0|C/f(>io„)| = l l d b . 
15.11. Determine the gain and phase margins for the system with the open-loop transfer function of 
Problem 15.8. 
From Fig. 15-29, to, = 2.3 rad/sec. From Fig. 15-30, argG//(j'w 1) = - 1 2 7 ° . Hence the phase margin 
is 180° - 127° = 53°. AS shown in Fig. 15-30, argGH(ju>) approaches - 1 8 0 ° as to decreases. Since 
arg GH(ju) = - 180° only at to = 0, then <off = 0. Therefore the gain margin is - 20\ogm\GH(/'to,.) | = —12 
db using the normal procedure. Although a negative gain margin indicates instability for most systems, this 
system is stable, as verified by the Nyquist Stability Plot shown in Fig. 15-31. Remember that the system 
has an open-loop right-half plane pole; but the zero of GH at - 2 acts to stabilize the system for K = 2. 
Fig. 15-31 
CLOSED-LOOP FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
15.12. F o r the system of Example 15.7 with H=\, 
determine the closed-loop frequency 
response 
function and compare the actual closed-loop Bode magnitude plot with the approximate one of 
Example 15.7. 
For this system, GH = W/s(s + 1). Then 
and 
Therefore the closed-loop Bode magnitude plot corresponds to Fig. 15-11, with f = 0.18 and u„ = 3.16. 
From this plot the actual 3-db bandwidth is to/to„ = 1.5 in normalized form; hence, since to,, = 3.16, 
BW — 1.5(3.16) = 4.74 rad/sec. The approximate 3-db bandwidth determined from Fig. 15-20 of Example 

385 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 15] 
15.7 is 3.7 rad/sec. Note that «„ = 3.16 rad/sec for the closed-loop system corresponds very well with 
coj = 3.1 rad/sec from Fig. 15-20. Thus the gain crossover frequency of the open-loop system corresponds 
very well with w„ of the closed-loop system, although the approximate 3-db bandwidth determined above is 
not very accurate. The reason for this is that the approximate Bode magnitude plot of Fig. 15-20 does not 
show the peaking that occurs in the exact curve. 
15.13. For the discrete-time system with open-loop frequency response function 
find the gain margin, phase margin, phase crossover angle, and gain crossover angle. 
The Bode plots for this system are given in Figs. 15-32 and 15-33. The phase crossover angle co7.7
T is 
determined from Fig. 15-33 as 1.74 rad. The corresponding gain margin is found on Fig. 15-32 as 11 db. 
The gain crossover angle u>{T is determined from Fig. 15-32 as 0.63 rad. The corresponding phase margin is 
found on Fig. 15-33 as 57°. 
Fig. 15-32 
Fig. 15-33 

386 
B O D E A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 15 
Supplementary Problems 
15.14. Construct the Bode plots for the open-loop frequency response function 
15.15. Construct the Bode plots and determine the gain and phase margins for the system with the open-loop 
frequency response function 
15.16. Solve Problems 13.35 and 13.37 by constructing the Bode plots. 
15.17. Work Problem 13.52 using Bode plots. 
15.18. Work Problem 11.59 using Bode plots. 

387 
Chapter 16 
Bode Design 
16.1 
DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
Design of a feedback control system using Bode techniques entails shaping and reshaping the Bode 
magnitude and phase angle plots until the system specifications are satisfied. These specifications are 
most conveniently expressed in terms of frequency-domain figures of merit such as gain and phase 
margin for the transient 
performance 
and the error constants (Chapter 9) for the steady state 
time-domain response. 
Shaping the asymptotic Bode plots of continuous-time systems by adding cascade or feedback 
compensation 
is a relatively simple procedure. Bode plots for several common 
continuous-time 
compensation networks are presented in Sections 16.3. 16.4, and 16.5. With these graphs, the magnitude 
and phase angle contributions of a particular compensator can be added directly to the uncompensated 
system Bode plots. It is usually necessary to correct the asymptotic Bode plots in the final stages of 
design to accurately verify satisfaction of the performance specifications. 
Since simple asymptotic Bode plots do not exist for discrete-time systems, the shaping and 
reshaping of Bode plots for discrete-time systems is usually not as simple and intuitive as for 
continuous-time systems. However, by transforming the discrete-time transfer function into the u-plane, 
design of discrete-time systems can be accomplished by continuous-time techniques. 
16.2 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
It is possible in some cases to satisfy all system specifications by simply adjusting the open-loop 
gain factor K. Adjustment of the gain factor K does not affect the phase angle plot. It only shifts the 
magnitude plot up or down to correspond to the increase or decrease in K. The simplest procedure is to 
alter the db scale of the magnitude plot in accordance with the change in K instead of replotting the 
curve. For example, if A' is doubled, the db scale should be shifted down by 20log H )2 = 6.02 db. 
When working with continuous-time Bode plots, it is more convenient to use the Bode gain: 
where 
arc the finite poles and zeros of GH. 
EXAMPLE 16.1. 
The Bode plots for 
arc shown in Fig. 16 1 for Kn = 1. 
The maximum amount KH 
may be increased to improve the system steady state performance without 
decreasing the phase margin below 45° is determined as follows. In Fig. 16-1, the phase margin is 45° if the gain 
crossover frequency to, is 2 rad/sec and the magnitude plot can be raised by as much as 9 db before u>{ becomes 2 
rad/sec. Thus Kn can be increased by 9 db without decreasing the phase margin below 45°. 

388 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
Fig. 16-1 
16.3 
LEAD COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
The lead compensator, presented in Sections 6.3 and 12.4, has the following Bode form frequency 
response function: 
(76./) 
The Bode plots for this compensator, for various lead ratios a/b, are shown in Fig. 16-2. These graphs 
illustrate that addition of a cascade lead compensator to a system lowers the overall magnitude curve i n 
the low-frequency region and raises the overall phase angle curve i n the low-to-mid-frequency region. 
Other properties of the lead compensator are discussed in Section 12.4. 
The amount of low-frequency attenuation and phase lead produced by the lead 
compensator 
depends on the lead ratio a/b. M a x i m u m phase lead occurs at the frequency w m = Jab and is equal to 
(16.2) 

389 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
Fig. 16-2 
Lead compensation is normally used to increase the gain a n d / o r phase margins of a system or 
increase its bandwidth. A n additional modification of the Bode gain KB 
is usually required with lead 
networks, as described in Section 12.4. 
EXAMPLE 16.2. 
An uncompensated continuous-time system whose open-loop transfer function is 
24 
s(s + 2)(s + 6) 
is to be designed to meet the following performance specifications: 
1. 
when the input is a ramp with slope (velocity) 2it rad/sec, the steady state position error must be less than 
or equal to 77/IO radians. 
2. 
<J>PM = 45° ± 5°. 
3. 
gain crossover frequency tot > 1 rad/sec* 
Lead compensation is appropriate, as previously outlined in detail in Example 12.4. Transforming GH(ju) 
into Bode form, 
2 
GHt ju) = — 
-
' 
/ « ( i + y « / 2 ) ( i + y « / 6 ) 
we note that the Bode gain KB is equal to the velocity error constant KlA = 2. The Bode plots for this system are 
shown in Fig. 16-3. 
•When using Bode techniques, closed-loop system bandwidth specifications arc often interpreted in terms of the gain crossover 
frequency 
which is easily determined from the Bode magnitude plot. The bandwidth and ul are not generally equivalent; but, 
when one increases or decreases, the other usually follows. As noted in Sections 10.4, and 15.8 and Problem 12.16. u, is often a 
reasonable approximation for the bandwidth. 

390 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
Fie. 16-3 
The steady state error e(oo) is given by Equation (9.13) as \/Kv 
for a unit ramp function input. Therefore, if 
e(oo) < w/10 radians and the ramp has a slope of 2ir instead of 1, then the required velocity error constant is 
Thus a cascade amplifier with a gain of A = 10, or 20 db, will satisfy the steady state specification. But this gain 
must be further increased after the lead network parameters are chosen, as described in Example 12.4. When the 
Bode gain is increased by 20 db, the gain margin is — 8 db and the phase margin - 28°, as read directly from the 
plots of Fig. 16-3. Therefore the lead compensator must be chosen to bring the phase margin to 45°. This requires a 
large amount of phase lead. Furthermore, since addition of the lead compensator must be accompanied by an 
increase in gain of b/a, the net effect is to increase the gain at mid and high frequencies, thus raising the gain 
crossover frequency. Hence a phase margin of 45° has to be established at a higher frequency, requiring even more 
phase lead. For these reasons we add two cascaded lead networks (with the necessary isolation to reduce loading 
effects, if required). 
To determine the parameters of the lead compensator, assume that the Bode gain has been increased by 20 db 
so that the 0-db line is effectively lowered by 20 db. If we choose b/a — 10, then the lead compensator plus an 

391 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
additional Bode gain increase of (b/a)
1 for the two networks has the following combined form: 
Now we must choose an appropriate value for a. A useful method for improving system stability is to try to cross 
the 0-db line at a slope of - 6 db/octave. Crossing at a slope of —12 db/octavc usually results in too low a value 
for the phase margin. If a is set equal to 2, a sketch of the asymptotes reveals that the 0-db line is crossed at —12 
db/octave. If a = 4, the 0-db line is crossed at a slope of - 6 db/octave. The Bode magnitude and phase angle 
plots for the system with a = 4 rad/sec are shown in Fig. 16-4. The gain margin is 14 db and the phase margin is 
50°. Thus the second specification is satisfied. The gain crossover frequency u ( = 14 rad/sec is substantially higher 
than the value specified, indicating that the system will respond a good deal faster than required by the third 
specification. The compensated system block diagram is shown in Fig. 16-5. A properly designed amplifier may 
additionally serve the purpose of load-effect isolation if it is placed between the two lead networks. 
Fig. 16-4 
Fig. 16-5 

392 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
16.4 
LAG COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
The lag compensator, presented in Sections 6.3 and 12.5, has the following Bode form frequency 
response function: 
{16.3) 
The Bode plots for the lag compensator, for several lag ratios b/a, 
are shown in Figure 16-6. 
The 
properties of this compensator are discussed in Section 12.5. 
Fig. 16-6 
EXAMPLE 16.3. 
Let us redesign the system of Example 16.2 using gain factor plus lag compensation, as 
previously outlined in detail in Example 12.5. The uncompensated system is, again, represented by 
and the specifications are 
1. 
2. 
3. 
As before, a Bode gain increase by a factor of 10, or 20 db, is required to satisfy the first (steady state) 
specification. Hence the Bode plots of Fig. 16-3 should again be considered with the 0-db line effectively lowered by 
20 db. Addition of significant phase-lag at frequencies less than 0.1 rad/sec will lower the curve or effectively raise 
the 0-db line by an amount corresponding to b/a. Thus the ratio b/a must be chosen so that the resulting phase 

393 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
margin is 45°. From the Bode phase angle plot (Fig. 16-3) we sec that a 45° phase margin is obtained if the gain 
crossover frequency is 
= 1.3 rad/sec. From the Bode magnitude plot, this requires that the magnitude curve be 
lowered by 2 + 20 = 22 db. Thus a gain decrease of 22 db, or a factor of 14, is needed. This can be obtained using a 
lag compensator with b/a = 14. The actual location of the compensator is arbitrary as long as the phase shift 
produced at 
is negligible. Values of a = 0.01 and b = 0.14 rad/sec are adequate. The compensated system block 
diagram is shown in Fig. 16-7. 
Fig. 16-7 
16.5 
LAG-LEAD COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
It is sometimes desirable, as discussed i n Section 12.6, to simultaneously employ both lead and lag 
compensation. Although one each of these two networks can be connected in series to achieve the 
desired effect, it is usually more convenient to mechanize the combined lag-lead compensator described 
in Example 6.6. This compensator can be constructed with a single R-C network, as shown in Problem 
6.14. 
The Bode form of the frequency response function for the lag-lead compensator is 
with />! > a v b2> a2 and axb2 = bva2. A typical Bode magnitude plot in which ax > b2 is shown in Fig. 
16-8. The Bode plots for a specific lag-lead compensator can be determined by combining the Bode 
plots for the lag portion from Fig. 16-6 with those for the lead portion from Fig. 16-2. Additional 
properties of the lag-lead compensator are discussed in Section 12.6. 
Fia. 16-8 
EXAMPLE 16.4. 
Let us redesign the system of Example 16.2 using lag-lead compensation. Suppose, for example, 
that we want the gain crossover frequency to, (approximate closed-loop bandwidth) to be greater than 2 rad/sec 
but less than 5 rad/sec, with all the other specifications the same as Example 16.2. For this application, we shall see 
that the lag-lead compensator has advantages over either lag or lead compensation. The uncompensated system is, 
again, represented by 

394 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
The Bode plots are shown in Fig. 16-3. As in Example 16.2, a Bode gain increase of 20 db is required to satisfy the 
specification on steady state performance. Once again referring to Fig. 16-3 with the 0-db line shifted down by 20 
db to correspond to the Bode gain increase, the parameters of the lag-lead compensator must be chosen to result in 
a gain crossover frequency between 2 and 5 rad/sec, with a phase margin of about 45°. The phase angle plot of 
Fig. 16-3 shows about —188° phase angle at approximately 4 rad/sec. Thus we need about 53° phase lead to 
establish a 45° phase margin in that frequency range. Let us choose a lead ratio of ax/bv =0.1 to make sure we 
have enough phase lead. To place it in about the right frequency range, let ax = 0.8 and bl = % rad/sec. The lag 
portion must have the same ratio a2/b2 = 0.1; but the lag portion must be sufficiently lower than a, so as not to 
significantly reduce the phase lead obtained from the lead portion; b2 = 0.2 and a2 = 0.02 are adequate. The Bode 
plots for the compensated system are shown in Fig. 16-9; and the block diagram is shown in Fig. 16-10. 
We note that the lag-lead compensator produces no magnitude attenuation at either high or low frequencies. 
Therefore a smaller gain factor adjustment (as obtained with lag compensation in Example 16.3) and a smaller 
bandwidth and gain crossover frequency (as that resulting from lead compensation in Example 16.2) are obtained 
using lag-lead compensation. 
Frequency u, rad/sec 
Fig. 16-9 
Fig. 16-10 

395 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
16.6 
BODE DESIGN OF DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS 
Bode design of discrete-time systems is based on the same philosophy as Bode design of 
continuous-time systems in that it entails shaping and reshaping the Bode magnitude and phase angle 
plots until the system specifications are met. But the effort involved can be substantially greater. 
It is sometimes possible to satisfy specifications by simply adjusting the open-loop gain factor K, as 
described i n Section 16.2 for continuous-time systems. 
EXAMPLE 16.5. 
Consider the discrete-time system of Example 15.4, with open-loop frequency response function 
and H=l. 
Figures 16-11 and 16-12 are the Bode plots of GH, drawn by computer, which illustrate the gain and 
Fig. 16-11 
Fig. 16-12 

396 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
se margins and the gain and phase crossover frequencies. We now show that gain factor compensation alone 
be used to satisfy the following system specifications: 
1. 
^
P
M > 3 0 ° . 
2. 
10 db < gain margin < 15 db. 
From Fig. 16-12 we see if toucan be increased to 1.11 rad, then (J>,JM = 30°. To accomplish this, the gain must 
ncrcascd by 35 db, as shown in Fig. 16-11, resulting in a gain margin of 39 - 35 = 4 db, which is too small. If 
ncrease the gain by only 25 db (increase A" by a factor of 18), then w 17'= 0.35 rad and the phase margin is 70
c. 
e that changing K does not change u^T. 
For discrete-lime system design specifications which cannot be satisfied by gain factor compensa-
i alone. Bode design in the z-domain is not as straightforward as in the .y-domain. Continuous-time 
em design methods can. however, be transferred to the design of discrete-time systems using the 
•ansform. Based on developments in Sections 10.7 and 15.9, the design algorithm is as follows: 
1. 
Substitute (1 + H')/(1 — w) for z in the open-loop transfer function GH(z): 
2. 
Set w =y'w„., and then transform critical frequencies in the performance specifications from the 
z- to the M'-domain, using: 
uT 
u„, = tan 
2 
3. 
Develop continuous-time compensation (as in Sections 16.3 through 16.5) such that the system 
in the w-domain satisfies the given specifications at the frequencies obtained in Step 2 (as if the 
w-domain were the s-domain). 
4. 
Transform the compensation elements obtained i n Step 3 back to the z-domain to complete the 
design, using w = (z - l ) / ( z + 1). 
EXAMPLE 16.6. The unity feedback discrete-time system with open-loop transfer function 
and sampling period 7"= 0.1 sec is to be compensated so that it meets the following specifications: 
1. The steady state error must be less than or equal to 0.02 for a unit ramp input. 
2. 
*
P
M > 3 0 ° . 
3. The gain crossover frequency to, must satisfy c0|r> 1 rad. 
This is a type 0 system and the steady state error for a unit ramp input is infinite (Section 9.9). Therefore the 
compensation must contain a pole at z = 1 and the new transfer function including this pole becomes 
From the table in Section 9.9 Ihe steady slate error for the unit ramp is e(x) = T/Kr, 
where A / = 67/(1) = 
lim. , ,(z - \)GH'{z) = ^. Thus, with «•(*) = 0.15, the gain factor must be increased by a factor of 15/2 (17.5 db). 
The Bode plots for GH' arc shown in Figs. 16-13 and 16-14. From Fig. 16-13, the angle at the gain crossover 
frequency is w{T = 0.68 rad and the phase margin is 56". Increasing the gain by 17.5 db would move the angle at 
the gain crossover frequency to uifT — 2.56 rad, but the phase margin would then become —41°, destabilizing the 
system. Gain factor compensation alone is apparently inadequate for this design problem. 
To complete the design, wc transform GH(z) into the w-domain, setting z = (1 + w)/(l - w) and forming 
The Bode plots for GH" are shown in Figs. 16-15 and 16-16. 

397 
Fig. 16-15 
Fig. 16-14 
Fig. 16-13 

398 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
Fig. 16-16 
Following Step 2 above, the gain crossover frequency specification uxT> 1 rad is transformed into the w-plane 
using 
From Fig. 16-15 [or from coH>1 = tan(0.68/2)] the gain crossover frequency is 0.35 rad/sec and the phase margin is 
56° (as it was in the z-domain). 
To satisfy the steady state error specification, the gain factor must be increased by at least 17.5 db (as noted 
earlier), and to satisfy the remaining specifications, the gain crossover frequency should be increased to at least 0.55 
rad/sec (Fig. 16-16), and the phase angle at uw = 0.55 should be held to at least —150°. This last requirement 
implies that no more than 6.5° of lag can be introduced at uw = 0.55 rad/sec. Note that this requires about 4.3-db 
gain increase at u„ = 0.55 rad/sec so that this frequency can become the gain crossover frequency. 
Lag compensation can satisfy these specifications (Step 3). From Fig. 16-6, a lag ratio of b/a = 5 provides 14 
db of attenuation at higher frequencies. To increase the gain crossover frequency, the gain factor is increased by 
18.3 db, so that at w w = 0.55 there is a net increase of 4.3 db. This is clearly adequate to also satisfy the steady state 
error specification (17.5 db is needed). 
Now the parameter a in the lag ratio can be chosen to satisfy the phase margin requirement. As noted above, 
we must keep the phase lag of the compensator below 6.5° at ww = 0.55 rad/sec. We note that the phase lag of the 
lag compensator is 
Thus, setting $ L a g = —6.5°, co = 0)^ = 0.55 rad/sec and b = 5a (as above), this equation is easily solved for a. 
Choosing the smaller of the solutions generates a dipole (a pole-zero pair) very near the origin of the w-plane, for 
a = 0.0157. We choose a = 0.015 which gives only 6.2° of phase lag. Thus b = 0.075 and the lag compensator in the 
w-plane is given by 
P L a g is now transformed back to the z-domain (Step 4) by substituting w = (z - l ) / ( z + 1). The result is 
Combining this with the pole at z = 1 and the gain factor increase of 18.3 db (a gain factor ratio increase of 8.22), 

399 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
the complete compensation element G ^ z ) is 
The compensated control system is shown in Fig. 16-17. Note that this design is quite similar to those developed for 
this same system and specifications in Examples 12.7 and 14.5. 
Fig. 16-17 
Solved Problems 
GAIN FACTOR 
COMPENSATION 
16.1. Determine the maximum value for the Bode gain KB 
which will result in a gain margin of 6 db 
or more and a phase margin of 45° or more for the system with the open-loop frequency 
response function 
The Bode plots for this system with KB = 1 are shown in Fig. 16-18. 
The gain margin, measured at u„ = 5 rad/sec, is 20 db. Thus the Bode gain can be raised by as much 
as 20 — 6 = 14 db and still satisfy the gain margin requirement. However, the Bode phase angle plot 
indicates that, for <f> P M>45°, the gain crossover frequency wx must be less than about 2 rad/sec. The 
magnitude curve can be raised by as much as 7.5 db before oi1 exceeds 2 rad/sec. Thus the maximum value 
of KB satisfying both specifications is 7.5 db, or 2.37. 
16.2. Design the system of Problem 15.7, to have a phase margin of 55°. 
The Bode phase angle plot in Fig. 15-28 indicates that the gain crossover frequency coj must be 0.9 
rad/sec for 55° phase margin. From the Bode magnitude of Fig. 15-27, KB must be reduced by 6 db, or a 
factor of 2, to achieve u>x = 0.9 rad/sec and hence <j>PU = 55°. 
LEAD 
COMPENSATION 
16.3. Show that the maximum phase lead of the lead compensator [Equation (16.1)] occurs at um = -Jab 
and prove Equation (16.2). 
The phase angle of the lead compensator is 
Then 
Setting 
equal to zero yields 
fhus the maximum phase lead occurs at 
Hence 
degrees. 
But 
since 
we 
have 

400 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
Frequency u, rad/sec 
Fig. 16-18 
16.4. What attenuation (magnitude) is produced by a lead compensator at the frequency of maximum 
phase lead um = i/ab ? 
The attenuation factor is given by 
16.5. Design compensation for the system 
which will yield an overall phase margin of 45° and the same gain crossover frequency W j as the 
uncompensated system. The latter is essentially the same as designing for the same bandwidth, as 
discussed in Section 15.8. 

401 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
The Bode plots for the uncompensated system are shown in Fig. 16-19. 
Fig. 16-19 
The gain crossover frequency to, is 3.4 rad/sec and the phase margin is 10°. The specifications can be 
met with a cascade lead compensator and gain factor amplifier. Choosing a and b for the lead compensator 
is somewhat arbitrary, as long as the phase lead at ul = 3.4 is sufficient to raise the phase margin from 10° 
to 45°. However, it is often desirable, for economic reasons, to minimize the low-frequency attenuation 
obtained from the lead network by choosing the largest lead ratio a/b < 1 that will supply the required 
amount of phase lead. Assuming this is the case, the maximum lead ratio that will yield 45° — 10° = 35° 
phase lead is about 0.3 from Fig. 16-2. Solution of Equation (16.2) yields a value of a/b = 0.27. But we 
shall use a/b = 0.3 because we have the curves available for this value in Fig. 16-2. We want to choose a 
and b such that the maximum phase lead, which occurs at w„, = 'fab , is obtained at u1 = 3.4 rad/sec. Thus 
'fab = 3.4. Substituting a = 0.3b into this equation and solving for b, wc find /; = 6.2 and a = 1.86. But this 
compensator produces 201og 1 0y6.2/l .86 = 5.2 db attenuation at to, = 3.4 rad/sec (see Problem 16.4). Thus 
an amplifier with a gain of 5.2 db, or 1,82, is required, in addition to the lead compensator, to maintain tOj 
at 3.4 rad/sec. The Bode plots for the compensated system are shown in Fig. 16-20 and the block diagram 
in Fig. 16-21. 

402 
BODE DESiGN 
[CHAP. 16 
Fig. 16-20 
Fig. 16-21 
LAG COMPENSATION 
16.6. 
What is the maximum phase lag produced by the lag compensator [Equation (16.3)]
1. 
The phase angle of the lag compensator is 
Thus the maximum phase lag (negative phase angle) of the lag compensator is the same as the maximum 
phase lead of the lead compensator with the same values of a and b. Hence the maximum also occurs at 
co,„ = \fib and, from Equation (16.2), we get 

403 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
Expressed in terms of the lag ratio b/a, this equation becomes 
16.7. 
Design compensation for the system of Problem 16.1 to satisfy the same specifications and. in 
addition, to have a gain crossover frequency w1 less than or equal to 1 rad/sec and a velocity 
error constant Kv > 5. 
The Bode plots for this system, shown in F i g . 16-18, indicate that <o, = 1 rad/sec for KB = 1. 
Hence K„ = KB = 1 for w 1 = 1. The gain and phase margin requirements are easily met with any 
KB < 2.37; but the steady state specification requires Kv = KB > 5. Therefore a low-frequency 
cascade lag compensator with b/a = 5 can be used to increase Kv 
to 5, while maintaining the 
crossover frequency and the gain and phase margins at their previous values. A lag compensator 
with b = 0.5 and a = 0.1 satisfies this requirements, as shown in Fig. 16-22. 
The compensated open-loop frequency response function is 
16.8. 
Design a discrete-time unity feedback system, with the fixed plant 
satisfying the specifications: 
gain margin 
phase margin 

404 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
The specification on the position error constant K 
requires a gain factor increase of 4. This transfer 
function is transformed into the w-plane by letting z = (1 + w)/(l - w) thus forming 
The Bode plots for this system, with the gain factor increased by 201og104 = 12 db, are shown in Fig. 
16-23. 
Fig. 16-23 
The gain margin is 6 db and the phase margin is 30°. These margins can be increased by adding a lag 
compensator. To increase the gain margin by 12 db, the high-frequency magnitude must be reduced by 6 
db. To raise the phase margin to 45°, coHi must be lowered to 3.0 rad/sec or less. This requires a magnitude 
attenuation of 3 db at that frequency. Therefore let us choose a lag ratio b/a = 2 to yield a high-frequency 
attenuation of 20log i 02 = 6 db. For a = 0.1 and b =• 0.2 the phase margin is 65° and the gain margin is 12 
db, as shown in the compensated Bode plots of Fig. 16-23. 
The compensated open-loop frequency response function is 
The compensation element 
is transformed back to the z-domain by letting w 
thus forming 

405 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
LAG-LEAD COMPENSATION 
16.9. 
Determine compensation for the system of Problem 16.5 that will result in a position error 
constant KP > 10, <j>PM > 45° and the same gain crossover frequency w, as the uncompensated 
system. 
The compensation determined in Problem 16.5 satisfies all the specifications except that K is only 4.4 
The lead compensator chosen in that problem has a low-frequency attenuation of 10.4 db, or a factor of 
3.33. Let us replace the lead network with a lag-lead compensator, choosing ax = 1.86, bx = 6.2, and 
a1/b1 
= 0.3. The low-frequency magnitude becomes alb2/bxa1 
= 1, or 0 db, and the attenuation produced 
by the lead network is erased, effectively raising Kp for the system by a factor of 3.33 to 14.5. The lag 
portion of the compensator should be placed at frequencies sufficiently low so that the phase margin is not 
reduced below the specified value of 45°. This can be accomplished with a2 = 0.09 and b2 = 0.3. The 
compensated system block diagram is shown in Fig. 16-24. Note that an amplifier with a gain of 1.82 is 
included, as in Problem 16.5, to maintain tj, = 3.4. 
Fig. 1 6 - 2 4 
The compensated Bode plots are shown in Fig. 16-25. 
Fig. 16-25 

406 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
16.10. Design cascade compensation for a unity feedback control system, with the plant 
to meet the following specifications: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
To satisfy the first specification, a Bode gain increase by a factor of 100 is required since the 
uncompensated Kr = 1. The Bode plots for this system, with the gain increased to 100, are shown in Fig. 
16-26. 
Fig. 16-26 
The gain crossover frequency 
= 23 rad/sec, the phase margin is — 30°, and the gain margin is —12 
db. Lag compensation could be used to increase the gain and phase margins by reducing to,. However, tOj 
would have to be lowered to less than 8 rad/sec to achieve a 45° phase margin and to less than 6 rad/sec 
for a 10-db gain margin. Consequently, we would not satisfy the second specification. With lead 
compensation, an additional Bode gain increase by a factor of b/a would be required and u, would be 
increased, thus requiring substantially more than the 75° phase lead for t^ = 23 rad/sec. These disadvan­
tages can be overcome using lag-lead compensation. The lead portion produces attenuation and phase lead. 
The frequencies at which these effects occur must be positioned near to, so that to, is slightly reduced and 
the phase margin is increased. Note that, although pure lead compensation increases Wj, the lead portion of 
lag-lead compensator decreases to, because the gain factor increase of b/a is unnecessary, thereby lowering 
the magnitude characteristic. The lead portion can be determined independently using the curves of Fig. 
16-2; but it must be kept in mind that, when the lag portion is included, the attenuation and phase lead 

407 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
may be somewhat reduced. Let us try a lead ratio of ax/bx = 0.1, with ax = 5 and bx = 50. The maximum 
phase lead then occurs at 15.8 rad/sec. This enables the magnitude asymptote to cross the 0-db line with a 
slope of —6 db/octave (see Example 16.2). The compensated Bode plots are shown in Fig. 16-27 with a2 
and b2 chosen as 0.1 and 1.0 rad/sec, respectively. The resulting parameters are 6ox = 12 rad/sec, gain 
margin = 14 db, and <#>PM = 52°, as shown on the graphs. The compensated open-loop frequency response 
function is 
Fig. 16-27 
MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEM 
16.11. The nominal frequency response function of a certain plant is 
A feedback control system must be designed to control the output of this plant for a certain 
application and it must satisfy the following frequency domain specifications: 
(2) 
gain margin > 6 db 
phase margin (</>PM) > 30° 
In addition, it is known that the "fixed" parameters of the plant may vary slightly during 
operation of the system. The effects of this variation on the system response must be minimized 
over the frequency range of interest, which is 0 < to < 8 rad/sec, and the actual requirement can 

408 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
be interpreted as a specification on the sensitivity of (C/R){ju>) 
with respect to \G2(jto)\, that is, 
for 
It is also known that the plant will be subjected to an uncontrollable, additive disturbance input, 
represented in the frequency domain by U(ju). 
For this application, the system response to this 
disturbance input must be suppressed in the frequency range 0 < co < 8 rad/sec. Therefore the 
design problem includes the additional constraint on the magnitude ratio of the output to the 
disturbance input given by 
Design a system which satisfies these four specifications. 
The general system configuration, which includes the possibility of either or both cascade and feedback 
compensators, is shown in Fig. 16-28. 
Fig. 16-28 
From Fig. 16-28, we see that 
In a manner similar to that of Example 9.7, it is easily shown that 
If we assume that \GlG2H(joi)\ 
s> 1 in the frequency range 0 < to < 8 rad/sec (this inequality must be 
checked upon completion of the design and, if it is not satisfied, the compensation may have to be 
recomputed), then specification (3) may be approximated by 
or 
Similarly, specification (4) can be approximated by 
or 

409 
B O D E D E S I G N 
C H A P . 16] 
Specifications (3) and (4) can therefore be translated into the following combined form. We require that 
the open-loop frequency response, G1G2H(ju), 
lie in a region on a Bode magnitude plot which simultane­
ously satisfies the two inequalities: 
This region lies above the broken line shown in the Bode magnitude plot in Fig. 16-29, which also includes 
Bode plots of G 2(/co). The design may be completed by determining compensation which satisfies the gain 
and phase margin requirements, (1) and (2), subject to this magnitude constraint. 
A 32-db increase in Bode gain, which is necessary at co = 8 rad/sec, would satisfy specifications (.?) 
and (4), but not ( i ) and (2). Therefore a more complicated compensation is required. For a second trial, 
we find that the lag-lead compensation: 
results in a system with a gain margin of 6 db and <J>PM = 26°, as shown in Fig. 16-29. We see from the 
figure that 10° to 15° more phase lead is necessary near co = 25 rad/sec and \G1H'( /co)| must be increased 
by at least 2 db in the neighborhood of co = 8 rad/sec to satisfy the magnitude constraint. If we introduce 
an additional lead network and increase the Bode gain to compensate for the low-frequency attenuation of 
the lead network, the compensation becomes 
This results in a gain margin of 7 db, <j>PM = 30°, and satisfaction of specifications (3) and (4), as shown in 
Fig. 16-29. The assumption that \G1G2H(ju>)\ » 1 for 0 < co < 8 rad/sec is easily shown to be justified by 
Fig. 16-29 

410 
B O D E D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 16 
calculating the actual values of the db magnitudes of 
The compensator G, H"( jw) can be divided between the forward and feedback paths, or put all in one 
path, depending on the form desired for (C/R)(jo>) if such a form is specified by the application. 
Supplementary Problems 
16.12. Design a compensator for the system with the open-loop frequency response function 
to result in a closed-loop system with a gain margin of at least 10 db and a phase margin of at least 45°. 
16.13. Determine a compensator for the system of Problem 16.1 which will result in the same gain and phase 
margins but with a crossover frequency to, of at least 4 rad/sec. 
16.14. Design a compensator for the system with the open-loop frequency response function 
which will result in a closed-loop system with a gain margin of at least 6 db and a phase margin of at least 
40°. 
16.15. Work Problem 12.9 using Bode plots. Assume a maximum of 25% overshoot will be ensured if the system 
has a phase margin of at least 45°. 
16.16. Work Problem 12.10 using Bode plots. 
16.17. Work Problem 12.20 using Bode plots. 
16.18. Work Problem 12.21 using Bode plots. 

411 
Chapter 17 
Nichols Chart Analysis 
17.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Nichols chart analysis, a frequency response method, is a modification of the Nyquist and Bode 
methods. The Nichols chart is essentially a transformation of the M- and JV-circles on the Polar Plot 
(Section 11.12) into noncircular M and N contours on a db magnitude versus phase angle plot in 
rectangular coordinates. If GH(co) represents the open-loop frequency response function of either a 
continuous-time or discrete-time system, then GH(LC) plotted on a Nichols chart is called a Nichols 
chart plot of GH(u), 
The relative stability of the closed-loop system is easily obtained from this graph. 
The determination of absolute stability, however, is generally impractical with this method and either 
the techniques of Chapter 5 or the Nyquist Stability Criterion (Section 11.10) are preferred. 
The reasons for using Nichols chart analysis are the same as those for the other frequency response 
methods, the Nyquist and Bode techniques, and are discussed in Chapters 11 and 15. The Nichols chart 
plot has at least two advantages over the Polar Plot: (1) a much wider range of magnitudes can be 
graphed because \GH(u)\ is plotted on a logarithmic scale; and (2) the graph of GH(u) is obtained by 
algebraic summation of the individual magnitude and phase angle contributions of its poles and zeros. 
While both of these properties are also shared by Bode plots, | G / / ( w ) | and a r g G / / ( w ) are included on a 
single Nichols chart plot rather than on two Bode plots. 
Nichols chart techniques are useful for directly plotting ( C / / ? ) { « ) and are especially applicable in 
system design, as shown in the next chapter. 
17.2 
db MAGNITUDE-PHASE ANGLE PLOTS 
The polar form of both continuous-time and discrete-time open-loop frequency response functions 
is 
(17.1) 
Definition 17.1: 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH{a) is a graph of \GH(u)\. in decibels. 
versus argG7/(w), in degrees, on rectangular coordinates with u as a parameter. 
EXAMPLE 17.1. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of the continuous-time open-loop frequency response 
function 
is shown in Fig. 17-1. 
17.3 
CONSTRUCTION OF db MAGNITUDE-PHASE ANGLE PLOTS 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for either a continuous-time or discrete-time system can be 
constructed directly by evaluating 20log 1 0|O//(to)| and a r g G / 7 ( « ) in degrees, for a sufficient number of 
values of w (or uT) and plotting the results in rectangular coordinates with the log magnitude as the 
ordinate and the phase angle as the abscissa. Available software makes this a relatively simple process. 
EXAMPLE 17.2. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of the open-loop frequency response function 
is shown in Fig. 17-2. Note that uT is the parameter along the curve. 

412 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
Fig. 17-1 
Fig. 17-2 
A 
graphical approach to construction of db magnitude-phase 
angle plots is illustrated by 
examining the technique for continuous-time systems. 
First write GH( ju) in the Bode form (Section 15.3): 

413 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
where / is a nonnegative integer. For 
add 
(17.2) 
(17.3) 
Using Equations (17.2) and (17.3), the db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH(jw) is generated by 
summing the db magnitudes and phase angles of the poles and zeros, or pairs of poles and zeros when 
they are complex conjugates. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of KB is a straight line parallel to the phase angle axis. The 
ordinate of the straight line is 201og l o KB. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for a pole of order I at the origin. 
(17.4) 
is a straight line parallel to the db magnitude axis with an abscissa —90/° as shown in Fig. 17-3. Note 
that the parameter along the curve is 
Fig. 17-3 

414 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
The plot for a zero of order I at the origin, 
(17.5) 
is a straight line parallel to the db magnitude axis with an abscissa of 90/°. The plot Tor (/to)' is the 
diagonal mirror image about the origin of the plot for l / ( / t o ) ' . That is, for fixed to the db magnitude 
and phase angle of l / ( /to)' are the negatives of those for (jo)'. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for a real pole, 
(17.6) 
is shown in Fig. 17-4. The shape of the graph is independent of p because the frequency parameter 
along the curve is normalized to u/p. 
Fia. 17-4 
The plot for a real zero, 
(17.7) 
is the diagonal mirror image about the origin of Fig. 17-4. 
A set of db magnitude-phase angle plots of several pairs of complex conjugate poles. 
(17.8) 
are shown in Fig. 17-5. For fixed 
the graphs are independent of to,, because the frequency parameter 
is normalized to " / t o n . 
The plots for complex conjugate zeros. 
(17.9) 
are diagonal mirror images about the origin of Fig. 17-5. 

415 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
Fig. 17-5 
EXAMPLE 17.3. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of 
is constructed by adding the db magnitudes and phase angles of the individual factors: 
Tabulation of these factors is helpful, as in Table 17.1. The first row contains the db magnitude and phase 
Table 17.1 
Frequency 
Term 

416 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
angle of the Bode gain KK = 10 for several frequency values. The db magnitude is 20 db and the phase angle is 0° 
for all to. The second row contains the db magnitude and phase angle of the term (1 + /to/2) for the same values of 
to. These w
:crc obtained from Fig. 17-4 by letting p = 2 and taking the negatives of the values on the curve for the 
frequencies in the table. The third row corresponds to the term 1/(1 +/to) and was also obtained from Fig. 17-4. 
The fourth row was taken from the f = 0.5 curve of Fig. 17-5 by letting to,, = 2. The sum of the db magnitudes and 
phase angles of the individual terms for the frequencies in the table is given in the last row. These values are plotted 
in Fig. 17-6, the db magnitude-phase angle plot of GII( /to). 
Fig. 17-6 
17.4 
R E L A T I V E S T A B I L I T Y 
The 
gain and phase margins for both continuous-time and discrete-time systems are readily 
determined from the db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH(u). 
The phase crossover frequency uw is the frequency at which the graph of GH(a) 
intersects the 
— 180° line on the db magnitude-phase angle plot. The gain margin in db is given by 
(17.10) 
gain margin 
and is read directly from the db magnitude-phase angle plot. 
The gain crossover frequency u1 is the frequency at which the graph of GH(u>) intersects the 0-db 
line on the db magnitude-phase angle plot. The phase margin is given by 
phase margin 
degrees 
and can be read directly from the db magnitude-phase angle plot. 
In most cases, positive gain and phase margins will ensure stability of the closed-loop system; 
however, absolute stability should be established by some other means (for example, see Chapters 5 and 
11) to guarantee that this is true. 
EXAMPLE 17.4. For a stable system, the db magnitude-phase angle plot of (7//(to) is shown in Fig. 17-7. The 
gain margin is 15 db and the phase margin is 35°, as indicated. 

417 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
Fig. 17-7 
17.5 
T H E NICHOLS CHART 
The remaining discussion is restricted to either continuous-time or discrete-time unity feedback 
systems. The results are easily generalized to nonunity feedback systems, as illustrated in Example 17.9. 
The closed-loop frequency response function of a unity feedback system may be written in polar 
form as 
(17.11) 
where 4>G= arg G ( to). 
The locus of points on a db magnitude-phase angle plot for which 
constant 
is defined by the equation 
(77.72) 
F o r a fixed value of M, this locus can be plotted in three steps: (1) choose numerical values for |G(to)|; 
(2) solve the resultant equations for <j>G, excluding values of |G(co)| for which |cos<£ c| > 1; and (3) plot 
the points obtained on a db magnitude-phase angle plot. Note that for fixed values of M and |G(to)|, 4>G 
is multiple-valued because it appears in the equation as cos <j>G. 
EXAMPLE 17.5. 
The locus of points for which 

418 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
or. cquivalcntly. 
graphed in Fig. 17-8. A similar curve appears at all odd multiples of 180° along the arg G ( t o ) axis. 
Fig. 17-8 
The locus of points on a db magnitude-phase angle plot for which a r g ( C / / f )(to) is constant or, 
equivalently. 
is defined by the equation 
[17.13) 
For a fixed value of A', this locus of points can be plotted in three steps: (1) choose values for <J>6; (2) 
solve the resultant equations for G(w); and (3) plot the points obtained on a db magnitude-phase angle 
plot. 
EXAMPLE 17.6. 
The locus of points for which arg<C/K)(«) = - 6 0 ° or, equivalently, 
is graphed in Fig. 17-9. A similar curve appears at all multiples of 180° along the arg G{") axis. 
Fig. 17-9 

419 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
Definition 17.2: 
A Nichols chart is a db magnitude-phase angle plot of the loci of constant db 
magnitude and phase angle of (C/R)(cc), 
graphed as | G ( w ) | versus argG(to). 
EXAMPLE 17.7. A Nichols chart is shown in Fig. 17-10. The range of argG(w) on this chart is well suited to 
control system analysis. 
Definition 17.3: 
A Nichols chart plot is a db magnitude-phase angle plot of a frequency response 
function P(co) superimposed on a Nichols chart. 
17.6 
CLOSED-LOOP FREQUENCY RESPONSE FUNCTIONS 
The frequency response function (C/R)(w) 
of a unity feedback system can be determined from the 
Nichols chart plot of G(co). Values of \(C/R)(oi)\in 
db and arg(C/R)(o>) are determined directly from 
the plot as the points where the graph of G(to) intersects the graphs of loci of constant |(C/7^)(co)| and 
a r g ( C / * X « ) . 

420 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
EXAMPLE 17.8. 
The Nichols chart plot of GH(o>) for the continuous-time system of Example 17.3 is shown in 
Fig.. 17-11. Assuming that it is a unity feedback system 
1), values for \(C/R)(o)\ and arg(C//\)(«) arc 
obtained from this graph and plotted as a db magnitude-phase angle plot of ( C / R i n 
Fig. 17-12. 
Fig. 17-11 
EXAMPLE 17.9. 
Assume that the system in Example 17.3 is not a unity feedback system and that 
Then 
where C = GH. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of G'(OJ)/(1 + G ' O ) ) was derived in Example 17.8 and is 
shown in Fig. 17-12. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of (C/R)(os) can be obtained by point-by-point addition 
of the magnitude and phase angle of the pole 1/(1 + jus/2) to this graph. The magnitude and phase angle of 
1/(1 + j^/2) 
can be obtained from Fig. 17-4 for p = 2. The result is shown in Fig. 17-13. 

421 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
Fig. 17-12 
Fig. 17-13 
Solved Problems 
db MAGNITUDE-PHASE ANGLE PLOTS 
17.1. 
Show thai the db magnitude-phase angle plot for a pole of order / at the origin of the s-plane, 
1 / ( / t o ) ' , is a straight line parallel to the db magnitude axis with an abscissa of — 90/° for to > 0. 
In polar form 
Therefore 
and 
We see that arg 
is independent of to; hence the abscissa of the plot is a 

422 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
constant - 90/°. In addition, for the region 0 < to < + oo, the db magnitude ranges from + co to — oo. Thus 
the abscissa is fixed and the ordinate takes on all values. The result is a straight line as shown in Fig. 17-3. 
17.2. Construct the db magnitude-phase 
angle plot for the continuous-time open-loop 
transfer 
functiot 
The db magnitude of GH(ju) is 
The phase angle of GH(ju>) is 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot is shown in Fig. 17-14. 
17.3. Using the plots in Fig. 17-3 and Fig. 17-4, show how the plot in Fig. 17-14 can be approximated. 
We rewrite GH 
as 
The db magnitude of GH 
is 
The phase angle is 
We now construct Table 17.2. 
The first row contains the db magnitude and phase angle of the Bode gain KB = 2. The second row 
contains the db magnitude and phase angle of the term 1/ju for several values of to. These are obtained 
from Fig. 17-3 by letting / = 1 and taking values from the curve for the frequencies given. The third row 
corresponds to the term 1/(1 + y'to) and is obtained from Fig. 17-4 for p = 1. The fourth row corresponds to 
the term 1/(1 +/to/3) and is obtained from Fig. 17-4 for p = 3. Each pair of entries in the final row Is 
obtained by summing the db magnitudes and phase angles in each column and corresponds to the db 
magnitude and phase angle of GH(ju) for the given value of to. The values In the last row of this table are 
then plotted (with the exception of the first) and these points are joined graphically to generate an 
approximation of Fig. 17-14. 

423 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A NAL Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 

424 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
17.4. 
Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function 
The frequency response function is 
A computer-generated db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH(ja>) is shown in Fig. 17-15 
Fig. 17-15 
17.5. 
Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot for the discrete-time open-loop transfer function 

425 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
The open-loop frequency response function is 
A computer-generated db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH is shown in Fig. 17-16. 
Fig. 17-16 
GAIN AND PHASE MARGINS 
17.6. 
Determine the gain and phase margins for the system of Problem 17.2. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function of this system is given in Fig. 
17-14 (Problem 17.2). We see that the curve crosses the 0-db line at a phase angle of - 1 6 2 ° . Therefore the 
phase margin is <j>PM = 180° - 162° = 18°. 
(The gain crossover frequency tOj is determined by interpolating along the curve between to = 1.0 and 
to =-1.5 which bound 
below and above, respectively, co, is approximately 1.2 rad/sec.) 
The curve crosses the - 1 8 0 ° line at a db magnitude of - 6 db. Hence gain margin = — (— 6) = 6 db. 
(The phase crossover frequency to„ is determined by interpolating along the curve between co = 1.5 and 
to = 2.0 which bound to,, below and above, to,, is approximately 1.75 rad/sec.) 
17.7. 
Determine the gain and phase margins for the system of Problem 17.4. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function of this system is given in Fig. 
17-15 (Problem 17.4). We see that the curve crosses the 0-db line at a phase angle of - 1 5 9 ° . Therefore the 
phase margin is <j>PM = 180° - 159° = 21°. 
(The gain crossover frequency to, is found by interpolating along the curve between to = 1.0 and 
to = 1.5 which bound co, below and above, respectively, co, is approximately 1.2 rad/sec.) 
The curve crosses the - 1 8 0 ° line at a db magnitude of -3.1 db. Hence gain margin = 3.1 db. 
(The phase crossover frequency to„ is determined by interpolating between co = 1.5 and to = 2.0 which 
bound to„ below and above, respectively. to„ is approximately 1.7 rad/sec.) 
17.8. 
Determine the gain and phase margins for the system denned by the open-loop 
frequency 
response function 

426 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
Fig. 17-17 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH(ja) is given in Fig. 17-17. We see that the curve crosses the 
0-db line at a phase angle of - 1 4 0 ° . Hence the phase margin is <J>PM = 180° - 140° = 40°. 
The curve does not cross the - 1 8 0 ° line for the range of db magnitudes in Fig. 17-17. However, as 
CO - » 00, 
The curve approaches the —180° line asymptotically but does not cross it. Therefore the gain margin is 
indeterminate. This implies that the gain factor can be increased by any amount without producing 
instability. 
17.9. Determine the gain and phase margins for the discrete-time system of Problem 17.5. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function of this system is given in Fig. 
17-16 (Problem 17.5). We see that the curve crosses the 0-db line at a phase angle of —87°. Therefore the 
phase margin <#>PM = 180° - 87° = 93°. 
The gain crossover angle ic{T can be determined by interpolating along the curve between co77= 0.5 
and co77= 1.0 which bound co^ below and above, respectively. 0^77 = 0.6 rad. 
The curve never crosses the —180° line, so the gain margin is indeterminate as is the phase crossover 
angle. 
NICHOLS CHART 
17.10. Show that the locus of points on a db magnitude-phase angle plot for which the magnitude of 
the closed-loop frequency response (C/R)(w) 
of either a continuous-time or discrete-time unity 
feedback system equals a constant M is denned by Equation (17.12). 

427 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 171 
Using, Equation (17.11), \(C/R)(co)\ can be written as 
Since 
this can be rewritten as 
If we set the last expression equal to M, square both sides, and clear the fraction, we obtain 
which can be written as 
Dividing by 
we obtain Equation (17.12), as required. 
17.11. Show that the locus of points on a db magnitude-phase angle plot for which the tangent of the 
argument of the closed-loop frequency response function (C/R)(w) 
of a unity feedback system 
equals a constant TV is defined by Equation (17.13). 
Using Equation (17.11), 
can be written as 
Since 
Multiplying numerator and denominator of the term in brackets by the complex conjugate of the 
denominator vields 
Since the denominator of the term in the last brackets is real. 
is determined by the 
numerator only. That is. 
using 
Therefore 
Equating this to N, cancelling the common 
term and clearing the fraction, wc obtain 
which can be rewritten in the form of Equation (17.13), as required. 
17.12. Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot of the locus denned by Equation (17.12) for db 
magnitude of (C/R)(w) 
equal to 6 db. 

428 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
implies that 
Therefore we let M = 2 in Equation (17.12) 
and obtain 
as the equation defining the locus. Since |cos<f><,| < L 
to)| may take on only those values for which this 
constraint is satisfied. To determine bounds of 6"(to)|, we let cos^>(l- take on its two extreme values of plus 
and minus unity. For cos<f>(, = 1, the locus equation becomes 
w
:ith solutions |G(tj)| = — 2 and <7//(u>)| = — \ . Since an absolute value cannot be negative, these solutions 
are discarded. This implies that the locus does not exist on the 0° line (in general, any line which is a 
multiple of 360°), which corresponds to cos<f>f/ = 1. 
For cos <J>(; = — 1, the locus equation becomes 
with solutions |<7(o>)| = 2 and |G(to)| = r,. These are valid solutions for |Cr(w)| and are the extreme values 
which |<J(U>)| can assume. 
Solving the locus equation for cos<£>6, we obtain 
The curves obtained from this relationship are periodic with period 360°. The plot is restricted to a single 
cycle in the vicinity of the - 1 8 0 ° line and is obtained by solving for 4>(; at several values of |(7(w)| between 
the bounds 2 and 4. The results arc given in Table 17.3 
Note that there are two values of <p(i whenever |cos<J>6| < 1. The resulting plot is shown in Fig. 17-18. 
Table 17.3 
201og 1 ( l|G(u)| 
COS(J>(; 
2.0 
6db 
- 1 
- 1 8 0 ° 
— 
1.59 
4 
-0.910 
- 204.5° 
-155.5° 
1.26 
2 
-0.867 
-209.9° 
-150.1° 
1.0 
0 
-0.873 
-209.2° 
- 150.8° 
0.79 
- 2 
-0.928 
- 201.9° 
-158.1° 
0.67 
-3.5 
- 1 
- 1 8 0 ° 
— 
Fig. 17-18 

429 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
CHAP. 17] 
17.13. Construct the db magnitude-phase 
angle plot of the locus defined by Equation (17.13) for 
tan[arg(C//v)0)] = N = - oo, 
lan[arg(C/R)(to)] = - cc implies that arg(C/A>)(to) = - 90 + £360°, k = 0. ± 1, + 2 
or 
arg(C/R)(to) = - 2 7 0 ° + A-360°, fc = 0, + 1, ± 2 , . . . . We will plot only the cycle between - 3 6 0 ° and 0°, 
which corresponds to k = 0. Setting N = — oo in Equation (17.13), we obtain the locus equation 
| G'( to) | + eos<£<; = 0 
or 
cost4 (,. = -\G( to) | 
Since |cos t>,J < 1, the locus exists only for 0 < |<7(co) < 1 or, cquivalently, 
- oo < 201og,0| G( to) | < 0 
To obtain the plot, we use the locus equation to calculate values of db magnitude of G(u>) 
corresponding to several values of <p(i. The results of these calculations arc given in Table 17.4. The desired 
plot is shown in Fig. 17-19. 
Table 17.4 
4*; 
cos <j>(; 
|G'(to)[ 
201o g l o|C(t J)| 
- 180° 
— 
- 1 
1 
Odb 
- 1 5 3 ° 
- 2 0 7 ° 
-0.893 
0.893 
- 1.0 
- 1 3 5 ° 
-222.5° 
-0.707 
0.707 
- 3 
- 1 2 0 ° 
- 240° 
-0.5 
0.5 
- 6 
- 110.7° 
- 249.3° 
-0.354 
0.354 
- 9 
-104.5° 
-255.5° 
-0.25 
0.25 
- 1 2 
- 100.3° 
-259.8° 
-0.178 
0.178 
- 1 5 
Fig. 17-19 
CLOSED-LOOP FREQUENCY RESPONSE FUNCTIONS 
17.14. Construct the db masnitude-phase angle plot of the closed-loop frequency response function 
(C/R)(y'co) 
of the unity feedback system whose open-loop transfer function is 

430 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
Therefore 
and 
A computer-generated db magnitude-phase angle plot of (C/R)(ju) is shown by the solid line in Fig. 
17-20, 
Fig. 17-20 
17.15. Solve Problem 17.14 again, using the technique discussed i n Section 17.6. 
The Nichols chart plot of G ( / t o ) is shown in Fig. 17-21. We determine values for the db magnitude of 
\(C/R)(ju)\ and a r g [ ( C / # ) ( j t o ) ] by interpolating values of db magnitude and phase angle on the Nichols 
chart plot for to = 0,0.2,0.5,1.0,1.25,1.5,2.0,3,0. These values are given in Table 17.5. 
Table 17.5 
C 
C 
to 
201og 1 0 
arg 
0 
Odb 
0° 
0.2 
0.2 
- 6 ° 
0.5 
1.2 
- 1 5 ° 
1.0 
6.0 
- 4 2 ° 
1.25 
10.0 
- 9 0 ° 
1.5 
6.0 
- 1 5 5 ° 
2.0 
- 4.0 
- 1 9 4 ° 
3.0 
-15.0 
-212° 

431 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
C H A P . 17] 
Fig. 17-21 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of (C/R)(ju), 
graphed using the values in the table, is illustrated 
by the broken line in Fig. 17-20. The differences between the two curves is due to the interpolation 
necessary to obtain values of db magnitude and phase angle. 
Supplementary Problems 
17.16. Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function 
17.17. Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function 

432 
N I C H O L S C H A R T A N A L Y S I S 
[CHAP. 17 
17.18. Construct the db magnitude-phase angle plot for the open-loop transfer function 
17.19. Determine gain and phase margins for the system of Problem 17.17. 
17.20. Determine the resonance peak M and resonant frequency oi for the system whose open-loop transfer 
function is 
17.21. Determine the gain and phase crossover frequencies for the system of Problem 17.17. 
17.22. Determine the resonance peak M and the resonant frequency to of the system in Problem 17.17. 
17.23. Let the system of Problem 17.17 be a unity feedback system and construct the db magnitude-phase angle 
plot of (C/R)( ju). 
Answers to Some Supplementary Problems 
17.19. Gain margin 
17.20. 
17.21. 
17.22. 

433 
Chapter 18 
Nichols Chart Design 
18.1 
DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
Design by analysis in the frequency domain using Nichols chart techniques is performed in the 
same general manner as the design methods described in previous chapters: appropriate compensation 
networks are introduced in the forward and/or feedback paths and the behavior of the resulting system 
is critically analyzed. In this manner, the Nichols chart plot is shaped and reshaped 
until 
the 
performance specifications are met. These specifications are most conveniently expressed in terms of 
frequency-domain figures of merit such as gain and phase margin for transient performance and the 
error constants (Chapter 9) for the steady state time-domain response. 
The Nichols chart plot is a graph of the open-loop frequency response function GH(w), for a 
continuous-time or discrete-time system, and compensation can be introduced in the forward and/or 
feedback paths, thus changing G'(CJ), //(w), or both. W e emphasize that no single compensation scheme 
is universally applicable. 
18.2 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
We have seen in several previous chapters (5, 12, 13. 16) that an unstable feedback system can 
sometimes be stabilized, or a stable system destabilized, by adjustment of the gain factor K of GH. 
Nichols chart plots are particularly well suited for determining gain factor adjustments. However, when 
using Nichols techniques for continuous-time systems, it is more convenient to use the Bode gain 
Kn 
(Section 15.3). expressed in decibels (db), than the gain factor K. Changes in KB 
and A", when given in 
decibels, are equal. 
EXAMPLE 18.1. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for an unstable continuous-time system, represented by 
G!F( jo) with the Bode gain KH = 5, is shown in Fig. 18-1. The instability of litis system can be verified by a sketch 
of the Nyquist plot, or application of the Routh criterion. The Nyquist plot in Example 12.1 chapter 12, illustrates 
the general shape for all Nyquist plots of systems with one pole at the origin and two real poles in the left-half 
plane. This graph indicates that positive phase and gain margins guarantee stability and negative phase and gain 
margins guarantee instability for such a system, which implies that a sufficient decrease in the Bode gain stabilizes 
the system. If the Bode gain is decreased from 201og1(,5db to 20tog,„2db, the system is stabilized. The db 
magnitude-phase angle plot for the compensated system is shown in Fig. 18-2. Further decrease in gain does not 
alter stability. 
Note that the curves for KB = 5 and KR = 2 have identical shapes, the only difference being that the ordinates 
on the KH = 5 curve exceed those on the KH = 2 curve by 20Tog 1 0 (5/2) db. Therefore changing the gain on a db 
magnitude-phase angle plot is accomplished by simply shifting the locus of GFf( jo) up or down by an appropriate 
number of decibels. 
Even though absolute stability can often be altered by gain factor adjustment, 
this form of 
compensation 
is inadequate 
for most designs because other performance criteria such as those 
concerned with relative stability cannot usually be met without the inclusion of other types of 
compensators. 

434 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
Fig. 18-1 
Fig, 18-2 
18.3 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION USING CONSTANT AMPLITUDE CURVES 
The Nichols chart may be used to determine the gain factor K (for a unity feedback system) for a 
specified resonant peak M (in decibels). The following procedure requires drawing the db magnitude-
phase angle plot only once. 
Step 1: 
Draw the db magnitude-phase angle plot of G(to) for K= 1 on tracing paper. The scale of 
the graph must be the same as that on the Nichols chart. 
Step 2: 
Overlay this plot on the Nichols chart so that the magnitude and phase angle scales of 
each sheet arc aligned. 
Step 3: 
Fix the Nichols chart and slide the plot up or down until it is just tangent to the constant 
amplitude curve of M db. The amount of shift in decibels is the required value of K. 
EXAMPLE 18.2. In Fig. 18-3(a), the db magnitude-phase angle plot of the open-loop frequency response 
function of a particular unity feedback system with K = 1 is shown superimposed on a Nichols chart. The desired 
M is 4 db. We sec in Fig. 18-3(/>) that, if the overlay is shifted upward by 4 db, then the resonant peak Mr of the 
system is 4 db. Thus the desired K is 4 db. 

435 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
Fig. 18-3 
(a) 
(6) 
18.4 
LEAD COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
The Bode form of the transfer function for a lead network is 
08.1) 
where a/b < 1. The db magnitude-phase angle plots of P L e a d for several values of b/a and with the 
normalized frequency w/a as the parameter are shown in Fig. 18-4. 
For some systems in which lead compensation in the forward loop is applicable, appropriate choice 
of a and b permits an increase in KB, providing greater accuracy and less sensitivity, without adversely 
affecting transient performance. Conversely, for a given KB, the transient performance can be 
improved. It is also possible to improve both the steady state and transient responses with lead 
compensation. 
The important properties of a lead network compensator are its phase lead contribution in the 
low-to-medium-frequency range (the vicinity of the resonant frequency up) and its negligible attenua­
tion at high frequencies. If a very large phase lead is required, several lead networks may be cascaded. 
Lead compensation generally increases the bandwidth of a system. 

436 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
Fie. 18-4 
EXAMPLE 18.3. 
The uncompensated continuous-time unity feedback system whose open-loop transfer function 
is 
is to be designed to meet the following performance specifications: 
1. 
When the input is a unit ramp function, the steady state position error must be less than 0.25. 
2. 
*
P
M s 4 0 ° . 
3. 
Resonance peak = 4 db. 
Note that the Bode gain is cquai to the velocity error constant Kr. Therefore the steady state error for the 
uncompensated system is e(=°) = \/Kt 
= {- [Equation (9.13)]. From the db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH in 
Fig. 18-5, we see that r/>PM = 18° and Mp = 11 db. 
The steady state error is too large by a factor of 2; therefore the Bode gain must be increased by a factor of 2 
(6 db). If we increase the Bode gain by 6 db, we obtain the plot labeled G//, in Fig. 18-5. The phase margin of GHl 
is about zero and the resonant peak is near infinity. Therefore the system is on the verge of instability. 

437 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
Fig, 18-5 
Phase lead compensation can be used to improve the relative stability of the system. The compensated 
open-loop transfer function is 
where K/t = 4(b/a) to satisfy the steady state error. 
One way of satisfying the requirements on <f>PM and M is to add 40° to 50° of phase lead to the Off curve in 
the region 1 < to < 2.5 without substantially changing the db magnitude. We have already chosen A' w = 4(b/a) to 
compensate for a/b in the lead network. Therefore we need concern ourselves only with the effect that the factor 
(1 + s/a)/(l 
+ s/h) has on the GHl curve. Referring to Fig. 18-4, wc see that in order to provide the necessary 
phase lead we will require b/a > 10. We note that the curves of Fig. 18-4 include the effect of a/b of the lead 
network. Since we have already compensated for this, we must add 20 \ogl(l(b/a) to the db magnitudes on the 
curve. In order to keep the db magnitude contribution of the lead network small in the region 1 < to < 2.5, wc let 
b/a = 15 and choose a so that only the lower portion of the curve (to/a < 3.0) contributes in the region of interest 
1 < to < 2.5. In particular, we let a = 1.333. Then the compensated open-loop transfer function is 

438 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of G'W;, is shown in Fig. 18-5. We see that <t>yM = 40.5° and Af„ = 4 db. Thus 
the speciftcations are all met. We note, however, that the resonant frequency mp of the compensated system is 
about 2.25 rad/sec. For the uncompensated system defined by GH it is about 1.2 rad/sec. Thus the bandwidth 
has been increased. 
A block diagram of the fully compensated system is shown in Fig. 18-6. 
Fig. 18-6 
18.5 
LAG COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS-TIME SYSTEMS 
The Bode form transfer function for a lag network is 
(18.2) 
Fig. 18-7 

439 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
where a < b. The db magnitude-phase angle plots of P
L 
for several values of b/a 
and with the 
normalized frequency a/a 
as the parameter are shown in Fig. 18-7. 
The 
lag network provides compensation by attenuating the high-frequency portion of the db 
magnitude-phase angle plot. Higher attenuation is provided by cascading several lag networks. 
Several general effects of lag compensation are: 
1. 
The bandwidth of the system is usually decreased. 
2. 
The dominant time constant T of the system is usually increased, producing a more sluggish 
system. 
3. 
For a given relative stability, the value of the error constant is increased. 
4. 
F o r a given error constant, relative stability is improved. 
The procedure for using lag compensation is essentially the same as that for lead compensation. 
EXAMPLE 18.4. 
Let us redesign the system of Example 18.3 using gain factor plus lag compensation. The steady 
state specification is again satisfied by GHt. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of (7/7, is repeated in Fig. 18-8. 
Since 7 ^ ( 7 0 ) = 1, introduction of the lag network after the steady state specification has been met by gain factor 
compensation does not require an additional increase in gain factor. 
Incorporating the lag network, we get the open-loop transfer function 
Fig. 18-8 

440 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
One way of satisfying the requirements on <£>HM and Mp is to choose a and b such that the GI^ curve is attenuated 
by about 12 db in the region 0.7 < to < 2.0 without substantial change in the phase angle. Since the lag network 
introduces some phase lag, it is necessary to attenuate the curve more than 12 db. Referring to Fig. 18-7, we see 
that if we choose b/a = 6, a maximum of 15.5-db attenuation is possible. If we choose a = 0.015, then at a 
frequency to = 0.5 (to/a = 33.33) 15.4 db of attenuation is obtained from the lag network, with a phase lag of - 9°. 
GH, can now be written as 
where /; = 6a = 0.09. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH4 is given in Fig. 18-8. Wc sec that <j>VM = 41° and 
Mp s 4, which satisfy the specifications. We note that the resonant frequency u> of the compensated system is 
about 0.5 rad/sec. For the uncompensated system defined by GH, a is about 1.2 rad/sec. A block diagram of 
the fully compensated system is shown in Fig. 18-9. 
Fig. 18-9 
18.6 
LAG-LEAD COMPENSATION 
The Bode form transfer function for a lag-lead network is 
(18.3) 
where hl/al 
= b2/a2 > 1- The db magnitude-phase angle plots of F
u for a few values of 
bl/al 
(=b2/a2), 
when at/a2 
= 6,10,100, and with the normalized frequency w/a2 
are shown in F i g . 
18-16(a), (b), a n d ( c ) 
Fig. 18-10(tv) 

441 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
Fig. 18-10(6) 
Fig. 18-10(f) 

442 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
Additional plots of P} 
L for other values of b1/a1 
and ax/a2 
can be obtained by combining plots of 
lag networks (Fig. 18-7) and lead networks (Fig. 18-4). 
Lag-lead compensation has all of the advantages of both lag and lead compensation and a 
m i n i m u m of their usually undesirable characteristics. For example, system specifications can be satisfied 
without excessive bandwidth or sluggish time response caused by phase lead or lag, respectively. 
EXAMPLE 18.5. 
Let us redesign the system of Example 18.3 using gain factor plus lag-lead compensation. We 
add the additional specification that the resonant frequency u of the compensated system must be approximately 
the same as that of the uncompensated system. The steady state specification is again satisfied by 
as shown in Example 18.3. Since Pn(jO) = 1, introduction of the lag-lead network does not require an additional 
increase in gain factor. 
Inserting the lag-lead network, wc get the open-loop transfer function 
From Fig. 18-5, wc sec that for the uncompensated system (III, w = 1.2 rad/sec. From the db magnitude-phase 
angle plot of GH, (Fig. 18-11) wc sec that, if G//,( j 1.2) is attenuated by 6.5 db and has its phase increased by 20°, 
the resonant frequency &)(, = 1.2 is shifted to A-/;) = 4 db. Referring to Fig. 18-l()(a), wc sec that the desired 
attenuation and phase lead arc obtained with bl/a] 
= b2/a2 
= 3, a,/a2 
= 10, and a i / i i , = 12. The constants a,. 
Fig. 18-11 

443 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
and 
are determined by noting that 
then becomes 
The complete db magnitude-phase angle plot of (7// 5 is shown in Fig. 18-11. We sec that </>PM - 40.5°, Af„ = 4 db, 
and the resonant frequency <a„ = 1.15. Thus all specifications have been satisfied. 
8.7 
NICHOLS CHART DESIGN OF DISCRETE-TIME SYSTEMS 
A s with Bode methods (Section 16.6), design of discrete-time systems using Nichols charts is not as 
straightforward as the design of continuous-time systems using either of these approaches. But, again, 
the w-transform can facilitate the process as it did for Bode design of discrete-time systems. The 
method is the same as that developed in Section 16.6. 
EXAMPLE 18,6. 
The uncompensated discrete-time unity feedback system with plant transfer function 
is to be designed to yield an overall phase margin of 40° and the same gain crossover frequency to, as the 
uncompensated system. Since both of these specifications arc in the frequency domain, we transform the problem 
directly into the ^-domain by substituting z =- (1 + w)/(l 
- u<), thus forming 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for this system is shown in Fig. 18-12. The gain crossover frequency obtained 
from this plot is to„, = 3.4 rad/sec and the phase margin is 10°. A lead compensator with somewhat arbitrary a 
and b can be chosen as long as the phase lead at toHl = 3.4 rad/sec is sufficient to raise the phase margin from 10° 
to 40°. The minimum b/a ratio that yields 30° of phase lead is about 3.3 from Fig. 18-4. We choose a and h so 
that the maximum phase lead occurs at u>H., = 3.4 rad/sec. From Section 16.3, this occurs when w l r l = 3.4 = -fab. 
Since 6 = 3.3a. wc find 6 = 6.27 and a = 1.90. This compensator produces about 201og 1 ( ) V
/6.27/l .90 = 5 db of 
attenuation at to,,, = 3.4 rad/sec. Thus an amplifier with gain of 5.2 db, or gain factor 1.82, is required in addition 
Fig. 18-12 

444 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
to the lead compensator to maintain uwl 
at 3.4 rad/sec. The w-domain transfer function for the compensator is 
therefore given by 
This is transformed back to the z-domain by letting 
thus forming 
The compensated control system is shown in Fig. 18-13. 
Fig. 18-13 
Solved Problems 
GAIN FACTOR COMPENSATION 
18.1. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of the open-loop continuous-time frequency response 
function 
is shown in Fig. 18-14 for KB=1. 
The closed-loop system defined by GH(jco) is stable for 
KB = 1. Determine a value of KB for which the phase margin is 45°. 
Fig. 18-14 

445 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
<fi'M = 180° + argC//(yW|), where «, is the gain crossover frequency. For <J>,,M = 4 5 ° , to, must be 
chosen so that argG
,/f(/« 1) = - 1 3 5 ° . If we draw a vertical line with abscissa of - 1 3 5 ° , it intersects the 
GH(ju) 
curve at a point toi = 0.25 rad/sec, where &cgGH(ju\) = - 1 3 5 ° . The ordinate of this point of 
intersection is 10.5 db. If we decrease KB 
by 10.5 db, the gain crossover frequency becomes toj, and 
4>PM=45°. A decrease of 10.5 db implies that 2Q\ogwK„ =-10.5, 
or KR = 10"
 l n "
V 2 ° = 0.3. Further 
decrease in KH increases <J>PM beyond 45°. 
18.2. 
For the system in Problem 18.1, determine the value of KB for which the system is stable and the 
gain margin is 10 db. 
Gain margin = - 201og 1 0|G//(7<o„)| db, where to„ is the phase crossover frequency. Referring to Fig. 
18-14, we see that there arc two phase crossover frequencies: w£ = 0.62 rad/sec and u'J = 1.95 rad/sec. For 
w'„ = 0.62, we have 20 log ! ()|G/7( _/<o£)| = - 3 db. Therefore the gain margin is 3 db. It can be increased to 10 
db by shifting the GH(ju) 
curve downward by 7 db. The phase crossover frequency ^ is the same in the 
new position, but 20 log H )|G//(7<oi)| = - 10 db. A gain decrease of 7 db implies that KB = 10
 
7 
2 0 = 0.447. 
Since the system is stable for KB = 1, it remains stable when the GH(jco) curve is shifted downward. 
Absolute stability is not affected unless the GH(joi) curve is shifted upward and across the point defined by 
0 db and - 180°, as would be necessary if -201og 1 ( ) GII(j^')= 
10 db. 
18.3. For the system of Problem 18.1, determine a value for KB 
such that: gain margin > 10 db, 
<f>™>45°. 
In Problem 18.1, it was shown that <J>,,M > 45° if KB < 0.3; in Problem 18.2. gain margin > 10 db if 
KB < 0.447. Therefore both requirements can be satisfied by setting KR < 0.3. Note that if wc had specified 
gain margin = 10 db and <J>PM = 45°, then the specifications could not be met by gain factor compensation 
alone. 
18.4. 
Assume that the system of Problem 18.1 is a unity feedback system and determine a value for 
KH 
such that the resonant peak M 
is 5 db. 
Fig. 18-15 

446 
NICHOLS CHART DESIGN 
[CHAP. 18 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of GH(jo) for KB = 1 is shown in Fig. 18-15 along with the locus 
of points for which \(C/R)(ju)\ = 2 db (M = 2 db). We see that if KB is decreased by 8 db, the resulting 
<7//( /to) curve is just tangent to the M, = 2 db curve. A decrease of 8 db implies that KH = 10
 
s''"° = 0.40. 
18.5. 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of the open-loop frequency response function 
is given in Fig. 18-16 for K^ — 0.5. The closed-loop system defined by GH(joi) 
is stable for 
K B = 0.5. Determine the value of KB 
which maximizes the phase margin. 
Fig. 18-16 
<J>[1M = 180° + arg GH( /to,), where to, is the gain crossover frequency. Referring to Fig. 18-16, we see 
that argGW(yio) is always negative. Therefore if we maximize arg GH(jox), 
<£>PM will be maximized. Fig. 
18-16 indicates that axgGH(ju) is maximum when to = to[ = 0.8 rad/sec and arg<7//(ju[) = —147°. The 
ordinate of the point GH(ja\) is 4.6 db. Therefore if KR is decreased by 4.6 db, the phase crossover 
frequency becomes u\; and <J>PM takes on its maximum value: <J>PM = 180° + arg GH( 
= 33°. A 
decrease of 4.6 db in KB implies that 201ogm(Kls/Q.5) = -4.6 db or KB/Q.5 = 10"
 4 6 
2 n . Then KB = 0.295. 
18.6. 
For the system in Problem 18.5, determine a value of KB 
for which the system is stable and the 
gain margin is 8 db. 

447 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
Gain margin = - 20 log 1 0|G//(/<«>„) | db. Referring to Fig. 18-16, we see that the gain margin is 3.1 db. 
This can be increased to 8 db by shifting the curve down by 4.9 db; co„ remains the same, as it is 
independent of KB. A decrease of 4.9 db in KB implies that 201og10(7sTfl/0.5) = -4.9 or KB = 0.254. 
PHASE COMPENSATION 
18.7. The db magnitude-phase angle plot of the open-loop transfer function G(j(o) for a particular 
unity feedback system has been determined experimentally as shown in F i g . 18-17. In addition, 
the steady state error e(oo) for a unit ramp function input was measured and found to be 
= 0.2. The open-loop transfer function is known to have a pole at the origin. Determine a 
combination of phase lead plus gain compensation such that: Mp = 3.5 db, <bPM = 40°, and the 
steady state error for a unit ramp input is e(°°) = 0.1. 
Fig. 18-17 
Since <?(oo) = \/Kv = l/KB, 
the steady state requirement can be satisfied by doubling KB. The 
compensation has the form 
Hence KB is doubled by letting K'(a/b) = 2, or K' = 2(b/a). 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the gain compensated open-loop frequency response function 
is shown in Fig. 18-17. G t(/co) satisfies the steady state specification. To satisfy the specifications on M 
and <J>PM, the G^yco) curve must be shifted to the right by about 30° to 40° in the region 1.2 < co < 2.5 

448 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
without substantially changing the db magnitude. This is done by proper choice of a and b. Referring to 
Fig. 18-4, we see that, for b/a = 10, 30° phase lead is obtained for u/a > 0.65. Since the lead ratio a/b of 
the lead network is taken into account by designing for the gain factor K' = 2(b/a) = 20, we must add 
201og(V«) = 201og H )10= 20 db to all db magnitudes taken from Fig. 18-4. 
To obtain 30° or more phase lead in the frequency range of interest, wc let a = 2. For this choice wc 
have to = (2)(0.65) = 1.3 and obtain 30° phase lead. Since b/a =10, then b=20. The compensated 
open-loop frequency response function is 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot of G\(j'<w) is shown in Fig. 18-17. We sec that Mp = 4.0 db and 
(/)PM = 36"; therefore the specifications are not satisfied by this compensation. We need to shift G2(J(o) 5° 
to 10° further to the right; hence additional phase lead is needed. Referring once more to Fig. 18-4, we 
sec that letting b/a = 15 increases the phase lead. Again, we let a = 2: then b = 30. The db magnitude-
phase angle plot of 
is shown in Fig. 18-17. Wc sec that </>PM = 41° and M = 3.5 db and hence the specifications arc met by 
the compensation 
18.8. Solve Problem 18.7 using lag plus gain compensation. 
Fig. 18-18 

449 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
In Problem 18.7 we found that the Bode gain KB must be increased by a factor of 2 to satisfy the 
steady state specification. But the Bode gain of a lag network is 
Therefore the compensation required in this problem has the form 2(1 + s/a)/(l 
+ s/b) where the twofold 
gain factor increase is supplied by an amplifier and a and b for the lag network must be chosen to satisfy 
the requirements on Mp and c|>PM. The gain-compensated function is shown as Gx(ja>) = 2G(yto) in Fig. 
18-18; G,(jco) must be shifted downward by 7 to 10 db in the region 0.7 < to < 2.0, with no substantial 
increase in phase lag, to meet the transient specifications. 
Referring to Fig. 18-7, we see that, for b/a = 3, we can obtain a maximum attenuation of 9.5 db. For 
a = 0.1, the phase lag is - 1 5 ° at to = 0.7 (to/a = 7) and - 6° at to = 2.0 (to/a = 20), that is, the phase lag is 
relatively small in the frequency region of interest. The db magnitude-phase angle plot for 
is also shown in Fig. 18-18, with M = 5 db and <£ P M = 32°; hence this system docs not meet the 
specifications. To decrease the phase lag introduced in the frequency region 0.7 < w < 2.0, we change a to 
0.05 and b to 0.15. The phase lag is now 9° at w = 0.7 (to/a = 14). The db magnitude-phase angle plot for 
is shown in Fig. 18-18. Wc see that Mp s 3.5 db and <£ P M = 41°. Thus the specifications are satisfied. The 
desired compensation is given by 
18.9. Solve Problem 18.7 using lag-lead plus gain compensation. In addition to the previous specifica­
tions, we require that the resonant frequency top of the compensated system be approximately the 
same as that for the uncompensated 
system. 
In Problems 18.7 and 18.8 we found that the Bode gain KB must be increased by a factor of 2 to 
satisfy the steady state specification. The frequency response function of the lag-lead plus gain compensa­
tion is therefore given by 
We must now choose ax, bx, b2, and a2 to satisfy the requirements on M , <J>PM and to;;. Referring to Fig. 
18-17, we see that the resonant frequency for the uncompensated system is about 1.1 rad/sec. The db 
magnitude-phase angle plot of Gx(ju) = 2G(ju) shown in Fig. 18-19 indicates that, if the Gx(jo) curve is 
attenuated by 6.5 db and 10° of phase lead is added at a frequency of to = 1.0 rad/sec, then the resulting 
curve will be tangent to the Mp = 2 db curve at about 1 rad/sec. Referring to Fig. 18-10, if we let 
bx/ax = b2/a2 = 3, ax = 6a2, and to/a 2 = 6.0 for to = 1, we obtain the desired attenuation and phase lead. 
Solving for the remaining parameters, we get a2 = 1/6 = 0.167, b2 = 3a2 = 0.50, ax = 6a2 = 1.0, bx = 3ax 
= 3.0. The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the resulting open-loop frequency response function 
is shown in Fig. 18-19, where Mp = 3.5 db, <f>PM = 44°, and top s 1.0 rad/sec. These values approximately 
satisfy the specifications. 

450 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
Fig. 18-19 
18.10. Design compensation for the discrete-time system with open-loop transfer function 
such that the following performance specifications are satisfied: 
1. 
gain margin > 6 db 
2. 
phase margin 4>PM > 45° 
3. 
gain crossover frequency w x such that u{T < 1.6 rad 
4. 
velocity constant Kv > 10 
The Nichols chart plot of GH shown in Fig. 18-20 indicates that 6^7" = 1.6 rad for K = - 3 db. The 
gain and phase margins are met if K< 4.7 db; but the steady state specification requires that K> 10.8 db 
(gain factor of 3.47). Substituting z = (1 + w ) / ( l - w), we transform the open-loop transfer function from 
the z-domain to the w-domain, thus forming 

451 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
C H A P . 18] 
Fig. 18-20 
In the w-domain the gain crossover frequency specification becomes 
A low-frequency cascade lag compensator with b/a = 3.5 can be used, to increase Kr 
to 10, while 
maintaining the gain crossover frequency <x>l and the gain and phase margins at their previous values. A lag 
compensator with b = 0.35 and a = 0.1 satisfies the requirements. 
The lag compensator in the w-plane is 
This is transformed back into the z-domain by substituting 
The db magnitude-phase angle plot for the compensated discrete-time system is shown in Fig. 18-21. 
thus forming 
Fig. 18-21 

452 
N I C H O L S C H A R T D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 18 
Supplementary Problems 
18.11. Find a value of Ktl for which the system whose open-loop transfer function is 
has a resonant peak 
Arts. 
18.12. For the system of Problem 18.11, find gain plus lag compensation such that 
and 
18.13. For the system of Problem 18.11. find s.ain olus lead comnensation such that 
and 
18.14. For the system of Problem 18.11, find gain plus lag-lead compensation such that 
and 
18.15. Find gain plus lag compensation for the system whose open-loop transfer function is 
such that 
18.16. For the system of Problem 18.15, find gain plus lead compensation such that 
Cadcade two lead compensation networks. 
Hint. 
18.17. Find gain plus lead compensation for the system whose open-loop transfer function is 
such that 

453 
Chapter 19 
Introduction to Nonlinear Control Systems 
19.1 
INTRODUCTION 
We have thus far confined the discussion to systems describable by linear time-invariant ordinary 
differential or difference equation models or their transfer functions, excited by Laplace or z-transform-
able input functions. The techniques developed for studying these systems are relatively straightforward 
and usually lead to practical control system designs. While it is probably true that no physical system is 
exactly linear and time-invariant, such models are often adequate approximations and, as a result, the 
linear system methods developed in this book have broad application. There are many situations, 
however, for which linear representations are inappropriate and nonlinear models are required. 
Theories and methods for analysis and design of nonlinear control systems constitute a large body 
of knowledge, some of it quite complex. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce some of the 
prevailing classical techniques, utilizing mathematics at about the same level as in earlier chapters. 
Linear systems are defined in Definition 3.21. Any system that does not satisfy this definition is 
nonlinear. The major difficulty with nonlinear systems, especially those described by nonlinear ordinary 
differential or difference equations, is that analytical or closed-form solutions are available only for very 
few special cases, and these are typically not of practical interest in control system analysis or design. 
Furthermore, unlike linear systems, for which free and forced responses can be determined separately 
and the results superimposed to obtain the total response, free and forced responses of nonlinear 
systems normally interact and cannot be studied separately, and superposition does not generally hold 
for inputs or initial conditions. 
In general, the characteristic responses and stability of nonlinear systems depend qualitatively as 
well as quantitatively on initial condition values, and the magnitude, shape, and form of system inputs. 
On the other hand, time-domain solutions to nonlinear system equations usually can be obtained, for 
specified inputs, parameters, and initial conditions, by computer simulation techniques. Algorithms and 
software for simulation, a special topic outside the scope of this book, are widely available and therefore 
are not developed further here. Instead, we focus on several analytical methods for studying nonlinear 
control systems. 
Nonlinear control system problems arise when the structure or fixed elements of the system are 
inherently nonlinear, and/or nonlinear compensation is introduced into the system for the purpose of 
improving its behavior. In either case, stability properties are a central issue. 
EXAMPLE 19.1. 
Fig. 19-l(a) is a block diagram of a nonlinear feedback system containing two blocks. The 
linear block is represented by the transfer function G2 = 1/D(D 
+ 1), where D = d/dt is the differential operator. 
D is used instead of s in this linear transfer function because the Laplace transform and its inverse are generally 
not strictly applicable for nonlinear analysis of systems with both linear and nonlinear elements. Alternatively, 
when using the describing function method (Section 19.5), an approximate frequency response technique, we 
Fig. 19-1 
(a) 
(b) 

454 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
usually write 
The nonlinear block N has the transfer characteristic f(e) defined in Figure 19-1(6). Such nonlinearities are called 
(piecewise-linear) saturation functions, described further in the next section. 
EXAMPLE 19.2. 
If the earth is assumed spherical and all external forces other than gravity are negligible, then 
the motion of an earth satellite lies in a plane called the orbit plane. This motion is defined by the following set of 
nonlinear differential equations (see Problem 3.3): 
(transverse force equation) 
(radial force equation) 
The satellite, together with any controller designed to modify its motion, constitutes a nonlinear control system. 
Several popular methods for nonlinear analysis are summarized below. 
19.2 
LINEARIZED AND PIECEWISE-LINEARIZED APPROXIMATIONS 
OF NONLINEAR SYSTEMS 
Nonlinear terms in differential or difference equations can sometimes be approximated by linear 
terms or zero-order (constant) terms, over limited ranges of the system response or system forcing 
function. In either case, one or more linear differential or difference equations can be obtained as 
approximations of the nonlinear system, valid over the same limited operating ranges. 
EXAMPLE 19.3. 
Consider the spring-mass system of Fig. 19-2, where the spring force fs(x) 
is a nonlinear 
function of the displacement x measured from the rest position, as shown in Fig. 19-3. 
The equation of motion of the mass is M(d
2x/dt
2) 
+ fs(x) 
= 0. However, if the absolute magnitude of the 
displacement does not exceed x0, then fs(x) 
= kx, where k is a constant. In this case, the equation of motion is a 
constant-coefficient linear equation given by M(d
2x/dt
2) 
+ kx = 0, valid for \x\ < x0. 
Fig. 19-2 
Fig. 19-3 
EXAMPLE 19.4. 
We again consider the system of Example 19.3, but now the displacement x exceeds x0. To treat 
this problem, let the spring force curve be approximated by three straight lines as shown in Fig. 19-4, a 
piecewise-linear approximation of fs(x). 
The system is then approximated by a piecewise-linear system; that is, the system is described by the linear 
equation M(d
2x/dt
2) 
+ kx = 0 when |x| < xlt and by the equations M(d
2x/dt
2) 
± Fx = 0 when |JC| > xx. The + 
sign is used if x > xx and the - sign if x < —xx. 
Nonlinear terms in a system equation are sometimes known in a form that can be easily expanded 
in a series, for example, a Taylor or a Maclaurin series. In this manner, a nonlinear term can 
be 
approximated by the first few terms of the series, excluding terms higher than first degree. 

455 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Fig. 19-4 
Fig. 19-5 
EXAMPLE 19.5. 
Consider the nonlinear equation describing the motion of a pendulum (see Fig. 19-5): 
where / is the length of the pendulum bob and g is the acceleration of gravity. If small motions of the pendulum 
about the "operating point" 0 = 0 are of interest, then the equation of motion can be linearized about this 
operating point. This is done by forming a Taylor series expansion of the nonfinear term (g//)sin# about the point 
9 = 0 and retaining only the first degree terms. The nonlinear equation is 
The linear equation is 
I'alid for small variations in 
It is instructive to express the linearization process more formally for Taylor series applications, to 
better establish its applicability and limitations. 
Taylor Series 
The infinite series expansion of a general nonlinear function f(x) can be quite useful i n nonlinear 
systems analysis. The function f(x) can be written as the following infinite series, expanded about the 
point x: 
(19.1) 
where (d
kf/dx
k)\x=J 
is the value of the kth derivative of / with respect to x evaluated at the point 
x = x. Clearly, this expansion exists (is feasible) only if all the required derivatives exist. 
If the sum of the terms of Equation (19.1) second-degree and higher-degree i n (x — x) are 
negligible compared with the sum of the first two terms, then we can write 
(19.2) 
This approximation usually works if x is "close enough" to x, or, equivalently, if x — x is "small 
enough," in which case higher-degree terms are relatively small. 

456 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
Equation (19.2) can be rewritten as 
Then if we define 
Equation (19.3) becomes 
(19.3) 
(19.4) 
(J9S) 
(19.6) 
If x = x(t) is a function of time f, or any other independent variable, then in most applications / 
can be treated as a fixed parameter when performing the linearization computations above, and 
Ax = Ax(l) = x(t) - x(t). etc. 
EXAMPLE 19.6. Suppose y(t) = f[u(t)] represents a nonlinear system with input u(t) and output y(t), where 
t > f(, for some ?„, and df/du exists for all u. If the normal operating conditions for this system arc defined by the 
input u = u and output >'=>', then small changes Ay(t) =>'(/) —y(t) in output operation in response to small 
changes in the input Au(t) = u(t) — u(t) can be expressed by the approximate linear relation 
(19.7) 
foi 
Taylor Series for Vector Processes 
Equations (19.1) through (19.7) are readily generalized for nonlinear m-vector functions of 
n-vector arguments. f(x), where 
and m and n are arbitrary. In this case. 
and Equation (19.6) becomes 
where 
is a matrix defined as 
(19.8) 
(19.9) 
EXAMPLE 19.7. For m = 1 and n = 2, Equation (19.9) reduces to 

457 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
and Equation (19.8) is 
(19.10) 
Equation (19.10) represents the common case where a nonlinear scalar function / of two variables, say xl= x and 
x2 = v, are linearized about a point (x, y) in the plane. 
Linearization of Nonlinear Differential Equations 
W e follow the same procedure to linearize differential equations as we did above i n linearizing 
functions i(x). Consider a nonlinear differential system written in state variable form: 
(19.11) 
where the vector of n state variables x(f) and the /--input vector u(t) are defined as in Chapter 3, 
Equations (3.24) and (3.25), and / > t0. In Equation (19.11), f is an n-vector of nonlinear functions of 
x(j) and u(r). 
Similarly, nonlinear output equations may be written i n vector form: 
(19.12) 
where y(t) is an w-vector of outputs and g is an w-vector of nonlinear functions of x(r). 
EXAMPLE 19.8. 
One example of a nonlinear SISO differential system of the form of Equations (19.11) and 
(19.12) is 
The linearized versions of Equations (19.11) and (19.12) are given by 
(19.13) 
(19.14) 
where the partial derivative matrices i n these equations are defined as i n Equations (19.9) and (19.10), 
each evaluated at the "point" {x,u}. The pair x = x(t) and u = u(t) are actually functions of time, but 
they are treated like "points" in the indicated computations. 
Linearized equations (19.13) and (19.14) are usually interpreted as follows. If the input is 
perturbed or deviates from an "operating point" 0(7) by a small enough amount Au(r), generating small 
enough perturbations Ax(r) i n the state and small enough perturbations i n the output Ay(r) about their 
operating points, then the linear equations (19.13) and (19.14) are reasonable approximation equations 
for the perturbed states Ax(r) and perturbed outputs Ay(r). 
Linearized equations (19.13) and (19.14) are often called the (small) perturbation equations for the 
nonlinear differential system. They are linear i n Ax and (Au), because the coefficient matrices: 
having been evaluated at x(t) and/or u(r), are not functions of Ax(r) [or Au(r)]. 

458 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
Linearized equations (19,13) and (19.14) are also time-Invariant if u(f) = u = constant and x(t) = x 
— constant. In this case, all of the methods developed in this book for time-invariant ordinary 
differential systems can be applied. Nevertheless, the results must be interpreted judiciously because, 
again, the linearized model is an approximation, valid only for "smalt enough" perturbations about an 
operating point and, generally speaking, "small enough" perturbations are not always easy to ascertain. 
EXAMPLE 19.9. 
The linearized (perturbation) equations for the system given in Example 19.8 are determined as 
follows from Equations (19.13) and (19.14). For convenience, we first define 
etc., to simplify the notation. Then 
Similarly, 
and the output perturbation equation is 
Linearization of Nonlinear Discrete-Time Equations 
The Taylor series linearization procedure can be applied to many discrete-time system problems, 
but sufficient care must be taken to justify the existence of the series. The application is often justified if 
the discrete-time equations represent reasonably well-behaved nonlinear processes, such as discrete-time 
representations of continuous systems with state variables expressed only at discrete-time instants. 
EXAMPLE 19.10. 
The time-invariant discrete-time system represented by the nonlinear difference equation 
x(k + 1) = ax
2(k), with a <0 and x(0) # 0, is easily linearized, because the nonlinear term ax'(k) is a smooth 
function of x. We have 
Substitution of these equations into Equation (19.6) and rearranging terms yields 
which is linear in Ax, but time-varying in general. 
19.3 
PHASE PLANE METHODS 
In Sections 3.15 and 4.6, the state variable form of linear differential equations was introduced and 
shown to be a useful tool for analysis of linear systems. In Section 19.2, this representation was applied 
to nonlinear systems via the concept of linearization. In this section, phase plane methods are developed 
for analyzing nonlinear differential equations i n state variable form, without the need for linearization. 

459 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
A second-order differential equation of the form: 
can be rewritten as a pair of first-order differential equations, as in Section 3.15, by making the change 
of variables x — xx and dx/dt = x2, yielding 
(19.16) 
(19.17) 
The two-tuple, or pair of state variables ( x „ x2), may be considered as a point in the plane. Since 
jt, and A- 2 are functions of time, then as t increases, (xl(/),(x2(t)) 
describes a path or trajectory in the 
plane. This plane is called the phase plane, and the trajectory is a parametric plot of x2 
versus A',, 
parametrized by t. 
If we eliminate time as the independent variable i n Equations (19.16) and (19.17), we obtain the 
first-order differential equation 
(19.18) 
Solution of Equation (19.18) for xy as a function of x2 (or vice versa) defines a trajectory in the phase 
plane. By solving this equation for various initial conditions on A
l and x 2 and examining the resulting 
phase plane trajectories, we can determine the behavior of the second-order system. 
EXAMPLE 19.11. 
The differential equation 
A'ith the initial condition; 
can be replaced by the two first-order equations 
where 
and 
Eliminating time as the independent variable, wc obtain 
Integration of this equation for the given initial conditions yields 
The phase plane trajectory defined by this equation is plotted in Fig. 19-6. Its direction in the phase plane is 
Fig. 19-6 

460 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
TCHAP. 19 
determined by noting that 
for all 
Therefore 
always decreases and we obtain the 
trajectory shown. 
On-Off Control Systems 
A particularly useful application of phase plane methods is designing on-off controllers (Definition 
2.25), for the special class of feedback control systems with linear continuous-time second-order plants, 
as i n F i g . 19-7 and Equation (19.19). 
(19.19) 
The initial conditions 
and 
for Equation 
are arbitrary. The on-off controller 
with input 
generates the control signal u which attains only two values, 
Fig. 19-7 
On-Off Controller Design Specifications 
If the reference input r is a unit step function applied at time zero, typical design specifications for 
the system of F i g . 19-7 are the following. The control input u to the plant must drive the plant output 
c(t) to c(t') = l, and its derivative dc/dt to (dc/dt)\l=t, 
= 0, simultaneously, and i n the minimum 
possible time t'. The steady state error becomes zero at t' and remains zero if the control signal is 
turned off (u = 0). 
Since / ' is required to be minimum, this is an optimal control problem (see Section 20.5). It can be 
shown that t' is minimized only if the control signal u switches values, from + 1 to - 1 or from - 1 to 
+ 1 , at most once during the time interval 0 < t < t'. 
On-Off Controller Design 
In solving this design problem, it is convenient to use the error e = r — c, where r = l(t), as the 
variable of interest, rather than the controlled output c, because e = 0 and de/dt = 0 when c = 1 and 
dc/dt = 0. Therefore requiring that the error e and its derivative go to zero i n minimum time is 
equivalent to our original problem. 
T o solve the problem, we first generate a differential equation for e: 
(19.20) 
with initial conditions e(0) = 1 - c(0) and (de/dt)\t_0 
= -(dc/dt)\t=0. 
Then we replace 
Equation 
(19.20) with two first-order differential equations, by letting e = xx and de/dt = x2: 
(19.21) 
(19.22) 

461 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
with initial conditions x^O) = e(0) = 1 - c(0) and x 2(0) = (de/dt)\t=0 
= -(dc/dt)\,_0. 
Eliminating 
time as the independent variable, we obtain 
(19.23) 
This equation plus the initial conditions on xx(0) and x2(0) define a trajectory in the phase plane. 
Since the control signal u switches (+1 to — 1 or — 1 to +1) no more than once, we can separate 
the trajectory into two parts, the first prior to the switching time and the second after switching. We 
consider the second part first, as it terminates at the origin of the phase plane, xx = x2 = 0. We set 
u= +1 in Equation (19.23) and then integrate between a general set of initial conditions xx(t) 
and 
x2(t) 
and the terminal conditions xl = x2 = 0. To perform the integration, we consider four different 
sets of initial conditions, each corresponding to one of the quadrants of the phase plane. 
In the first quadrant, xx > 0 and x2 > 0. Note that dxx/dt = x2 > 0. Thus xx increases when x2 is 
in the first quadrant, and when x2 goes to zero, xx cannot be zero. Therefore trajectories which start in 
the first quadrant cannot terminate at the origin of the phase plane if u does not switch. 
A n identical argument holds when the initial conditions are in the third quadrant, that is, if xx < 0 
and x2 < 0, the trajectory cannot terminate at the origin if u does not switch. 
In the second quadrant, xx < 0 and x2 > 0. Since dxx/dt = x2 > 0, xx 
will increase as long as 
x2 > 0. Since a > 0, then — ax2 < 0 and thus dx2/dt < 0 for u = +1 whenever x2 > 0. Integration of 
Equation (19.23) with w= +1, initial conditions in the second quadrant, and terminal conditions 
xx = x2 = 0, yields 
(19.24) 
or 
where xv(t) < 0, x2(t) 
> 0. This equation defines a curve in the second quadrant of the phase plane 
such that, for any point on this curve, the trajectory terminates at the origin if u= +1. That is, the 
control signal u = +1 drives xx and x2 to zero simultaneously. 
By an identical argument, there exists a curve in the fourth quadrant defined by 
(19.25) 
where xx(t) > 0, x 2 ( r ) < 0 such that for any (xx(t), x2(t)) on this curve the control signal u= — 1 
drives xx and x2 to zero simultaneously. 
The curves defined by Equations (19.24) and (19.25) join at xx = x2 = 0 and together define the 
switching curve for the on-off controller. The switching curve divides the entire phase plane into two 
regions, as indicated in Fig. 19-8. The part of any trajectory after switching always starts on this curve, 
moves along the curve, and terminates at xx = x2 = 0. 
Fig. 19-8 

462 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
N o w we consider the part of the trajectory prior to switching. First, we explore a monotone 
property of the switching curve. In the second quadrant, where u= + 1 , x2> 0, and the slope of the 
curve is negative: 
In the fourth quadrant, where 
and 
Therefore the slope of the entire switching curve is negative for all (xv x2) on the curve, that is, the 
switching curve is monotone decreasing. Thus, corresponding to any specific value of xv, there is one and 
only one corresponding value of x2. Because of the monotone property of the switching curve, the 
region above the switching curve is the same as the region to the right of the switching curve, that is, it 
consists of the set of points (xl7 x2) such that 
when 
and 
(19.26) 
(19.27) 
when x2 < 0. 
W e consider the part of the trajectory prior to switching, when the conditions (xx(0), x 2(0)) lie 
above the switching curve. F o r this case, u = + 1 and the first part of the trajectory is obtained by 
integration of Equation (19.23) with u= +1 between the initial conditions (xx(0), x2(Q)) and an 
arbitrary pair of points (xx(t), x2(t)) which satisfy the inequalities (19.26) and (19.27). W e obtain the 
trajectory by integrating Equation (19.23), which yields 
or 
(19.28) 
N o t e that this part of the trajectory has the same shape as that i n Equation (19.24), but that it is shifted 
to the right. So, when x 2 ( / ) = 0, xx(t) = xx(0) + (l/a)[x2(0) 
- ( l / a ) l n ( a x 2 ( 0 ) + 1)], which is greater 
than 0 because of inequality (19.26). 
Thus, when (xx(0), x 2(0)) lies above the switching curve, the on-off controller develops a control 
signal u= + 1 and the resultant trajectory (xx(t), x2(t)) is defined by Equation (19.28). W h e n this 
trajectory intersects the switching curve, that is, when (xx(t), x2(t)) 
satisfies Equations (19.25) and 
(19.28) simultaneously, the on-off controller switches the control signal to u= —1 and the trajectory 
continues along the switching curve to the origin of the phase plane. 
B y identical reasoning, if the initial conditions lie below the switching curve, that is, 
when . 
or 
when 
then the on-off controller develops a control signal u = - 1 and the trajectory 

463 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
satisfies 
When this trajectory intersects the switching curve, that is, when ( x ^ / ) , x2(t)) 
satisfies 
Equations 
(19.24) and (19.29) simultaneously, the on-off'controller switches the control signal to u = + 1 and the 
trajectory moves along the switching curve in the second quadrant and terminates at the origin of the 
phase plane. 
Recalling that x, = e and x2 = e, the switching logic of the on-off controller is as follows: 
(a) 
When 
(b) 
When 
(c) 
When 
(d) 
When 
EXAMPLE 19.12. 
For the feedback control system depicted in Fig. 19-7 and plant defined by Equation (19.19) 
with parameter a = 1, the switching curve is defined by 
and the switching logic for the on-off controller is given in Table 19.1. 
No 
No 
No 
- 1 
No 
No 
Yes 
+1 
No 
Yes 
N o 
- 1 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
- 1 
Yes 
No 
N o 
- 1 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
- 1 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
+1 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4 1 
Table 19.1 

464 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[ C H A R 19 
invariant. A more general method is provided by the Lyapunov theory, for exploring the stability of 
system states x(t) and outputs y(r) in the time domain, for any size perturbations Ax(r). It can be used 
for both linear and nonlinear systems described by sets of simultaneous first-order ordinary differential 
or difference equations, which we write concisely here in state variable form: 
(19.30) 
(19.31) 
or 
The following stability definitions are for unforced systems, that is, for u = 0, and for simplicity we 
write x = f(x) or \(k + 1) = i[x(k)]. 
A point x s for which f (x s) = 0 is called a singular point. A singular point x s is said to be stable if, 
for any hyperspherical region SR (e.g., a circle in two dimensions) of radius R centered at x s , there 
exists a hyperspherical region Sr of radius r < R also centered at x s in which any motion x(r) of the 
system beginning in Sr remains in SR ever after. 
A singular point x s is asymptotically stable if it is stable and all trajectories (motions) x(t) tend 
toward x s as time goes to infinity. 
The Lyapunov stability criterion states that, if the origin is a singular point, then it is stable if a 
Lyapunov function V(x) can be found with the following properties: 
(a) 
V(x) > 0 for all values of x * 0 
(19.32) 
(b) 
dV/dt < 0 for all x, for continuous systems, or AV[x(k)] = V[x(k + 1)] - V[x(k)] < 0, 
for all x, for discrete-time systems 
(79.53) 
Furthermore, if 
is never zero except at the origin, the origin is asymptotically stable. 
or 
EXAMPLE 19.13. 
A nonlinear continuous system represented by 
or, equivalently, the pair of equations 
where xx = x, has a singular point at xx = x2 = 0. The function V = x\ + x\ is positive for all xx and x2, except 
xx = x2 = 0 where V=0. The derivative 
is never positive. Therefore the origin is stable. 
EXAMPLE 19.14. 
The nonlinear system shown in Fig. 19-9 is represented by the differential equations [with 
Fig. 19-9 

465 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Also, 
for this particular nonlinear element. If r is constant, we can make the changes of variables 
and the state equations become 
The origin x[ = x'2 = 0 is a singular point since x[ = x2 = 0 at the origin. The Lyapunov function is defined by 
K = 2/()
v>7(<?) de + x'2
2>0 for all x{, x'2 * 0, if x[f(x[) > 0 for all x{ * 0. Differentiating V, 
Thus, if we restrict x[f(x[) > 0, to maintain V>0, V<0 for x{ + 0. Therefore the system is stable for any 
nonlinear element satisfying the conditions 
Note that this result is very general in that only the conditions above are required to assure stability. 
If r is not constant, the solution for x,(r) and x2(t) corresponding to r(t) is in general not constant. But, if 
the solution were known, the stability of the solution could be analyzed in a similar way. 
EXAMPLE 19.15. 
For the discrete-time system 
where f(xx) is the saturation nonlinearity in Fig. 19-1(6), the origin is a singular point because xx(k) = x2(k) = 0 
implies .v,(& + 1) = x2(k + 1) = 0. Let V= x\ + x2, which is greater than zero for all xx, x2=t 0. Then 
Since 
for all xx, x2 and therefore the origin is stable. 
Choosing Lyapunov Functions 
For many problems, a convenient choice for the Lyapunov function V(x) is the scalar quadratic 
form function K(x) = x
TPx, where x
T is the transpose of the column vector x and P is a real symmetric 
matrix. T o render V> 0, the matrix P must be positive definite. By Sylvester's theorem [7], P is positive 
definite if and only if all its discriminants are positive, that is, 
(19.34) 
For continuous systems 
the derivative of 
is given by 
F o r discrete systems, 
and 

466 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
EXAMPLE 19.16. 
For the system represented by 
Then 
where 
Since P is positive definite, V> 0 for all x * 0. The discriminants of Q arc 4 and (24 - 9) = 15. Therefore Q is 
positive definite and —Q is negative definite, which guarantees that V<{) for all x ^ 0. The origin is therefore 
asymptotically stable for this system. 
19.5 
FREQUENCY RESPONSE METHODS 
Describing Functions 
Describing functions are approximate frequency response functions for the nonlinear elements of a 
system, which can be used to analyze the overall system using frequency response techniques developed 
in earlier chapters. 
A describing function is developed for a nonlinear element by analyzing its response to a sinusoidal 
input A sin to/, which can be written as a Fourier series: 
(19.35) 
The describing function is the ratio of the complex Fourier coefficient B]e
1'
1'
1 of the fundamental 
frequency of this output, to the amplitude A of the input. That is, the describing function is the complex 
function of to, ( B
x / A ) e a 
frequency response function of an approximation of the nonlinear 
element. Thus the describing function represents the effective gain of the nonlinear element at the 
frequency of the input sinusoid. 
In general, B , and <f>., are functions of both the input frequency w = Itr/T and the input amplitude 
A. Therefore we may write Bx = BX(A, to), ^ = <f>x(A, to) and the describing function as 
(19.36) 
T o apply the method, we replace system nonlinearities by describing functions and then apply the 
frequency domain techniques of Chapters 11, 12, and 15 through 18, with some modifications to 
account for the dependence of B} and <£, on A. 
EXAMPLE 19.17. 
The output of the nonlinear function /(e) = e~' in response to an input e = A sin tor is 
From Equation (19.36). the describing function for /(<?) is 
Note that this nonlincarity produces no phase shift, so that 

467 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Hysteresis 
A common type of nonlinearity called hysteresis or backlash is shown in Fig. 19-10. In electrical 
systems, it may occur due to nonlinear electromagnetic properties and, in mechanical systems, it may 
result from backlash in gear trains or mechanical linkages. For another example, see Problem 2.16. 
Fig. 19-10 
Fig. 19-11 
The describing function characteristic for hysteresis, normalized to dead zone parameter d = 1 and 
slope K= 1, is shown in Fig. 19-11. The phase lag §X(A) of this describing function is a function of the 
input amplitude A, but is independent of the input frequency w. 
The describing function technique is particularly well suited for analysis of continuous or discrete-
time systems containing a single nonlinear element, as illustrated in Fig. 19-12, with open-loop transfer 
function GH = N(A, w)G(w). Frequency response analysis of such systems typically entails first 
determining whether there exist values of A and w that satisfy the characteristic equation, 1 + 
N(A,a>)G(u) 
= 0> or 
Fig. 19-12 
that is, values of A and u permitting oscillations. Nyquist, Bode, or Nichols chart plots of G and 
- 1/7Y separately can be used to resolve this problem, because the plots must intersect if such A and u 
exist. Relative stability can also be evaluated from such plots, by determining the additional gain (gain 
margin) and/or phase shift (phase margin) required to have the curves intersect. 
It must be kept in mind that the describing function is only an approximation for the nonlinearity. 
The accuracy of describing function methods, using frequency response analysis based on linear system 
methods, depends upon the effective filtering by the plant G(u) of the (neglected) higher than 
first-order harmonics produced by the nonlinearity. Since most plants have more poles than zeros, it is 
often a reasonable approximation. 
EXAMPLE 19.18. 
Consider the system of Fig._19-12 with G(u) = 
+ 2)
2 and the saturation nonlinearity 
of Problem 19.17. Polar plots of G(<o) and — 1/7V(^4) are shown in Fig. 19-13. 

468 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
Fig. 19-13 
There are no values of A and co for which the two plots intersect, indicating that the system is stable and 
sustained oscillations of constant amplitude are not possible. However, if the forward-loop gain were increased by a 
factor of 2, from 8 to 16, the plots would intersect at ( — 1,0) for co = 2 and 0 < A < 1, and sustained oscillations 
would be possible. Thus an approximate gain margin for this system is 2 (6 db). 
Popov's Stability Criterion 
This criterion was developed for nonlinear feedback systems with a single nonlinear element in the 
loop, for example, as shown i n F i g . 19-12. Such systems are stable if the linear element G is stable, 
Re G(co) > —1 /K, and the nonlinear element f(e) satisfies the conditions: /(0) = 0 and 0 <f(e)/e 
< K 
for e J= 0. Note that this criterion does not involve any approximations. Nyquist analysis is particularly 
well suited for its application. 
EXAMPLE 19.19. 
For the system of Fig. 19-12, with G = l/O'co + l )
3 , the Polar Plot is shown in Fig. 19-14. For 
all co, Re G > - 1 / 4 . Therefore the nonlinear system is stable if K< 4, /(0) = 0, and 0 <f(e)/e < K for e + 0. 
Fig. 19-14 
EXAMPLE 19.20. 
For the nonlinear system in Fig. 19-12, with a stable discrete-time plant G = 1/z, 
The circular Polar Plot of G is shown in Fig. 19-15, and 
Thus the system is stable if 
and 

469 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Solved Problems 
NONLINEAR CONTROL SYSTEMS 
19.1. Several types of control laws or control algorithms were presented in Definitions 2.25 through 
2.29. Which of these are nonlinear and which are linear, from the viewpoint of their input-output 
characteristics? 
The on-oif (binary) controller of Definition 2.25 is clearly nonlinear, its output being a discontinuous 
function of its input. The remaining controllers, that is, the proportional (P), derivative (D). integral (/) 
and P D , PI, DI, and PID controllers given in Definitions 2.26 through 2.29, are all linear. Each of their 
outputs arc defined by linear operations, or linear combinations of linear operations, on each of their 
inputs. 
19.2. W h y is the thermostatically controlled heating system described in Problem 2.16 nonlinear? 
The thermostat controller in this system is a nonlinear binary device, with a hysteresis input-output 
characteristic, as described in Problem 2.16. This controller regulates the room temperature output of this 
control system in an oscillatory manner between upper and lower limits bracketing the desired temperature 
setting. This type of behavior is characteristic of many nonlinear control systems. 
LINEARIZED AND PIECEWISE-LINEAR SYSTEM APPROXIMATIONS 
19.3. The differential equation of a certain physical system is given by 
The function /(_>•) is nonlinear, but it can be approximated by the piecewise-linear graph 
illustrated in Fig. 19-16. Determine a piecewise-linear approximation for the nonlinear system 
differential equation. 
Fig. 19-16 

470 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
The nonlinear system can be approximated by the following set of five linear equations over the 
indicated ranges of v: 
19.4. 
A solution of the nonlinear differential equation 
with input u = 0, is y = 0. Linearize the differential equation about this input and output using a 
Taylor series expansion of the function d
7y/dt
2 
+ ycos y — u about the point u = y = 0. 
The Taylor series expansion of cos y about y = 0 is 
Therefore 
Keeping only first-degree terms, the linearized equation is dry/dt
1 + y = u. This equation is valid only for 
small deviations (perturbations) about the operating point u = y = 0. 
19.5. 
Write the perturbation equations determined in Example 19.9 in vector-matrix form. W h y are 
they linear? Under what conditions would they be time-invariant? 
These equations are linear because the matrices premultiplying Ax and Au are independent of Ax and 
Au. They would be time-invariant if the parameters c,, c2,..., cs were constant and the "operating point" of 
the system, for u = Ti(t) and x = x(l), were also constant. This would be the case if u = constant. 

471 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
^ H A P . 19] 
19.6. Derive the linearized Equations (19.13) and (19.14) for the nonlinear differential system given 
by (19.11) and (19.12). 
We consider changes Ax in x as a result of changes Au in u, each about operating points x and u, 
respectively, that is, 
In these equations, t is considered a parameter, held constant in the derivation. We therefore suppress /, for 
convenience, Substitution of x + Ax for x and u + Au for u in (19.11) gives 
Now we expand this equation in a Taylor series about {x,u}, retaining only first-order terms: 
Then, since dx/dt = /(x,u), Equation (19.11) follows immediately after subtracting these corresponding 
terms from both sides of the equation above. Similarly, for 
Subtracting y from both sides finally gives 
19.7. The equations describing the motion of an earth satellite in the orbit plane are 
(See Problem 3.3 and Example 19.2 for more details.) A satellite is in a nearly circular orbit 
determined by r and dO/dt = co. A n exactly circular orbit is defined by 
r — r0 = constant 
to = to0 = constant 
Since dr0/dt = 0 and du0/dt 
— 0, the first differential equation is eliminated for a circular orbit. 
The second equation reduces to r0u>^ = k
2/pr^. 
F i n d a set of linear equations which approxi­
mately describes the differences 
In the equations of motion we make the substitutions 
and obtain the equations 

472 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
We note that 
since both r() and u„ are constant. The first differential equation then becomes 
Since the differences Sr, 8u and their derivatives are small, the second-order terms {Sr)(d(8w)/dt) and 
2(d(8r)/dt) 
can be assumed negligible and eliminated. The resulting linear equation is 
which is one of the two desired equations. The second differential equation can be rewritten as 
where the right-hand side is the Taylor series expansion of —k/pr
2 about rt>. A l l terms of order 2 and 
greater in Sr and Sen may again be assumed negligible and eliminated leaving the linear equation 
In the problem statement we saw that r^u
1, = k/pr{
2. Hence the final equation is 
which is the second of the two desired linearized equations. 
PHASE PLANE METHODS 
19.8. Show the equation d
2x/dt
2 
=f(x, dx/dt) can be equivalently described by a pair of first-order 
differential equations. 
We define a set of new variables 
The two desired equations are therefore 
19.9. Show that the phase plane trajectory of the solution of the differential equation 
with initial conditions x(0) = 0 and (dx/dt)\l 
= n = 1 is a circle of unit radius centered at the 
origin. 

473 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Letting . 
and 
we obtain the pair of equations 
We eliminate time as the independent variable by writing 
Integrating this equation for the given initial conditions, we obtain 
which is the equation of a circle of unit radius centered at the origin. 
19.10. Determine the equation of the phase plane trajectory of the equation 
with the initial conditions 
and 
With 
and 
we obtain the pair of first-order equations 
We eliminate time as the independent variable by writing 
Then 
which is the equation of a straight line, as shown in Fig. 19-17. The direction of the motion in the phase 
plane is indicated by the arrow and is determined by noting that, initially, x 2(0) = 1; therefore dx1/dt > 0 
and xx is increasing, and dx2/dt < 0 and x2 is decreasing. The trajectory ends at the point (x l 5 x 2) = (1,0), 
where dxx/dt = dx2/dt = 0 and thus motion terminates. 
Fig. 19-17 

474 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
19.11. Design an on-off controller for the system given by Equation (19.19) and Fig. 19-7. with a = 0. 
For a = 0 in Equation (19.19), Equation (19.23) becomes 
The switching curve is generated by integrating this equation in the second quadrant with u = + 1 and 
terminating at the origin, yielding 
and integrating in the fourth quadrant with u— — I and terminating at the origin, yielding 
The switching curve is sketched in Fig. 19-18. The switching logic of this on-off controller is given in Tabic 
19.2. 
Fig. 19-18 
Table 19.2 
LYAPUNOVYS STABILITY CRITERION 
19.12. Find the singular points of the pair of equations 
Singular points arc found by setting sin x2 = 0 and xx -t- x2 = 0. The first equation is satisfied by 
x2 = +/I7T. n = 0,1,2 
The second is satisfied by JC, — 
Hence the singular points are defined by 
19.13. The origin is a singular point for the pair of equations 

475 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Using Lyapunov theory, find sufficient conditions on a, b, c. and d such that the origin is 
asymptotically stable. 
We choose a function 
which is positive for all xt, x2 except x, = x2 — 0. The time derivative of V is 
To make dV/dt negative for all Xj, x , , we might choose a < 0, d < 0, and h = -<•. In this case, 
except when x, = x, = 0. Hence one set of sufficient conditions for asymptotic stability are a < 0, d < 0, 
and b = — c. There arc other possible solutions to this problem. 
19.14. Determine sufficient conditions for the stability of the origin of the nonlinear 
discrete-time 
system described by 
Let 
, which is greater than 0 for all x i= 0. Then 
Therefore sufficient conditions for 
and thus stability of the system arc 
19.15. Determine sufficient conditions for the stability of the system 
Let 
and 
Then 
To eliminate the cross-product term 
Then 
where Q 
For 
The resulting 
is 
Then 
and the system is stable if 
for all 

476 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
19.16. Determine sufficient conditions for stability of the nonlinear discrete-time system 
where A 
and b 
Let 
where P 
Then 
where 
Now, in order for 
we set a •• 
and. to eliminate the cross-product term 
wc set 
Then 
and 
Sufficient conditions for 
and stability of the origin are then 
FREQUENCY RESPONSE METHODS 
19.17. Show that the describing function for the piecewise-linear saturation element in Example 19.1 is 
given by 
Wc see from Fig. 19-1(6) that, when the magnitude of the input is less than 1.0, the output equals the 
input. When the input exceeds 1.0, then the output equals 1.0. Using the notation of Example 19.1, if 
then /(/) is as shown in Fig. 19-19 and can be written as 

477 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Fig. 19-19 
The time r, is obtained by noting that 
Similarly, 
or 
The magnitude Bt and phase angle <j>l of the describing function are determined from the expression for 
the first Fourier coefficient: 
Since /(/) is an odd function, the phase angle <J>, is zero. The integral delining Bx can be rewritten as 
But 
and 
Wc can thus write B, as 
Substituting /, =(l/co)sin
_ 1(l/-4) and simplifying, wc obtain 
Finally, the describing function is 
19.18. Determine the amplitude A and frequency w for which oscillations could be maintained in the 
system of Example 19.18 with the forward-loop gain increased to 32 from 8. 

478 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
[CHAP. 19 
The Polar Plots of 
and — 1/N(A) are shown in Fig. 19-20. The two loci intersect at A = 2.5 and co = 2, the conditions for 
oscillation. 
Fig. 19-20 
19.19. Determine the amplitude and frequency of possible oscillations for the system of F i g . 19-12 with 
and 
From Example 19.17, the describing function for this nonlinearity is 
From the Polar Plots shown in Fig. 19-21, 
and 
intersect for 
and 
the 
conditions for oscillation. 
Fig. 19-21 
19.20. Determine the amplitude and frequency of possible oscillations for the system of Fig. 19-12, with 
the hysteresis nonlinearity shown i n Fig. 19-22, and G(co) = 2/ju(ju 
+ 1). 
The system block diagram can be manipulated as shown in Fig. 19-23, so that the hysteresis element is 
normalized, with a dead zone of 1 and a slope of 1. Figure 19-11 can then be used to construct the Polar 
Plot of — 1/7V, shown in Fig. 19-24 with the Polar Plot of 2G(co), rather than G(co), because the loop 
transfer function excluding the nonlinearity is 4G(co)/2 = 2G(co). 

479 
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO N O N L I N E A R C O N T R O L SYSTEMS 
C H A P . 19] 
Fig. 19-22 
Fig. 19-23 
Fig. 19-24 
The two curves intersect for w = 1.2 rad/sec and A = 1.7, the conditions for oscillation of the system. 
Note that A is the amplitude of the input to the normalized nonlinearity. Therefore the amplitude for 
oscillations is 3.4, in terms of e. 
Supplementary Problems 
19.21. Determine the phase plane trajectory of the solution of the differential equation 
19.22. Using Lyapunov theory, find sufficient conditions on a, and aa which guarantee that the point x = 0, 
dx/dt = 0 is stable for the equation 

480 
Chapter 20 
Introduction to Advanced Topics in Control 
Systems Analysis and Design 
20.1 
INTRODUCTION 
This final chapter is an introduction to advanced topics in control systems science. Each subject is 
discussed only briefly here to familiarize the reader with some of the terminology and mathematical 
level of advanced methodologies. It should also provide some of the motivation for advanced study. 
Time-domain state variable techniques, introduced in Chapters 3 and 4 and used extensively in Chapter 
19, predominate in advanced methodological developments, mainly because they provide the basis for 
solving broader classes of control system problems, including far more complex problems than are 
amenable to frequency-domain methods. 
20.2 
CONTROLLABILITY AND OBSERVABILITY 
M u c h of modern control theory is developed in the time domain, rather than the frequency domain, 
and the basic linear and time-invariant plant (controlled process) model is typically given a state 
variable description (Chapter 3), Equation (3.25b): dx(t)/dt 
= Ax(t) 
+ Bu(t) 
for continuous system 
plants, or Equation (3.36): x(k + 1) = Ax(k) 
+ Bu(k) 
for discrete-time system plants. F o r either type 
of model, the output equation may be written as y = Cx, where y = y(t) or y(k), 
x = x(t) or x(k), 
and 
C is a matrix of compatible dimension. W e mention in passing that this basic model form is often used 
to represent time-varying linear systems, with matrices A, B, or C having time-varying elements, and 
(less often) nonlinear systems, with A, B, or C having elements that are functions of the state vector x. 
The concept of controllability addresses the question of whether it is possible to control or steer the 
state (vector) x from the input u. Specifically, does there exist a physically realizable input u that can be 
applied to the plant over a finite period of time that will steer the entire state vector x (every one of the 
n components of x) from any point x 0 
in state space to any other point X j ? If yes, the plant is 
controllable; if no, it is uncontrollable. 
The concept of observability is complementary to that of controllability. It addresses the question of 
whether it is possible to determine all of the n components of the state vector x by measurement of the 
output y over a finite period of time. If yes, the system is observable; if no, it is unobservable. Obviously, 
if y = x, that is, if all state variables are measured, the system is observable. However, if y + x and C is 
not a square matrix, the plant may still be observable. 
The controllability and observability properties of the plant have important practical consequences 
in analysis and, more importantly, design of modern feedback control systems. Intuitively, uncontrol­
lable plants cannot be steered arbitrarily; and it is impossible to know all of the state variables of 
unobservable plants. These problems are clearly related, because together this means that unobservable 
states (or state variables) cannot be individually controlled if the control variable u is required to be a 
function of x, that is, if feedback control is needed. 
Linear, time-invariant plant models in state variable form [Equations (3.25b) or (3.36)] are 
controllable if and only if the following controllability matrix has rank n (n linearly independent 
columns), where n is the number of state variables in the state vector x: 
(20.1) 
Similarly, the plant model is observable if and only if the following observability matrix has 

481 
C H A P . 20] 
A D V A N C E D TOPICS IN C O N T R O L SYSTEMS A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N 
rank n (n linearly independent rows): 
(20.2) 
EXAMPLE 20.1. Consider the following single-input single-output (SISO) plant model, with x 
and 
each nonzero: 
To test if this model is controllable, we first evaluate the matrix given by Equation (20.1): 
By Definition 3.11, the two columns 
would be linearly independent if the only constants a and R 
and 
for which 
where a = B = 0. This is clearly not the case, because a = 1 and B = — l/an 
satisfies this equation. Therefore the 
two columns of [B AB] are linearly dependent, the rank of [B AB] = li=2 = n, and this plant is therefore 
uncontrollable. 
Similarly, from Equation (20.2), 
For this matrix, the only a and B for which a[l 0] + B[au 
an] = [0 0] are a = B = 0, because a n * 0. 
T C 1 
Therefore the rank of „ , is n = 2 and this plant is observable. 
CA \ 
20.3 TIME-DOMAIN DESIGN OF FEEDBACK SYSTEMS (STATE FEEDBACK) 
Design of many feedback control systems may be accomplished using time-domain representations 
and the concepts of controllability and observability discussed above. A s noted i n earlier chapters, 
particularly Chapter 14, Root-Locus Design, linear control system design is often performed by 
manipulating the locations of the poles of the closed-loop transfer function (the roots of the characteris­
tic equation), using appropriate compensators i n the feedforward or feedback path to meet performance 
specifications. This approach is satisfactory i n many circumstances, but it has certain limitations that 
can be overcome using a different design philosophy, called state feedback design, that permits arbitrary 
pole placement, thereby providing substantially more flexibility in design. 
The basic idea underlying state feedback control system design is as follows for single-input 
continuous plants dx/dt = Ax + Bu. The procedure is the same for discrete-time systems. 
W i t h reference to Fig. 2-1, we seek a state feedback control: 
(20.3) 
where G is a 1 X n feedback matrix of constant gains (to be designed) and r is the reference input. 
C o m b i n i n g these equations, the closed-loop system is given by 
(20.4) 

482 
A D V A N C E D TOPICS IN C O N T R O L SYSTEMS A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 20 
If the plant is controllable, the matrix G exists that can yield any (arbitrary) set of desired roots for 
the characteristic equation of this closed-loop system, represented by \\I — A +BG\ = 0, where the A 
solutions of this determinant equation are the roots. This is the basic result. 
EXAMPLE 20.2. 
A block diagram of the state feedback system given by Equations (20.3) and (20.4) is shown in 
Fig. 20-1. 
Fig. 20-1 
T o implement a state feedback design, the entire state vector x must somehow be made available, 
either as x exactly, or as an adequate approximation, denoted x. If the output is y = x, as i n Fig. 20-1, 
there obviously is no problem. But, if all states are not available as outputs, which is more common, 
then observability of the plant model differential and output equations (dx/dt = Ax + Bu and y = Cx) 
is required to obtain the needed state estimate or observer x. The equations for a typical state observer 
system are given by 
(20.5) 
where A, B, and C are matrices oT the plant and output measurement systems and L is an observer 
design matrix to be determined in a particular problem. 
EXAMPLE 20.3. A detailed block diagram of the state observer system given by Equation (20.5) is shown in Fig. 
20-2, along with the plant and measurement system block diagram (upper portion) for generating the needed input 
signals for the observer system (lower portion). 
Fig. 20-2 
EXAMPLE 20.4. Under suitable conditions, which include controllability and observability of the plant to be 
controlled, a separation principle applies and the state feedback portion (matrix G) and observer portion (matrix 
L) of a state feedback control system (with y i= x) can be designed independently. A block diagram of the 
combined systems is shown in Fig. 20-3. 

483 
C H A P . 20] 
A D V A N C E D TOPICS I N C O N T R O L SYSTEMS A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N 
Fig. 20-3 
We have omitted many details in this introductory material, and state feedback control systems are 
often more complex than described above. 
20.4 
CONTROL SYSTEMS WITH RANDOM INPUTS 
System stimuli often include random or otherwise "unknown" components. This means that input 
functions may sometimes be more appropriately described probabilistically than deterministically. Such 
excitations are called random processes. System disturbances n (Definition 2.21), illustrated in several 
previous chapters, are sometimes represented by random process models in modern control theory and 
practice. 
A random process can be viewed as a function of two variables, t and TJ, where / represents time 
and r/ a random event. The value of rj is determined by chance. 
EXAMPLE 20.5. 
A particular random process is denoted by x(t, TJ). The random event rj is the result of tossing 
an unbiased coin; heads or tails appears with equal probability. We define 
. 
. 
( a unit step function if TJ = heads 
\ a unit ramp function if rj = tails 
Thus x(t, TJ) consists of two simple functions but is a random process because chance dictates which function 
occurs. 
In practice, random processes consist of an infinity of possible time functions, called realizations, 
and we usually cannot describe them as explicitly as the one in Example 20.5. Instead, they must be 
described, in a statistical sense, by averages over all possible functions of time. The performance criteria 
discussed previously have all been related to specific inputs (e.g., KP is defined for a unit step input, MP 
and 4>VM for sine waves). But satisfaction of performance specifications defined for one input signal 
does not necessarily guarantee satisfaction for others. Therefore, for a random input, we cannot design 
for a particular signal, such as step function, but must design for the statistical average of random input 
signals. 
EXAMPLE 20.6. 
The unit feedback system in Fig. 20-4 is excited by a random process input r having an infinity 
of possibilities. We want to determine compensation so that the error e is not excessive. There are an infinity of 
possibilities for r and, therefore, for e. Hence we cannot ask that each possible error satisfy given performance 
criteria but only that average errors be small. For instance, we might ask that Gx be chosen from the set of all 
causal systems such that, as time goes to infinity, the statistical average of e
2(t) does not exceed some constant, or 
is minimized. 
Fig. 20-4 

484 
A D V A N C E D TOPICS I N C O N T R O L SYSTEMS A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N 
[CHAP. 20 
The study of random processes in control systems, often called stochastic control theory, is an 
advanced level subject in applied mathematics. 
20.5 
OPTIMAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 
The design problems discussed in earlier chapters are, in an elementary sense, optimal control 
problems. The classical measures of system performance such as steady state error, gain margin, and 
phase margin are essentially criteria of optimality, and control system compensators are designed to 
meet these requirements. In more general optimal control problems, the system measure of perfor­
mance, or performance index, is not fixed beforehand. Instead, compensation is chosen so that the 
performance index is maximized or minimized. The value of the performance index is unknown until 
the completion of the optimization process. 
In many problems, the performance index is a measure or function of the error e(t) between the 
actual and ideal responses. It is formulated in terms of the design parameters chosen, to optimize the 
performance index, subject to existing physical constraints. 
EXAMPLE 20.7. 
For the system illustrated in Fig. 20-5 we want to find a K> 0 such that the integral of the 
square of the error e is minimized when the input is a unit step function. Since e= e(t) is not constant, but a 
function of time, we can formulate this problem as follows: Choose K> 0 such that j™e
2(t) dt is minimized, where 
Fig. 20-5 
The solution may be obtained for ^ > 1 using conventional minimization techniques of integral calculus, as 
follows: 
Integration yields 
But 
Therefore 

485 
A D V A N C E D TOPICS I N C O N T R O L SYSTEMS A N A L Y S I S A N D D E S I G N 
C H A P . 20] 
The first derivative of 
with respect to K is given by 
Apparently, f^e
2(t) dt decreases monotonically as K increases. Therefore the optimal value of K is K= oo, which 
is of course unrealizable. For this value of K, 
Note also that the natural frequency to,, of the optimal system is to„ = y/~K = oo and the damping ratio £ = 1 /to,, = 0, 
making it marginally stable. Therefore only a suboptimal (less than optimal) system can be practically realized and 
its design depends on the specific application. 
Typical optimal control problems, however, are much more complex than this simple example and 
they require more sophisticated mathematical techniques for their solution. W e do little more here than 
mention their existence. 
20.6 ADAPTIVE CONTROL SYSTEMS 
In some control systems, certain parameters are either not constant, or they vary i n an unknown 
manner. In Chapter 9 we illustrated one way of minimizing the effects of such contingencies by 
designing for minimum sensitivity. If, however, parameter variations are large or very rapid, it may be 
desirable to design for the capability of continuously measuring them and changing the compensation 
so that system performance criteria are always satisfied. This is called adaptive control design. 
EXAMPLE 20.8. 
Figure 20-6 depicts an example block diagram of an adaptive control system. The parameters A 
and B of the plant are known to vary with time. The block labeled "Identification and Parameter Adjustment" 
continuously measures the input u(t) and output c(t) of the plant to identify (quantify) the parameters A and B. 
In this manner, a and b of the lead compensator are modified by the output of this element to satisfy system 
specifications. The design of the Identification and Parameter Adjustment block is the major problem of adaptive 
control, another subject requiring advanced knowledge of applied mathematics. 
Fig. 20-6 

Appendix A 
Some Laplace Transform Pairs Useful 
for Control Systems Analysis 
unit impulse 
delayed impulse 
486 

487 
L A P L A C E T R A N S F O R M PAIRS F O R C O N T R O L A N A L Y S I S 
A P P . A] 
unit step 
delayed step 
rectangular pulse 
unit ramp 

Appendix B 
Some z-Transform Pairs Useful 
for Control Systems Analysis 
k th term of time sequenct 
at 
elsewhere 
(Kronecker delta sequence) 
A is any complex number 
unit step sequence 
unit ramp sequence 
488 

References and Bibliography 
1. 
Churchill, R. V. and Brown. J. W., Complex Variables and Applications, Fourth Edition, M c G r a w -
H i l l , N e w York, 1984. 
2. 
Hartline, H . K . and Ratliff, F., "Inhibitory Interaction of Receptor 
Units in the Eye of the 
Limulus." J. Gen. Physiol., 40:357. 1957. 
3. 
Bliss, J. C . and Macurdy, W . B.. "Linear Models for Contrast Phenomena," J. Optical Soc. 
America, 51:1375, 1961. 
4. 
Reichardt, W . and MacGinitie, " O n the Theory of Lateral Inhibition," Kybernetk 
(German), 
1:155, 1962. 
5. 
Desoer, C . A . , " A General Formulation of the Nyquist Criterion," IEEE Transactions on Circuit 
Theory, V o l . CT-12, N o . 2, June 1965. 
6. 
K r a l l , A . M . , " A n Extension and Proof of the Root-Locus Method," Journal of the Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, V o l . 9, N o . 4, December 1961, pp. 644-653. 
7. 
Wiberg, D . M . , State Space and Linear Systems, Sehaum Outline Series, M c G r a w - H i l l , N e w Y o r k , 
1971. 
8. 
LaSalle, .1. and Lefschetz, S., Stability by Liapunov's Direct Method, with Applications, Academic 
Press, N e w York, 1958. 
9. 
Lindorfl, D . P., Theory of Sampled-Data Control Systems, John Wiley & Sons, N e w Y o r k , 1965. 
10. 
Astrom, K . J. and Wittenmark, B., Computer Controlled Systems, Prentice-Hal I, Englewood Cliffs. 
New Jersey, 1984. 
11. 
Leigh, J. R., Applied Digital Control, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N e w Jersey, 1985. 
12. 
Chen. C . T., Introduction to Linear System Theory, Second Edition, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
New Y o r k , 1985. 
13. 
Truxal, J. G . , Automatic Feedback Control System Synthesis, M c G r a w - H i l l , N e w Y o r k , 1955. 
14. 
Aizerman, M . A . , Theory of Automatic Control, Addison-Wcsley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1963. 
15. 
Bode, H . W., Network Analysis and Feedback Amplifier Design, V a n Nostrand, Princeton, N e w 
Jersey, 1945. 
16. 
Brown, G . S. and Campbell, D . P., Principles of Servomechanisms, John Wiley, N e w York, 1948. 
17. 
James, H . M . , Nichols, N . B. and Phillips, R. S., Theory of Servomechanisms, M c G r a w - H i l l , N e w 
York, 1947. 
18. 
K u o , B. C , Automatic Control Systems, Fifth Edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N e w Jersey 
1987. 
489 

This page intentionally left blank 

491 
Appendix C 
SAMPLE Screens From 
The Companion Interactive Outline 
A s described on the back cover, this book has a companion Interactive Schaum's Outline using 
M a t h c a d ^ which is designed to help you learn the subject matter more quickly and effectively. The 
Interactive Outline uses the L I V E - M A T H environment of Mathcad technical calculation software to give you 
on-screen access to approximately 100 representative solved problems from this book, along with summaries 
of key theoretical points and electronic cross-referencing and hyperlinking. The following pages reproduce a 
representative 
sample of screens from the Interactive Outline and will help you understand the powerful 
capabilities of this electronic learning tool. Compare these screens with the associated solved problems from 
this book (the corresponding page numbers are listed at the start of each problem) to see how one 
complements the other. 
In the Interactive Schaum's Outline, you'll find all related text, diagrams, and equations for a particular 
solved problem together on your computer screen. A s you can see on the following pages, all the math 
appears in familiar notation, including units. The format differences you may notice between the printed 
Schaum 's Outline and the Interactive Outline are designed to encourage your interaction with the material or 
show you alternate ways to solve challenging problems. 
A s you view the following pages, keep in mind that every number, formula, and graph shown is 
completely interactive when viewed on the computer screen. Y o u can change the starting parameters of a 
problem and watch as new output graphs are calculated before your eyes; you can change any equation and 
immediately see the effect of the numerical calculations on the solution. Every equation, graph, and number 
you see is available for experimentation. Each adapted solved problem becomes a worksheet you can modify 
to solve dozens of related problems. The companion Interactive Outline thus will help you to learn and retain 
the material taught in this book more effectively and can also serve as a working problem-solving tool. 
The Mathcad icon shown on the right is printed throughout this Schaum's Outline, indicating 
which problems are included in the Interactive Outline. 
For more information about system requirements and the availability of titles in Schaum's Interactive 
Outline Series, please see the back cover. 
Mathcad is a registered trademark of MathSoft, Inc. 

492 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Stability of Discrete-Time Systems 
(Schaum's Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd ed., Solved Problem 5.22, pp. 124 - 125) 
Statement 
Is the system with the following characteristic equation stable? 
System 
In this problem, a numerical root-finding method is used which is justified 
Parameters 
in detail in Appendix D. For now, you may want to just follow along, and 
concentrate on the stability question. Create a vector of the polynomial 
coefficients, up to the n - 1 power in the equation, starting with the 
zeroth-order term. 
Coefficient of the nth power term: 
Solution 
Find the number of coefficients in the vector, and create a subdiagonal 
matrix of ones. 
length(coeff) 
This is the subdiagonal matrix. For more 
information on the range variables and matrix 
functions used here, see A Mathcad Tutorial. 
Solve for the eigenvalues of the matrix constructed from C and the 
coefficient vector. These are the roots of the equation. 
eigenvals augment 

493 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
The roots of the equation are 
In order to graph these solutions, index them with a range variable: 
length 
Since this is a discrete-time system, the stability requirement is that 
the roots lie inside the unit circle. This will be graphed parametrically 
using sines and cosines, so define the range for 0. 
The z-plane diagram for this system is 
roots 
Real axis 
Because not all the roots are inside the unit circle, the system is unstable. 
You should take time to carefully examine the numerical root-finding 
technique shown here; it will be used throughout this Electronic Book. 
Also, try changing the numbers in the vector of coefficients, coeff. See 
what sorts of discrete-time systems are stable. Can you find one? Can 
you find one that's marginally stable? What happens when you change the 
coefficient of the nth term, A? 

494 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Lag Compensator 
(Schaum's Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd ed., Solved Problems 6.13 and 6.16, 
pp. 138 and 139) 
Statement 
(a) Derive the transfer function of the R-C network implementation of the lag 
compensator shown in the figure below, (b) Derive the transfer function of two 
simple lag networks connected in cascade. 
System 
Parameters 
Q. -- ohm 
uF= 10
 6-farad 
In order to graph the results, we use the following specific circuit element 
values, which are defined globally with the graphs below. 
Solution 
Kirchhoff's voltage law and constitutive relationships (Ohm's law) for the loop 
yield the equation 
(a) 
assuming zero initial conditions. Taking the Laplace transform of these two 
equations results in the equation 
Notice that this is the same expression which would have resulted if we 
used the expression 1/(C*s) for the impedance of the capacitor in 
Kirchhoff's voltage law. Since the transfer function is the ratio of the output 
to the input, find PLAG(
s) =
 vo(
s)
/ vi(
s)
: 

495 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
This gives 
Compare this to the definition of a lag compensator given in Chapter 6. Here, 
where -a is the pole of the system. To graph the frequency response, define 
a suitable range for a>. 
By changing the values of circuit elements below, examine their effect on the 
characteristics of the frequency response curves shown in the figures. 
Magnitude 
Phase 
Notice that these graphs are in semilog scale. We can see that this is a lag 
compensator from the graph of the phase: the response lags the input for all 
frequencies. It is possible to examine the simple lag network by setting R2 
equal to zero. 

496 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
(b) 
Suppose we examine the situation in which two simple lag 
networks are connected in cascade. 
Using a voltage divider and the Laplace transform expression for the 
impedances, 
simplifies to 
Using a second voltage divider, we obtain 
which, after expansion, becomes 

497 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
The expression for V 0 results in the transfer function 
Experiment with the two capacitor values to see their effect on the lag 
compensator output. 
Magnitude 
Phase 
Compare the single-stage and two-stage simple lag compensators: 
single 
double 
The second-order pole on the two-stage compensator greatly increases the 
amount of lag achieved in phase. Think about how you would use this 
information to best implement a compensator. Is the two-stage system 
stable? What would you do if you wished to add lag to a circuit operating at 
higher frequencies (notice that the response is almost zero at 1000 
rad/sec)? 

498 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Frequency vs. Time-Domain Specifications 
(Schaum's Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd ed., Example Problems 10.2 and 10.3, 
pp.233 - 235) 
Statement 
Using the second order system shown first in Chapter 3. compare the 
frequency and time-domain specifications and plots. 
System 
Parameters 
(These parameters are defined globally next to the graphs at the end of the 
problem, so you may experiment with them and watch the change in the 
graphs simultaneously.) 
Solution 
Beginning with the frequency-domain, examine the resonant peak, the cutoff 
frequency, and the bandwidth. The equation for the magnitude of the impulse 
response of the canonical second-order system is 
The magnitude of the response, in dB, is 
To find the peak value, take the derivative, as was done in Chapter 10. 
Find the frequency at which the derivative is zero. 
Check: 
This is very close to zero, so cop is a good approximation of the resonant 
frequency. 

499 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
The magnitude of the resonance peak is given by 
The magnitude of the peak could be used to calculate the bandwidth, but 
since this is a lowpass system, it's probably best to base the bandwidth 
calculation on the value of the transfer function at dc. 
In this case, 
Check: 
which corresponds, as we expect, to a 3 decibel drop. The bandwidth is equal 
to the cutoff frequency, in this case, since the first cutoff frequency is zero. 
The time-domain output of the system is 
In the time-domain, examine the overshoot and the dominant time constant. 
The dominant time constant is given by inspection of the solution, from which 
you can see that the transient response is the decaying exponential. The 
time constant is the multiplier in this exponential, described as the function 
envelope(t) above. 

500 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
The overshoot, as defined in Chapter 10. is the maximum difference between 
the transient and steady state solutions for a unit step input. We can find this 
value using derivatives and the root function, as above: 
Guess: 
Find the time at which the derivative is zero. 
The value at this point is 
The steady-state value is approximately the value after 5 time constants: 
So the overshoot is 
Now plot both the time and the frequency response, and display the various 
specifications on the graphs with markers. 
Create a time scale: 
To evenly space points on a logarithmic scale, use the following definitions to 
create the frequency range. 
number of points: 
step size: 
range variable: 

501 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Change 
these: 
Experiment with the values of the natural frequency and the damping ratio 
defined next to the graphs. As always, the accuracy of the answers you get 
wilt depend somewhat on the guess value you choose for the root-finding 
routines. An effort has been made to build a guess which works for most 
values, but be careful to check that answers make physical sense. You may 
need to adjust the guess in some extreme cases. 
What happens to the various specifications as the damping ratio changes? 
What about the natural frequency? What does this tell you in terms of 
system design? 

502 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Nyquist Analysis of Time-Delayed Systems 
(Schaum's Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd ed., Supplementary Problem 11.80, p. 296) 
Statement 
Plot the Nyquist diagram for the following for time delayed GH(s) shown below 
System 
Parameters 
G H 
Solution 
Parametrize the path in the s-plane in four pieces: 
Number of points per segment: 
Small deviation around pole: 
Radius of semicircle in the s-plane: 
Draw a semicircle around the pole on the jro-axis. 
Draw a line on the jra-axis from small radius p to large radius R. 
Draw a semicircle of radius R. 
Draw a line on the jo-axis from large radius R to small radius p. 
Close the path and index it: 

503 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Here is the Nyquist diagram for this system. Each part of the path above is 
mapped with a different line type (solid, dashed, etc.). 
Here's an expanded view of the central structure: 
The time delay introduces a diminishing spiral to the Nyquist plot of the 
open-loop transfer function, which spirals in with increasing frequency along 
the Nyquist path, and back out as the Nyquist path frequency returns to 
zero. This spiral is superimposed upon the familiar structure you've seen 
before for a type 1 system in Chapter 11. 

504 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Gain Factor Compensation Using the Root Locus Method 
(Schaum's Feedback and Control Systems, 2nd ed., Solved Problem 14.1, p. 354) 
Statement 
Determine the value of the gain factor K for which the system with the 
open-loop transfer function GH{s) below has closed loop poles with a 
damping ratio of C-
System 
Parameters 
Solution 
The closed loop poles will have a damping ratio of £ when they make an angle 
of 9 degrees with the negative real axis, where 9 is defined below. 
We need the value of K at which the root-locus crosses the £ line in the 
s-plane. Do this graphically and analytically in order to verify the answer. 
Refer to Chapter 13 to review how to plot root-loci in Mathcad. 
Load the Symbolic Processor from the Symbolic menu. Then, select the 
expanded equation for C/R above, and choose Simplify from the Symbolic 
menu. This produces the expression for the system characteristic equation 
(Chapter 61 in the denominator: 

505 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
Solving for the roots of this equation, as shown in Appendix D. 
The graph of the £ line is simply a graph of a line with a slope of 0 degrees, 
where the angle was found above. Plot that line by defining x and y(x) and 
including them on the root-locus plot. 
Change p to see the direction in which the root locus moves with change in 
gain. This moves the boxes on the trace. 

506 
MATHCAD SAMPLES 
If you change the value of p so that one of the boxes moves onto the 
intersection point of the loci and the damping line, you'll find an approximate 
value for the desired gain factor, K p. You can graphically read the value of s 
at which the intersection occurs. Use these values as starting guesses for 
a Solve Block: 
Use the three constraints on the values of s and K: 
Given 
damping ratio constraint 
angle constraint (Chapter 13) 
magnitude constraint (Chapter 13) 
Check the solution: 
You should try changing the required value of the damping ratio to see 
the way the required gain compensation changes. If you do this, 
remember that you may have to change the guess values for s and K to 
get a correct answer from the Solve Block above. See A Mathcad 
Tutorial for more information on Solve Blocks. 

Index 
507 
acceleration error constant, 217 
accclerometer, 144 
accuracy, 4 
actuating signal, 18, 156 
A / D converter, 19, 38 
adaptive control systems, 485 
addition rule, 180 
airplane control, 3 
algebraic design (synthesis) of digital systems, 238 
analog 
computer, 204 
control system, 5 
analog signal, 4 
analog-to-digital ( A / D ) converter. 19 
analysis methods 
Bode. 364 
Nichols, 411 
Nyquist, 246 
root-locus, 319 
time-domain, 39-73, 453-466 
angle criterion, 320, 330 
arrival angles. 324. 335 
asymptotes (root-locus). 322, 332 
asymptotic 
approximations, 368, 380 
errors, 369 
asymptotically stable, 464 
autopilot, 3, 28 
auxiliary equation, 116 
automobile driving control system. 3, 27 
automobile power steering apparatus, 22 
backlash, 467 
bandwidth, 4, 232, 241. 302. 305, 306, 314, 317, 376. 439 
baroreceptors, 146 
bilinear 
equation, 41 
transformation, 119, 236, 377, 395 
binary signal, 5 
biological control systems, 2, 3, 7, 10, 13, 27, 28, 32, 33, 35, 
37, 59, 146, 176 
block, 15 
block diagram, 15, 23, 154 
reduction, 160, 164, 170, 187, 199 
transformations, 156, 166 
blood pressure control system, 32 
Bode 
analysis, 364 
analysis and design of discrete-time systems, 377, 395 
design, 387 
form, 365, 379 
gain, 365, 379, 387 
magnitude plot, 364 
phase angie plot, 364 
plots. 364, 379, 387 
sensitivity, 209 
branch, 179 
breakaway points, 322. 334 
calibrate. 3 
cancellation compensation, 344 
canonical (form) feedback system, 156, 164 
cascade compensation, 235 
Cauchy's integral law, 134 
causal system, 45, 57, 73, 148 
causality, 57, 73 
cause-and-effect, 4 
center of asymptotes, 322 
characteristic equation, 42, 52. 62. 156. 184, 319 
distinct roots. 43 
repeated roots, 43 
characteristic polynomial. 42. 62, 80, 81, 128, 132 
classification of control systems. 214, 224 
closed contour. 248 
closed-loop, 3. 9 
frequency response, 376, 384, 419, 429 
poles. 327, 329 
transfer function, 155, 156, 326. 339 
eofaetor, 53 
cotl'eemaker control system, 12 
command, 1, 21 
compensation 
active. 236 
cancellation, 344, 355 
cascade. 235 
feedback. 235, 353, 360, 408 
gain factor, 299, 301. 310, 343, 354, 387, 399, 433, 434, 
444 
lag, 304. 345, 392, 402, 438 
lag-lead, 306, 311, 393, 405. 440 
lead, 302, 311, 345, 388, 399, 435 
magnitude, 345, 357 
passive. 236 
phase, 344. 356, 447 
tachometric, 312 
compensators, analog and digital 
derivative (D), 312 
integral (/), 22 
lag, 130, 133, 138, 139, 314, 392, 438 
lag-lead, 130, 138, 393, 440 
lead, 129, 132, 137, 210, 388, 435 
P1D, 22, 130, 308 
proportional (P), 22 
complex 
convolution, 76, 102 
form, 250 
function, 246 
plane, 95 
translation, 76 
component, 15 
compound interest, 12, 39 
computer-aided-design (CAD), 236 

508 
I N D E X 
computer controlled system, 20. 35 
conditional stability. 301 
conformal mapping, 249, 272 
conjugate .symmetry. 252 
continued fraction stability criterion, 117. 123 
continuous-time (-data) 
control system, 5 
signal, 4 
contour integral. 75. 87 
control, t 
action, 3, 9 
algorithms (laws), 22, 469 
ratio, 158 
signal, 17 
subsystem, 2 
system. 1 
system engineering problem, 6 
system models. 6 
controllability. 480 
matrix, 480 
controllable. 480 
controlled 
output, 17 
system, 17 
variable, 4 
controllers, 22 (see alio compensators, compensation) 
convolution 
integral, 45. 56, 72. 76 
sum, 53. 70, 87 
corner frequency. 369 
cutoff 
frequency. 232 
rate, 233 
D / A converter. 20, 38 
damped natural frequency. 48, 98 
damping 
coefficient. 48 
ratio, 48, 98, 264. 329. 341 
data hold, 19 
db magnitude. 364 
db magnitude-phase angle plots. 411. 421 
d.c. 
gain, 130, 132 
input, 130 
motor, 143 
deadbeat 
response. 239. 355, 362 
system, 239, 362 
dead zone, 467 
decibel. 233 
degree of a polynomial, 267 
delay time. 2.32, 234 
departure angles, 323, 335 
derivative controller, 22 
Descartes* rule of signs, 93, 107 
describing functions, 466, 476 
design 
by analysis, 6. 236 
Bode. 387, 395 
methods, 236 
Nichols, 433, ^43 
Nyquist, 299 
objectives, 231 
point, 352. 359 
root-loeus, 343 
by synthesis, 6, 236 
determinant, 53 
difference equations, 39, 51. 54. 69 
differential equations, 39 
linear, 41, 57, 62 
nonlinear, 41. 62. 457 
ordinary, 40 
solutions. 44. 51. 65. 91. 104 
time-invariant, 40. 61, 45S 
time-variable (time-varying), 40, 61 
differential operator, 42 
diffusion equation, 39 
digital 
data. 4 
filter. 20 
lag compensator, f 33, 314, 347 
lead eompensator, 132, 315, 316 
signal (data), 4. 18 
digital control system, 5 
digital-to-analog converter, 20. 38 
dipole. 345 
discrete-time (digital) data 
.signal, 4 
control system. 5 
discrete-time (digital) system "integrators," 254 
discretization of differentiaf equations, 55 
disturbance. 21, 483 
dominant pole-zero approximations. 348, 354, 358 
dominant time constant, 234, 305, 306, 439 
economic control systems, 10. 12. 13, 175 
element. 15 
emitter follower. 35 
enclosed. 248. 274 
entire functions, 266 
equalizers, 235 
error 
detector, 21 
ratio, 158 
signal, tS. 484 
error constants. 218, 225 
acceleration. 217, 227 
parabolic. 219. 227 
position. 216. 227 
ramp. 216, 218, 227 
step, 218, 227 
velocity. 216, 227 
Euler form. 250 
experimental frequency response data, 246, 251, 277 
exponential order, 86 
external disturbances. 2, 4 
Faraday's law, 57 
feedback, 3, 4, 9, 481 
characteristics. 4 
compensation. 235, 353, 4K1 
loop, 182 
path. 17. 182 
potentiometer, 29 
transfer function, 156 
feedforward, 17 
fictitious sampler, 134. 244 

509 
I N D E X 
Final Value Theorem, 76, 88. 132 
lirst-order hold, 152 
forced response, 45, 66, 70, 80, 81, 91 
forward 
path, 17. 182 
transfer function, 5 56 
free response, 44, 66. 70. 80, 81. 91 
frequency 
corner. 369 
cutoff. 232 
damped natural, 48, 98 
gain crossover, 231. 263, 416 
phase crossover, 231, 262. 416 
scaling, 76, 77 
undamped natural, 48. 98 
frequency-domain specifications, 231 
methods for nonlinear svstems, 466, 476 
frequency response, 130, 133 
continuous time. 130. 141 
discrete-time, 133, 142 
methods for nonlinear svstems, 466, 476 
fundamental sel, 43, 52, 63, 73 
fundamental theorem of algebra, 42. 83 
furnace, 2 
gam, 131. 133, 182 
crossover frequency. 231, 263, 416 
margin, 231, 241, 262, 328, 340, 375. 384. 386, 416, 425 
gain factor. 129 
compensation. 299, 310. 343, 387. 399, 433, 434, 444 
general input-output gain formula, 184, 194 
generalized Nyquist paths, 254 
generator (electrical), 7 
generic transfer function, 251 
graphical evaluation of residues, 96 
gyroscope, 145 
heading, 3 
heater control, 2, 5 
hold, 19. 60. 134 
homogeneous differential equation, 42, 43, 44 
hormone conlrol systems, 33. 35 
Horner's method, 93, 107 
Hurwitz stability criterion, 116, 122 
hybrid control systems, 5 
hysteresis, 34, 467, 478 
/-controller, 22 
impulse train, 60 
independent variable, 4 
initial 
conditions, 44 
value problem, 44, 51 
initial value theorem, 76, 88 
input, 2 
node, 181 
input-output gain formula, 184 
insensitive, 209 
instability, 4 
integral controller, 22 
intersample ripple, 240 
inverse 
Laplace transform, 75, 100, 107 
z-transform, 87 
Jury 
array, 118, 125 
test, 118, 125 
Kepler's Laws, 58 
Kirchhol'fs Laws. 58. 111. 183 
Kronecker delta 
response, 53. 91. 132, 142 
sequence. 53, S9 
lag 
compensation. 304, 345 
compensator. 130, 133. 392. 438 
continuous, 130 
digital, 133, 314 
lag-lead compensator. 130, 306. 393, 440 
Laplace transform, 74, 99. 486 
properties, 75, 100 
tables. 78, 486 
lateral inhibition, 59 
law
: of supply and demand, 10, 175 
lead compensation. 302, 345 
lead compensator. 129, 132, 345. 388, 435 
continuous. 129 
digital, 132. 315 
left-half-plane. 96 
lit"thridge control system, 13 
lighting control system, 11, 31 
Lin-Hairstow method, 94, 108 
linear 
differential equations, 41. 57, 62 
equation. 41 
system, 56 
system solutions, 65, 79 
term, 41 
transformation, 56, 75, 87 
linearity, 56, 71 
linearization 
of nonlinear digital systems, 458 
of nonlinear equations, 457, 469 
linearly dependent. 42. 481 
linearly independent, 42. 63, 481 
loading effects, 29, 155, 164, 187, 198 
logarithmic scales, 364 
loop gain, 182 
Lyapunov function, 464 
Lyapunov's stability criterion, 463. 474, 479 
magnitude, 250 
compensation, 345 
criterion, 321 
manipulated variable, 17 
mapping, 247, 249, 266 
marginally stable. 114 
matrix exponential function. 51, 69 
M-circles, 263. 290. 301 
microprocessor. 18 
M I M O . 21 
system, 50, 55, 167 
minimum phase, 129 
mirror, 1 
mixed continuous/discrete systems, 134, 155 
modulated signal, 60 
multiinput-multioutput, 21, 50, 55. 171 

510 
I N D E X 
multiple inputs, 159, 167 
multiple-valued function, 271 
multiplication rule, 181 
multivariable system, 21 
/V-circles, 263, 290 
negative encirclement, 249 
negative feedback, 18, 156 
system, 156 
Newton's method, 94, 108 
Newton's second law, 39 
Nichols chart. 417, 419, 426 
design, 433 
design of discrete-time systems, 443 
plot, 419 
node, 179 
noise input, 2, 21 
nominal transfer function, 208 
nonlinear 
control systems. 453 
differential system (of equations), 457 
equation, 41 
output equations. 457 
n th-order differential operator, 42 
number of loci, 321 
Nyquist 
analysis, 246 
design, 299 
Path, 253, 279, 287, 297 
Stability Criterion. 260, 286 
Stability Plots for continuous systems, 256. 279 
Stability Plots for discrete-time (digital) systems, 259 
observability, 480 
matrix, 480 
observable, 480 
observer design matrix, 482 
Ohm's law, 39 
on-off controller, 22, 34, 460 
open-loop, 3, 9 
frequency response function, 231, 232, 251 
transfer function, 156, 231 
optimal control systems, 460, 484 
order, 44 
ordinary differential equation, 40 
oscillation, 4 
output, 2 
node, 182 
sensitivity, 213 
oven temperature control, 12, 35 
overshoot, 49, 69, 234 
parabolic error constant, 219 
partial 
differential equation, 40 
fraction expansion, 83, 85, 90, 105 
path, 181 
gain, 182 
/"-controller, 22 
P D controller, 22 
pendulum equations, 455 
performance index, 484 
performance specifications, 231, 484 
frequency-domain, 231 
steady state, 234 
time-domain, 234 
transient, 234. 484 
perspiration control system, 2 
perturbation equations, 457, 470 
phase 
angle, 250 
compensation, 344 
crossover frequency, 231, 262. 416 
margin, 231, 241, 263, 328, 340, 375, 384, 386, 416, 425 
plane, 458, 459, 572 
photocell detector, 11 
physically realizable, 57 
PI controller, 22 
PID controller, 22, 130, 308 
piecewise-continuous, 19 
piecewise-linearization, 454, 469 
pilot, 3 
plant, 17 
point design, 352, 359 
pointing (directional) control system, 2 
polar form, 250 
Polar Plot, 250, 276, 291 
properties, 252, 276 
poles, 95 
pole-zero map, 95, 109 
polynomial 
factoring, 93, 330 
functions. 93, 267, 330 
Popov's Stability Criterion, 468 
position 
error constant, 215, 227 
servomechanism, 22, 29 
positive 
definite matrix, 465 
direction. 248 
encirclement, 248 
feedback, 18, 156 
feedback system, 156 
power steering, 22 
prediction, 73 
primary 
feedback ratio, 156 
feedback signal, 18, 156 
principle 
of arguments, 249, 273 
of superposition, 56, 72 
process, 17 
proportional controller, 22 
/>(i)-plane, 247 
P(z)-plane, 
247 
pulse transfer function, 147 
radar controlled systems, 13 
radius of convergence, 86 
ramp error constant. 218 
random 
event, 483 
inputs, 483 
processes, 483 
rational (algebraic) functions, 81, 83, 89, 95, 96, 268 

511 
I N D E X 
real 
function. 246 
variable. 246 
realizations, 483 
rectangular form, 251 
reference input, 17 
refrigeration control, 12 
regulate, 1 
regulating system, 23, 36 
regulator, 23 
relative stability, 114, 262, 289, 375, 384, 416 
residues, 84 
graphical evaluation of, 96, 109, 140 
resonance peak, 233, 264 
right-half-plane, 96 
rise time, 234, 242 
R-L-C networks, 36 
robust, 213 
robustness, 213 
root-locus 
analysis. 319 
construction, 324 
design, 343 
roots, 42 
distinct, 43 
of polynomials, 93 
repeated, 43 
Routh Stability Criterion, 115, 121 
Routh table, 121 
rudder position control system, 13 
sampled-data control systems, 5, 36 
sampled-data signal, 4, 19, 149 
samplers, 18, 60, 112, 147, 155, 173, 177 
samplers in control systems, 112, 147, 155, 173, 177 
sampling theorem, 233 
satellite equations, 58, 454, 471 
saturation function, 454 
screening property, 47 
second-order systems, 48, 68, 98, 110 
self-loop, 182 
sensitivity, 208 
closed-loop, 211, 407 
coefficient, 213 
frequency response, 208. 221, 407 
normalized, 209 
open-loop, 211 
output, 213 
relative, 209 
time-domain, 213, 223 
transfer function, 208, 221 
separation principle, 482 
servoamplifier, 29 
servomechanisms, 22, 29, 35 
servomotor, 29 
setpoint, 2, 6, 23 
settling time, 234 
shift operator, 52 
shift theorem, 88, 112 
signal flow graphs, 179, 189 
simple hold, 19 
singular point, 248, 464 
singularity, 248 
singularity functions, 47, 67 
sink, 182 
sinusoidal transfer function, 246, 251 
SISO, 16 
source, 181 
speed control system, 30 
s-plane, 247 
spring-mass system equations, 454 
stability, 114, 464 
asymptotic, 464 
continued fraction, 117, 123 
criteria, 114, 463 
Hurwitz, 116, 122 
Jury test, 118, 125 
Lyapunov, 463, 479 
marginal. 114 
Popov. 468 
relative, 114 
Routh, 115, 121, 126 
state 
estimator, 482 
feedback control design. 481 
observer, 482 
space, 480 
variable representations (models), 50, 54, 55, 69, 457, 
464, 480 
vector, 50, 55 
vector solutions, 51, 55 
steady state 
errors, 225, 229 
response, 46, 54 
step error constant, 218 
stimulus, 21 
stochastic control theory, 484 
stock market investment control system, 12 
suboptimal, 485 
subsystem, 2 
summing point, 15, 27 
superposition, 56, 71, 159 
switch (electric), 2, 26 
switching curve. 461 
Sylvester's theorem, 465 
system, 1 
tachometer 
feedback, 165 
transfer function, 144 
takeoff point, 16 
Taylor series approximations, 455, 470 
temperature control system, 5, 27, 34 
term, 40 
test input, 21 
thermostat, 2, 5, 27, 34 
thermostatically controlled system, 5 
time 
constant. 48 
delay, 73, 76, 126, 246, 284 
response, 21, 130, 139 
scaling, 76, 102 
time domain 
design, 481 
response, 51, 55, 91, 104, 326, 339 
specifications, 234 

5 1 2 
I N D E X 
time-invariant equations, 40, 458 
time-variable (time-varying) equations, 40 
toaster, 3, 35 
toilet tank control system (WC), 11. 28 
total response, 46, 54, 65, 67 
traffic control system, 10, 31 
trajectory, 459 
transducers, 21, 35 
transfer functions, 128 
continuous-time, 128, 135, 136 
derivative of, 247 
discrete-time, 132 
feedback, 156 
forward, 156 
loop. 156 
open-loop, 156 
transform 
inverse Laplace, 75 
inverse z-, 87 
Laplace, 74 
z-. S6 
transformation, 247 
transient response. 46, 54 
transition 
matrix, 51 
property. 51 
translation mapping, 266 
transmission 
function, 179 
rule, 180 
type / system, 215 
undamped natural frequency, 48, 98 
unified open-loop frequency response function, 231, 251 
uniform sampling, 233 
unit circle, 117, 255, 339 
unit impulse 
function, 47, 67 
response, 48, 67, 85 
unit ramp 
function, 47, 68 
response, 48, 68 
unit step 
function, 47, 68 
response, 48, 68 
unity 
feedback systems, 158, 167, 301, 434 
operator, 52 
unobservable, 480 
unstable, 114 
valve control svstem, 29, 36 
variation of parameters method. 70 
vector-matrix notation, 50, 69, 82 
velocity 
error constant, 216 
scrvomechanism, 30 
voltage divider, 9 
washing machine control systems, 7, 8 
weighting 
function, 45, 56, 57 
sequence. 53, 57, 70 
Wronskian, 63 
w-transform, 
119, 236, 243, 377, 443, 450 
design, 236, 377, 443, 450 
zero-order hold, 19, 60, 134, 147, 150, 151 
zeros, 95 
z-planc, 247 
z-transform, 86 
inverse. 87, 92 
properties of. 87 
tables, 89, 488 

Downloadable videos may be obtained
from McGraw-Hill Professional’s MediaCenter 
at http://mhprofessional.com/mediacenter. 
Some material may require a desktop  
or laptop computer for full access. 
Enter this eBook’s ISBN and your e-mail 
address at the MediaCenter to receive 
an e-mail message with a download link.  
This Book’s ISBN is 978-0-07-182948-9.
Back

