
School Violence

Recent Titles in the
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
Women and Crime: A Reference Handbook
Judith A. Warner
World Sports: A Reference Handbook
Maylon Hanold
Entertainment Industry: A Reference Handbook
Michael J. Haupert
World Energy Crisis: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Military Robots and Drones: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Marijuana: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Religious Nationalism: A Reference Handbook
Atalia Omer and Jason A. Springs
The Rising Costs of Higher Education: A Reference Handbook
John R. Thelin
Vaccination Controversies: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
The Animal Experimentation Debate: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Steroids and Doping in Sports: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Internet Censorship: A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, business-people,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series
will ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
School Violence
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
SECOND EDITION
Laura L. Finley

Copyright 2014 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review,
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Finley, Laura L.
School violence : a reference handbook / Laura L. Finley. —
Second edition.
pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–61069–623–4 (hardback) — ISBN 978–1–61069–
624–1 (ebook) 1. School violence—United States. 2. School
shootings—United States. 3. School violence—Law and
legislation—United States. I. Title.
LB3013.32.F563
2014
371.7082—dc23
2014021906
ISBN: 978–1–61069–623–4
EISBN: 978–1–61069–624–1
18 17 16 15 14
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface, xv
Acknowledgments, xix
1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY, 3
Types of School Violence, 4
Measuring School Violence, 12
Brief History of School Violence Incidents, 18
Legislation and Court Decisions, 37
Supreme Court Cases, 40
Conclusion, 47
Further Reading, 48
2
PROBLEMS, CONTROVERSIES, AND SOLUTIONS, 63
Effects of School Violence, 63
Biological Theories, 66
Psychological Theories, 70
Rational Choice Theory, 72
Social Strain Theories, 74
Social Learning Theories, 79
Social Control Theories, 81
Labeling Theories, 82
vii

Conﬂict Theories, 83
Integrated Theories, 85
Feminist Theories, 86
Risk Factors, 87
Individual, 87
Family, 94
School, 97
Community, 99
Protective Factors, 100
Individual, 100
Family, 100
School, 101
Community, 105
Interventions, 105
Anonymous Tip Lines, 105
Proﬁling, 106
Dress Codes and Uniforms, 107
Metal Detectors, 108
Video Cameras, 110
Conﬂict Resolution and Peer Mediation, 110
Peaceable Schools, 111
Restorative Justice, 112
School Police Ofﬁcers, 112
Canine Searches, 114
Zero Tolerance Laws, 115
Other Laws, 116
Conclusion, 121
Further Reading, 121
viii
Contents

3
PERSPECTIVES, 133
A Student’s Perspective on the Dangers of Bullying:
Lashanti Jupp, 133
Reﬂections on Mean Girls: Lauren Lorance, 136
Sticks and Stones Can Break My Bones, but Names
Will Never Hurt Me? Approaches to Language Mis(uses)
in Schooling: Kelly Concannon, 138
The People’s Court in a South Bronx
Elementary School: Evelyn Jackson, 142
Creating and Sustaining Positive School Climates:
De Palazzo, 145
Being Out, 152
Conﬁdentiality and LGBT Students:
It’s the Law, 154
Our Gender-Nonconforming Youth and
Transgender Youth, 156
Creating a Safe Space for All: Policies, Programs,
and Practices, 156
Federal Law, 158
State Law, 159
Local Policies and Acts, 159
Other Key Ways to Show Allyship to LGBTQ
Youth, 159
Resources, 163
Is There More School Violence Today? A Veteran
Educator Says No: Sarah Raitter, 164
Reﬂections on PeaceJam and School Violence
in the United Kingdom: Larenda Twigg, 166
Preventing School Violence: Barbara J. Wien, 176
Contents
ix

Violence as a Continuum, 176
Shifting U.S. Culture, 177
Ending War and Violence, 179
Cultivating Caring Communities, 183
How to Build Community, 184
Best Practices in Reducing School Violence, 187
Working for a Higher Purpose, 190
The Circle Model, 190
Organizing for Peace in Your Community:
Six Steps for Success, 192
References, 199
Activism against Domestic and Dating Violence:
Stephanie Wong, 200
Turning the Personal into Progress: Robert Spencer
Knotts, 204
4
PROFILES, 211
Part I, 212
Bath, Michigan, School Bombing, 212
Columbine Massacre, 215
Laurie Dann, 219
Kip Kinkel, 222
Adam Lanza, 226
Barry Loukaitis, 228
Patrick Purdy, 229
Evan Ramsey, 232
Charles Carl Roberts IV, 234
Steubenville High School Rape Case, 236
Jeff Weiss, 239
x
Contents

Phoebe Prince, Bullycide, 240
Amanda Todd, Bullycide, 241
Part II, 242
Break the Cycle, 242
Geoffrey Canada, 243
Riane Eisler, JD, 246
Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education Network
(GLSEN), 247
Jackson Katz, 249
Paul Kivel, 251
Hank Nuwer, 252
StopBullying.gov, 253
Students Against Violence Everywhere (SAVE), 255
Further Reading, 257
5
DATA AND DOCUMENTS, 265
Data, 265
Figure 5.1 Trends in school-associated violent
deaths, 1992–2010, 266
Figure 5.2 Percentage of students in grades 9–12
who reported being threatened or injured with a
weapon on school property at least one time during
the previous 12 months, by grade: Various years,
1993–2009, 266
Figure 5.3 Percentage of public and private school
teachers who reported that they were threatened
with injury or that they were physically attacked
by a student from school during the previous
12 months, by locale and instructional level:
School year 2007–2008, 267
Contents
xi

Figure 5.4 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported criminal victimization at school during the
previous six months, by type of victimization:
Various years, 1995–2009, 268
Figure 5.5 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported that gangs were present at school during the
school year, by urbanicity: 2007 and 2009, 269
Figure 5.6 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported being targets of hate-related words and
seeing hate-related grafﬁti at school during the
school year, by selected student and school
characteristics: 2009, 270
Figure 5.7 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported being bullied at school during the school
year, by selected bullying problems and sex:
2009, 271
Figure 5.8 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported cyberbullying problems anywhere during
the school year, by selected bullying problems and
sex: 2009, 272
Figure 5.9 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported avoiding school activities or one or more
places in school because of fear of attack or harm
during the school year: 2009, 273
Figure 5.10 Percentage of students ages 12–18 who
reported selected security measures at school:
Various years, 1999–2009, 274
Documents, 275
Sandy Hook Elementary School Violence Reduction
Act, 275
Safe Schools Improvement Act of 2013, 276
Barack Obama’s Statement on the School Shooting
in Newtown, Connecticut, 281
xii
Contents

The Myths about Bullying: Secretary Arne Duncan’s
Remarks at the Bullying Prevention Summit, 283
6
RESOURCES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH, 295
Books, 295
School Violence, 295
Bullying, 298
Speciﬁc Cases, 299
Hazing, 300
Civil Liberties, 300
Gender, 301
Dating and Sexual Violence, 302
Suicide, Eating Disorders, and Self-Harm, 302
Theories and Explanations, 302
Responses, 303
Media, 305
Recommended Journals, 305
Journal Articles, 2010–Present, 307
Websites and Organizations, 309
Films, 316
7
CHRONOLOGY, 323
Glossary, 339
Index, 351
About the Author, 359
Contents
xiii


Preface
It seems as though the United States is in constant recovery
from an incident of school violence. In just one week in mid-
October 2013, two teachers were killed. On October 23, 2013,
an 11-year-old brought a handgun, 400 rounds of ammunition,
and multiple kitchen knives to his middle school in Vancouver,
Washington. On Monday, October 21, a 12-year-old middle
school student in Sparks, Nevada, shot and killed a student and
teacher, then injured another student before killing himself.
That same day, a student shot at peers with an AR-15, injuring
three at a Chico, California, elementary school, and in Danvers,
Massachusetts, a 14-year-old was charged with the death of his
teacher. He allegedly used a box cutter to murder 24-year-old
math teacher Colleen Ritzer. Certainly one could ask, when will
we learn?
That young people will bully and harass their peers and
teachers, bring weapons to school, engage in dangerous hazing,
and abuse their dating partners is nothing new. And although
data do not necessarily indicate that the problem is worse now
than in previous decades, the availability of more deadly weap-
ons, the use of new technologies to harass and bully at all hours,
and the inﬂuences of violent media telling youth that this is
normal behavior are certainly different today. Because of the
nonstop stream of visual, radio, and Internet sources telling us
about these horriﬁc incidents, it is not surprising that the
majority of the U.S. public believes school violence to be a sig-
niﬁcant problem warranting dramatic interventions. Indeed, it
xv

is, although great care must be taken to ensure that the infor-
mation on which we base those interventions is accurate.
Schools should be a place in which all children are safe to
learn and grow. They are not always that, and thus it is vital
that communities continue to examine the scope and extent
of school violence, who is most likely to perpetrate and be vic-
timized by it, the forms violence takes, and why it happens.
At the same time, it is essential to get beyond stereotypes and
misconceptions that suggest only certain groups are responsible
for and victims of school violence. For example, we are far more
likely to consider today the violence faced daily in schools by
uniquely marginalized groups, including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) youth, racial and ethnic minorities,
and students with disabilities, and to see that sometimes it is
the teacher or administrator who is the perpetrator. Rejecting
stereotypical portrayals of boys pushing around other boys for
their lunch money, we know that girls too act as bullies and
may do so through spreading rumors and gossip and on social
media as well as through “traditional” physical means. Educators
today recognize that sexual harassment, dating violence, hazing,
and cyberbullying are frequent forms of violence experienced by
youth in schools. This understanding helps us assist victims and
informs our prevention practices.
Perhaps most importantly, it is crucial that we engage in criti-
cal reﬂection and thoughtful dialogue about how we respond to
each of these various forms of school violence. Too often, our fear
for the safety of our children results in poorly conceptualized and
ineffective policies and practices that in many cases do as much
harm as good. I taught at the high school level during the spate
of school shootings in the 1970s, including the April 1999
Columbine massacre. I remember the horror we all felt when we
heard and later saw what was happening at that school, as it was
the ﬁrst such incident to receive immediate and nonstop television
coverage. As dismaying as it was to see youth gone so far astray,
I was also dismayed, as were many of my peers, at the way that
many schools responded. Rather than offering troubled youth
xvi
Preface

additional support and seeking to create more positive and wel-
coming school environments, many districts, often at the
behest of worried parents, responded with punitive measures
that made schools look like, and to some students feel like, little
more than prisons.
As a professor of sociology and criminology, I believe I have
pulled together some of the best and most current data from
my ﬁeld and from others to help readers understand the nature
and dynamics of, as well as explanations for, school violence in
the United States. Although the focus is indeed domestic, sev-
eral international incidents are discussed because they too have
impacted the landscape and dialogue about the issue. I have
also drawn on my own observations as a high school teacher, a
position I held for six years prior to entering academia. And,
of course, this book is also informed by my role as a parent
and volunteer at my daughter’s elementary school. As such,
the book includes information about school violence in the
elementary, middle, and high school levels. More than just an
examination of high-proﬁle shootings or school-based bullying,
the book also addresses less discussed but no less important
forms of violence. In addition to up-to-date information about
the scope and extent of various forms of school violence, the
book also includes a timeline of signiﬁcant events, primary
source documents, and a list of recommended books, journal
articles, websites, and ﬁlms. Also included is an examination
of the major theories in criminology that can be used to explain
various forms of school violence and, subsequently, lead to
more effective responses. Further, detailed proﬁles of some of
the nation’s worst instances of school violence are included, as
are proﬁles of inspirational scholars and activists who are help-
ing create more peaceful schools. Also included are proﬁles of
important organizations doing work to keep students safe.
Additionally, the book offers brief overviews of some of the
more common responses and prevention initiatives, including
zero tolerance laws, installation of metal detectors, dress codes,
peer mediation programs, and more. Pros and cons of each, as
Preface
xvii

evidenced in scholarly research, are presented so that readers
can assess which initiatives are most effective. Finally, I am
pleased to be able to include personal reﬂections from students,
educators, and activists who are making a difference in schools
and communities every day. It is my hope that readers will ﬁnd
this an easy-to-use and well-researched tool but also one that
inspires more informed and inspired debate about how best to
keep children and youth safe in schools and, even more, how
to ensure that they are treated with the fundamental human
rights of respect and dignity.
xviii
Preface

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to the folks at ABC-CLIO who offered me the
opportunity to write this reference handbook. As a lifetime
educator and the mother of a soon-to-be middle school stu-
dent, this issue matters deeply to me. Speciﬁcally, deep grati-
tude to David Paige and Robin Tutt at ABC-CLIO for
supporting me through this process and ensuring that this book
is a timely and useful reference.
I also want to thank all those who contributed to this book,
either through research and technical support or through sub-
mitting a personal reﬂection for the Perspectives chapter. Barry
University students Korie Happy, Andrew Kappler, and Kelly
Moreno were terriﬁcally helpful in ﬁnding sources and in compil-
ing data. Contributors Kelly Concannon, Bob Knotts, Larinda
Twigg, Evelyn Jackson, Sarah Raitter, Stephanie Wong, Lauren
Lorance, Lashanti Jupp, De Palazzo, and Barbara Wien—from
the deepest of my heart, I thank you for all that you do and for
sharing it with others so that we can all improve.
Finally, I wish to thank my family for their continued sup-
port. I really like to write, and as such tend to pour myself into
projects in ways that are likely annoying, at best, to those
around me. So, Peter and Anya Finley, please know that
I appreciate your patience and unconditional love as I
immersed myself in this book.
I believe that, as an author, my duty is to do more than just
inform. Rather, I feel my task is to use this wonderful platform
as a way of supporting best practices in school violence
xix

prevention. To that end, I devote the royalties of this book to
the Humanity Project, an antibullying and student empower-
ment initiative described herein that is doing amazing things
in South Florida and beyond.
xx
Acknowledgments

School Violence


1
Background and History
While school violence has likely existed as long as have schools,
it is relatively recently that adults began to pay attention to the
issue. As more children have attended school, something that
was far from given in centuries past, so too have there been
more reported incidents of harassment, bullying, and assault
by peers as well as by educators themselves. This chapter begins
with an overview of the types of school violence. It next offers
an assessment of the scope and extent of school violence as mea-
sured by a number of research tools. In addition, the chapter
provides a brief historical overview of signiﬁcant incidents of
school violence, followed by a review of laws and court deci-
sions relevant to the issue.
In order to craft effective prevention programs and responses
to school violence, it is imperative that educators, lawmakers,
and parents have a realistic understanding of the problem.
One of the most challenging aspects of understanding school
violence is obtaining accurate data about its scope, the context
in which it occurs, and characteristics of perpetrators and vic-
tims. While these are seemingly straightforward concepts, they
are often complex to measure. One challenge lies in what, pre-
cisely, constitutes school violence. Although it is clear that acts
3
Teenager Brenda Spencer leaves court in Santa Ana, California, on October
1, 1979 after she pleaded guilty to two counts of murder in the sniper attack
on a San Diego school that left two men dead and eight children wounded.
(AP Photo)

of overt physical violence, such as punches and assaults with
weapons, should be considered school violence when they
occur on school grounds, often violence occurs in more subtle
ways. Violence can also be nonphysical, as in the violence that
occurs through racial or sexual harassment. Additionally, most
studies, and typical measurement tools, assess violence perpe-
trated in schools by and against young people. A growing body
of literature, however, shows that educators and administrators
also perpetrate violence, both against their peers and against
students. Another area of research involves what is commonly
called systemic violence. Systemic violence involves more than
actions; rather, it includes structural arrangements and methods
that result in harm. For instance, disciplinary policies that result
in students being paddled (corporal punishment) have been
considered by some to be examples of systemic violence.
Another challenge lies in precisely how we deﬁne what con-
stitutes “school.” While incidents occurring during the school
day on school grounds can be easily classiﬁed as school vio-
lence, what about acts of cyberbullying between classmates? In
many cases, both the perpetrator and the victim are not on
school grounds, but the bullying is related to school activities
or relationships. Legally, schools are liable for any violence that
results in an unsafe or ineffective school climate.
Types of School Violence
Most research shows that the most common type of school
violence is bullying. While there are many deﬁnitions of bullying,
most agree that it involves one or more persons trying to obtain
power over another through the use of a variety of verbal, social,
and physical techniques. Verbal bullying involves harassing,
degrading, or threatening remarks. Social bullying occurs when
bullies attempt to use peer pressure, rumors, and gossip to
demean and degrade victims. Physical bullying includes all
types of unwanted physical contact, from pushing to slapping
to punching and more. Some forms of bullying can also be
4
School Violence

categorized as assault, assault and battery, hazing, dating vio-
lence, and sexual assault. According to the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services stopbullying.gov website,
between one-quarter and one-third of U.S. students report
being bullied. The youth-focused organization Do Something
features bullying statistics on its website, www.dosomething
.org. These statistics show that some 3.2 million students are
bullied each year, or an estimated one in seven K–12
students. Rates are highest for middle school youth, with an
estimated 90 percent experiencing bullying. Some 56 percent
of students actually witness bullying in schools, and each
month, 282,000 students report being physically attacked by
a bully or bullies while on school grounds.
Certain groups of youth are at greater risk for experiencing
bullying in schools. Children and youth with disabilities are
victims of school violence at higher rates than their peers. In
the United States, children with disabilities—including children
with autism, children in wheelchairs, and children with learning
disorders—face routine violence in schools at higher rates than
do other students. According to a national survey on school disci-
pline conducted by Children and Adults with Attention-
Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD), about 32 percent
of kids with AD/HD are “egged on” by their peers to act out
and get into trouble. The study found that many youth with
AD/HD were victims of bullies, but when they reacted to the
bully, they were punished for poor behavior and the bully was
not. Studies show that students with visible and nonvisible dis-
abilities are subject to more bullying than nondisabled peers.
Bullying is frequently a direct result of a student’s disability.
Students with disabilities are disproportionately likely to face
peer rejection, a signiﬁcant risk factor for victimization. Many
students with disabilities have signiﬁcant social skills challenges,
either as a core trait of their disability or as a result of social
isolation due to segregated environments and/or peer rejection.
Such students may be at particular risk for bullying and victimi-
zation. For example, Little’s (2002) study of U.S. mothers
Background and History
5

found that 94 percent of children with a diagnosis of Asperger’s
syndrome faced peer victimization, with a broad swatch of
different types of victimization including emotional bullying
(75 percent), gang attacks (10 percent), and nonsexual assaults
to the genitals (15 percent).
Other research has indicated that students with a wide range
of disabilities face increased bullying victimization, including
students with physical, developmental, intellectual, emotional,
and sensory disabilities. A 2003 study found that 34 percent
of students who report taking medication for AD/HD face bul-
lying victimization at least two or three times a month, a sub-
stantial increase over the rate of bullying victimization from
other students surveyed. Wiener and Mak (2009) also found
high rates of victims among girls with attention deﬁcit and
hypertension disabilities. Langevin, Bortnick, Hammer, and
Wiebe (1998), in a Canadian study examining the relationship
between stuttering and selection as a target for bullying, found
that at least 59 percent of students studied were bullied about
their stuttering; 69 percent of students who stutter were also
bullied about other things and said bullying takes place on at
least a weekly basis.
Another group that is victimized at particularly high rates is
youth who identify as or are perceived to be lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual, or transgendered (LGBT). The National School Climate
Survey, administered every other year by the Gay, Lesbian, and
Straight Education Network (GLSEN), has found that homo-
phobic remarks, harassment, and even assault of LGBT students
is common in schools. The 2011 survey includes responses from
8,584 students between the ages of 13 and 20. Students were
from all 50 states and the District of Columbia and from 3,224
unique school districts. Results indicated that 8 out of 10
LGBT students (81.9 percent) experienced harassment at school
in the past year because of their sexual orientation, three-ﬁfths
(63.5 percent) felt unsafe at school because of their sexual orien-
tation, and nearly a third (29.8 percent) skipped a day of school
in the past month because of safety concerns.
6
School Violence

Further, the majority of students in the National School
Climate Study study who were harassed or assaulted (60.4 per-
cent) did not report it because they believed nothing would
change or that the situation might worsen. Of those who did
report, 36.7 percent said school ofﬁcials did nothing. This ﬁnd-
ing reinforces research that has continually shown that many
teachers and administrators to do little to counteract homopho-
bic attitudes. There has been very little (and in some instances
no) improvement in the quality of the learning environment
for LGBT youth. Studies have found these same patterns for
15 years, and a study reported in TES magazine found that
gay teachers are even less likely to respond out of fear for their
own job security.
This daily harassment and abuse takes a heavy toll on LGBT
youth. The 2011 National School Climate Survey found that
almost 30 percent of students skipped a class at least once in
the past month because they felt uncomfortable or unsafe,
and almost 32 percent skipped a full day of school each month
for those reasons. Students experiencing this form of bullying
have, on average, lower grade point averages and are less likely
to report that they intend to pursue postsecondary education.
They suffer from higher levels of depression and lower self-
esteem than do their peers. What is more, 50 percent of home-
less youth are LGBT, most of whom are homeless because they
were kicked out by their family (the others also run away
because of an unsafe home environment).
Another common form of bullying is cyberbullying.
According to stopbullying.gov, cyberbullying is “verbal and/or
social
aggression
carried
out
through
technology.”
Do
Something statistics show that 43 percent of school-aged youth
have been bullied online, with one-quarter of the youth saying
it happened more than once. Girls are twice as likely to be both
victims and perpetrators of cyberbulling, which youth say is
much easier to get away with than in-person bullying.
Hazing is another form of violence that may occur at school.
Hazing occurs when groups seek to initiate new recruits by
Background and History
7

forcing or coercing them to participate in humiliating, degrad-
ing, or verbally, physically, or socially injurious acts. Athletic
teams and clubs commonly haze rookies as a means of estab-
lishing a status order among group members. Hazing experts
have identiﬁed three levels of hazing. Subtle hazing is typically
not physically injurious, as it is simply intended to show that
more senior members of the group have power over the newer
members. It might involve asking new members to engage in
menial tasks or refer to older members using speciﬁc reverent
terms, assigning embarrassing nicknames to new members,
and socially isolating the recruits or pledges. Harassment hazing
invokes greater degrees of stress and frustration, as it usually
involves more overt verbal harassment, threats, sleep depriva-
tion, and even forcing newer members to engage in simulated
sex acts. Violent hazing may cause serious physical, sexual, or
emotional harm, as it sometimes involves severe paddling, forc-
ing new members to consume excessive amounts of alcohol,
forced sex acts, and other dangerous behaviors. One study by
Alfred University researchers found that 48 percent of high
school students who belong to some type of group or club, or
approximately 1.5 million each year, are hazed. Males are more
frequently perpetrators and victims of hazing, and students
with lower grade point averages have been shown to be at
greater risk of being hazed. Perpetrators and even school ofﬁ-
cials often defend hazing as an essential form of group bonding
and a normal rite of passage. Studies have shown, however, that
hazing can leave long-lasting marks on victims’ emotional
health. Critics maintain that there are other more positive
means of group bonding.
Sexual harassment is another form of school violence that
occurs with great frequency. There are two types of sexual har-
assment recognized in U.S. law. Quid pro quo harassment, or
literally “something for something,” occurs when perpetrators
demand sexual favors in exchange for something. Hostile envi-
ronment harassment involves unwanted sexual comments and
behaviors that create an environment which negatively impacts
8
School Violence

someone’s abilities to learn or work. A 2011 survey conducted
by the American Association of University Women (AAUW)
found that almost 50 percent of 7th to 12th graders had experi-
enced sexual harassment, with 44 percent reporting that the
harassment occurred in person and 30 percent reporting online
harassment.
Title IV of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits workplace
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, and national
origin. It was not clear until the 1992 Supreme Court case
Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public School how this issue was
to be handled by schools. In that case, the Court held that the
rights of Christine Franklin, a student, had been violated.
Franklin had complained about sexually oriented remarks made
to her by her teacher and coach, Andrew Hill, which escalated
to forcible kissing and coercive intercourse. Although the
school district claimed to have investigated Hill, no action was
taken and Franklin was discouraged from pressing charges
against him. In 1999, the Court further clariﬁed that schools
have a responsibility to address sexual harassment in Davis v.
Monroe County Board of Education, which is discussed in more
detail later in the chapter. According to that decision, schools
can be held liable for violating Title IX of the U.S. Education
Amendments of 1972 when (1) they have actual knowledge of
the harassment; (2) they demonstrate deliberate indifference
or take actions that are clearly unreasonable; (3) they have sub-
stantial control over the harasser and the context in which the
harassment is occurring; and (4) the harassment is so severe,
pervasive, and offensive that it deprives the victim of access to
the educational opportunities provided by the school. Schools
have no legal mandate to coordinate sexual harassment preven-
tion programs, however, as the court decision addressed only
response requirements.
Although statistics show that girls are more likely to endure
sexual harassment, boys too can be victims. According to the
AAUW study from 2011, 56 percent of girls and 40 percent
of boys reported being harassed, with boys more likely to be
Background and History
9

the harassers. Further, it is often teachers, coaches, or other
adults who perpetrate sexual harassment in schools, either
against students or colleagues. AAUW’s 2002 survey found that
38 percent of students experience harassment from teachers or
school employees, while 36 percent of school employees were
harassed by a colleague.
Although dating violence occurs in a number of settings,
given that youth spend a large proportion of their time in
school, it inevitably occurs there as well. Essentially a form of
bullying between dating partners, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) deﬁnes dating violence as
physical, sexual, or psychological violence within a dating rela-
tionship. An estimated 20 to 33 percent of teen relationships
are abusive. A 2005 study found that one-third of reporting
teens knew someone who had been hit, punched, kicked,
slapped, choked, or punched by a partner, and one-quarter
knew someone who had been coerced or forced to perform
sex acts. Unlike adult domestic violence, studies have shown
that boys and girls are almost equally likely to be victimized
by dating partners.
Teachers and school personnel may be the perpetrators of
what is often called systemic violence. Systemic violence is
“any institutional practice or procedure that adversely impacts
on individuals or groups by burdening them psychologically,
mentally, culturally, economically, spiritually, or physically”
(Epp & Watkinson, 1996, p. 1). Teaching methodologies that
berate, demean, or stigmatize students and disciplinary prac-
tices that result in physical harm or emotional distress in excess
of what would be considered normal are also examples of
systemic violence. Because they are perpetrated by those in power
positions, these incidents and practices are generally not consid-
ered violent but instead are deemed normal and necessary for
ensuring students’ safety. As such, there is little data to quantify
the scope and extent of systemic violence in schools. One prac-
tice that many consider to be an example of systemic violence is
corporal punishment, or the intentional inﬂiction of physical
10
School Violence

pain with the intent of altering problem behavior. Although the
U.S. Supreme Court said corporal punishment is not a viola-
tion of the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition of cruel and
unusual punishment in Ingraham v. Wright (1975), research
and case studies show that it can be very damaging and that
there are likely more effective means of disciplining students.
Although some states have banned the practice, at the recom-
mendation
of
groups
like
the
American
Psychological
Association,
the
American
Academy
of
Pediatrics,
the
American
Medical
Association,
the
National
Education
Association, and the American Bar Association, it remains legal
in 20 states. Although likely an underestimate, studies have
shown some 200,000 students are paddled in schools each year.
Each year, up to 20,000 students who have been paddled seek
medical care for injuries they sustain. Further, research has
shown that minorities, boys, and students with special needs
are paddled more frequently than are others. Others have main-
tained that demeaning school searches, such as drug testing and
strip searches, are also examples of systemic violence.
Students also may target teachers or other educational staff.
According to the American Psychological Association, 7 percent
of U.S. teachers, or 253,100 individuals, are threatened with
injury each year. Fifty-ﬁve percent of the incidents occur
at the high school level. Far more females are threatened
(69 percent of females and 31 percent of male teachers).
Approximately 43 percent of teachers are physically attacked
each year. Teachers who have unclear or inconsistent rules or
are perceived as being excessively harsh are more likely to be
victimized.
Although they occur quite infrequently in comparison to
other forms of violence in schools, shootings receive the most
attention and generate the most debate about how to keep
children safe. School shootings are inextricably linked with the
other forms of school violence described here. For instance,
bullying has been linked to 75 percent of school shooting
incidents. Negative school climates have also been linked to
Background and History
11

an increased risk of school shootings. Further, many have con-
tended that while isolated incidents of violence occurred in
urban schools that were heavily populated by nonwhite stu-
dents, the real focus on school violence came when suburban
Caucasian students began assaulting their peers in a very
extreme and deadly fashion. Although there are many complex
reasons why people have attacked others at schools, a few char-
acteristics are shared by all or almost all of the assailants. First,
they are overwhelmingly male. Second, like other mass killings
in the United States, most were perpetrated by assailants who
acquired, both legally and illegally, arsenals of ﬁrearms. For
instance, a study published in Mother Jones magazine in 2012,
which analyzed 62 mass shootings occurring since 1982, found
that three-quarters of the guns used were obtained legally.
Third, a majority of the school shooters struggled with some
mental disturbance, albeit not always a diagnosed mental
illness.
The next section of the chapter provides a description of the
primary tools used to measure school violence in the United
States.
Measuring School Violence
Scholars and practitioners have devised a number of tools that
are used to measure the scope, extent, and characteristics of
school violence in a variety of forms. The section below
discusses some of the primary tools used to measure school
violence, as well as the limitations of each.
The Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS) is
coordinated by the CDC. A series of surveys administered every
two years in both private and public schools across the nation
measures six types of risky health-related behaviors common
among youth in 9th through 12th grades, including behaviors
that contribute to unintentional injuries and violence; sexual
behavior that may result in sexually transmitted diseases, HIV
infection, or unintended pregnancy; alcohol and other drug
12
School Violence

use; tobacco use; unhealthy diet and nutrition; and inadequate
physical activity. Additionally, YRBSS measures the prevalence
of obesity and asthma among youth. Results are broken down
by gender and race and ethnicity.
The 2011 YRBSS found the following related to bullying
and violence:
• 16.6 percent of students had carried a weapon (e.g., a gun,
knife, or club) on at least one day during the 30 days before
the survey.
• 5.1 percent of students had carried a gun on at least one day
during the 30 days before the survey.
• 32.8 percent of students had been in a physical ﬁght one or
more times during the 12 months before the survey.
• During the 12 months before the survey, 3.9 percent of stu-
dents had been in a physical ﬁght one or more times in which
they were injured and had to be treated by a doctor or nurse.
• During the 12 months before the survey, 9.4 percent of
students had been hit, slapped, or physically hurt on purpose
by their boyfriend or girlfriend (i.e., dating violence).
• 8.0 percent of students had ever been physically forced to
have sexual intercourse when they did not want to.
• 5.9 percent of students had not gone to school on at least
one day during the 30 days before the survey because they
felt they would be unsafe at school or on their way to or
from school.
• 16.2 percent of students had been electronically bullied, includ-
ing being bullied through e-mail, chat rooms, instant messaging,
websites, or texting during the 12 months before the survey.
• 20.1 percent of students had been bullied on school prop-
erty during the 12 months before the survey.
Rates for all bullying and violence-related measures were
either higher for boys or no difference was detected. Black
Background and History
13

students were less likely to report being bullied, including
electronically, than white or Hispanic students. White students
were less likely than black or Hispanic students to report being
threatened with a gun or other weapon on school property,
being in a ﬁght or being injured on school property, and
being hit, slapped, or purposely injured by their boyfriend or
girlfriend.
The CDC has also, since 1992, coordinated the School-
Associated Violent Death Study (SAVD). Developed in part-
nership with the U.S. Departments of Education and Justice,
the CDC collects information annually from media databases,
police, and school ofﬁcials. A case is deﬁned as a fatal injury
(e.g., homicide, suicide, or legal intervention) that occurs on
school property, on the way to or from school, or during or
on the way to or from a school-sponsored event. Only violent
deaths associated with U.S. elementary and secondary schools,
both public and private, are included. Results show that
school-associated violent deaths have been decreasing since
2006 and that most school-associated violent deaths occur
during the start of a semester and during transition times, such
as passing periods between classes, lunch breaks, and before and
after school. In almost half of recorded cases, perpetrators
issued some type of warning, such as a note or a verbal threat.
When ﬁrearms are used, they typically come from perpetrator’s
homes or from friends or acquaintances. Between 1 and 2 per-
cent of homicides of youth ages 5–18 are considered school-
associated.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics and National Center for
Education Statistics collaborate to issue an annual report from
a
number
of
sources,
including
the
National
Crime
Victimization Survey, the School Crime Supplement to the
National
Crime
Victimization
Survey,
the
Youth
Risk
Behavior Survey, and the School Survey on Crime and Safety
and the School and Stafﬁng Survey. The report describes the
scope, extent, and context of violence in schools on a number
of indicators: violent deaths at school and away from school;
14
School Violence

incidence of victimization at school and away from school;
prevalence of victimization at school; threats and injuries with
weapons on school property; teachers threatened with injury
or physically attacked by students; violent and other crime inci-
dents at schools reported to police; reported discipline prob-
lems; students’ reports of gangs at school; students’ reports of
being called hate-related words or seeing hate-related grafﬁti;
bullying at school and cyberbullying elsewhere; teachers’
reports on school conditions; physical ﬁghts on school property
and anywhere; students’ carrying weapons on school property
and anywhere; students’ use of alcohol on school property and
anywhere; students’ use of marijuana on school property
and anywhere; and students’ perceptions of safety at school and
away from school. The February 2012 report, which analyzed
data from the 2009–2010 school year, found there were about
828,000 nonfatal victimizations at school, which included
359,000 victims of violence (both simple assault and more seri-
ous acts). Approximately 74 percent of responding schools
reported at least one incident of violence, and 16 percent
reported one or more incident of serious violence. Students
attending public schools reported being victimized at twice
the rate of students attending private schools, although both
rates were relatively low (4 percent versus 2 percent). Eight per-
cent of students in grades 9–12 reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon, with males more likely to report such
threats or injuries (10 percent versus 5 percent). Twenty-three
percent of public schools reported that bullying occurred
among students on a daily or weekly basis, and 9 percent
reported widespread disorder in classrooms on a daily or weekly
basis. Sixteen percent of public schools reported that gang activ-
ities had occurred during the 2009–2010 school year, and
2 percent reported that cult or extremist activities had occurred
during this period. About 9 percent of students ages 12–18
reported being targets of hate-related words at school, and
29 percent of students reported seeing hate-related grafﬁti at
school during the school year. In 2009, about 31 percent of
Background and History
15

students in grades 9–12 reported they had been in a physical
ﬁght at least one time during the previous 12 months any-
where, and 11 percent said they had been in a ﬁght on school
property during the previous 12 months. Generally, a higher
percentage of students in ninth grade reported having been in
ﬁghts than students in any other grade, both anywhere and on
school property. In 2009, about 27 percent of males carried a
weapon anywhere, compared to 7 percent of females, and 8 per-
cent of males carried a weapon on school property, compared to
3 percent of females. In 2009, a higher percentage of students
ages 12–18 reported that they were afraid of attack or harm at
school (4 percent) than away from school (3 percent) during
the school year. In 2009, nearly all students (99 percent) ages
12–18 reported that they had observed the use of at least one
of the selected security measures at their schools. The majority
of students ages 12–18 reported that their schools had a code
of student conduct (96 percent) and a requirement that visitors
sign in (94 percent). Approximately 68 percent of students
reported the presence of security guards or assigned police ofﬁ-
cers, and 91 percent reported the presence of other school staff
or other adult supervision in the hallway. Metal detectors were
the least observed of the selected safety and security measures:
11 percent of students reported the use of metal detectors at
their schools.
Monitoring the Future (MTF) is a survey conducted each
spring. It is administered in approximately 420 public and
private schools in the United States, reaching approximately
50,000 randomly selected 8th-, 10th-, and 12th-grade stu-
dents. In addition, annual follow-up questionnaires are mailed
to a sample of each graduating class for a number of years after
their initial participation. In operation since 1975, the survey is
able to provide important longitudinal data about trends in
drug use and other youth risk-taking behaviors. MTF also
breaks down the data to provide important demographic infor-
mation related to gender, region of the country, and race and
ethnicity. Additionally, MTF tracks attitudes toward drug use
16
School Violence

and other risk-taking behavior, as well as perceived availability
of drugs and of social support. MTF is funded by the
National Institute on Drug Abuse at the National Institute of
Health and is administered by the Institute for Social
Research at the University of Michigan.
A limitation of the school-based surveys is that not all stu-
dents will be present the day that surveys are administered. In
fact, it might be that the most vulnerable youth and the youth
most likely to perpetrate school violence are the least likely to
be surveyed, as both victimization and perpetration are corre-
lated with school truancy. Additionally, a general limitation of
self-report surveys is that youth may not remember accurately
what they have experienced or may be purposely untruthful.
Some assert that young people are likely to lie when they
respond to these surveys, yet most research suggests that youth
are generally truthful in their responses. Yet survey methodolo-
gies do allow for the collection of large amounts of data such
that sample sizes are typically generalizable to the wider public.
Further, most of these tools help collect data that can provide a
longitudinal view of school violence.
In-depth interviews provide an important means of gather-
ing data about school violence. Because interviewees can pro-
vide more detailed responses, this qualitative form of research
is useful for understanding why perpetrators commit acts of
violence, how it has effected various parties, and how schools
have responded to school violence. Another form of interview-
ing involves talking to multiple people in a group setting, called
a focus group. The beneﬁt of this is that more data can be col-
lected in one interview session, and the comments from one
respondent may trigger additional reﬂection among others on
topics that the researcher did not anticipate. Conversely, it
takes a great deal of time to conduct interviews or focus groups;
thus sample sizes are typically small. These small samples are
thus not typically generalizable to the broader population,
which means interviews and focus groups are best suited for
case studies.
Background and History
17

School-based disciplinary reports can also provide another
means of understanding the frequency of school violence and
districts’ responses to it. Antibullying laws, for instance, typi-
cally require that districts report the number of incidents and
other details about bullying on campus. The limitation of
school-based reports is that not all students who are involved
(either as perpetrators or victims) come to the attention of
school ofﬁcials. Victims may not report incidents to school ofﬁ-
cials, or teachers may elect to handle incidents informally, and
thus no ofﬁcial record is made. Further, as evidence grows that
there are still biases in the administration of school discipline, it
could be dangerous to use these data sources as a conclusive
assessment of school violence because certain types of perpetra-
tors and victims may be over- or underrepresented.
The chapter next offers a brief overview of some of the most
signiﬁcant incidents as another tool for understanding school
violence. While the young mass shooter is far more likely to
attack his or her school in the United States than in other coun-
tries, there have been several high-proﬁle attacks that are
detailed in the segment below. Unlike the incidents in the
United States, many of the mass attacks on international
schools were politically motivated. All of these incidents
prompted public concern, and many resulted in legislative or
signiﬁcant policy changes. Thus the brief history below high-
lights some of the incidents, legal changes, and court decisions
relevant to understanding school violence.
Brief History of School Violence Incidents
One of the earliest incidents of school violence in the United
States, and, incidentally, still the most deadly, occurred in
1927 when 55-year-old school board member Andre Kehoe
ﬁrst killed his wife, set ﬁre to his farm, and then detonated a
series of bombs he had planted at Bath Consolidated School
in Bath, Michigan. Kehoe’s attack killed 45 and injured 58.
Kehoe himself died during the attack, which he perpetrated
18
School Violence

because of a long-standing disagreement with the super-
intendent, Emory Huyck, whom he had accused of ﬁnancial
mismanagement. Kehoe’s attack stands out for its carnage
but also for the fact that most large school massacres are
perpetrated by youth. He is not the only adult perpetrator,
however.
Although violence in the Middle East had long been a fact of
life, the world was astonished to learn about the attack on stu-
dents from Israel as they were on a school trip. Perpetrated by
the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP),
the attack left 25 dead and more than 50 injured. The team
of assailants demanded that Israel release 23 Arab terrorists
being held in Israeli prisons. In the end, Israeli defense forces
stormed the school in which the attackers had held the children
hostage, and the terrorists opened ﬁre. The three members of
the DFLP were all killed in the melee.
The next school violence incident to receive signiﬁcant
attention in the United States was the attack on students and
staff at a school in California in 1979. Brenda Spencer was 16
at the time that she killed two and injured nine at Cleveland
Elementary School in San Diego, California. Since the school
was located across from her home, Spencer shot out of a win-
dow while students waited outside. She killed Principal
Burton Wragg and Head Custodian Mike Suchar as both tried
to assist students. In the process of ﬁring 30 rounds, Spencer
also killed a police ofﬁcer. She engaged in a seven-hour standoff
and, upon surrendering to police, announced “I don’t like
Mondays.” She later claimed that it was easy, “like shooting
ducks in a pond.” Spencer was, by all accounts, a strange person
who was obsessed with guns. Her father had introduced her to
them and even purchased a gun and ammunition for her for a
Christmas present. Tried as an adult, Spencer pleaded guilty
and was convicted on two counts of murder and assault with a
deadly weapon. She is still incarcerated in the California
Institute for Women in Chico, California, and is not eligible
for parole again until 2014, after having been denied four
Background and History
19

times. Spencer is one of the few females to perpetrate a mass
attack at school.
Throughout the 1980s, several boys committed attacks on
school grounds, often killing themselves after their assaults. In
1988, another female, 30-year-old Laurie Dann, perpetrated
an odd attack in Illinois before committing suicide. Dann shot
and killed one boy and wounded four other children in
Highland Park, Illinois, after attempting to poison several fam-
ily members and friends. She ﬂed the location, taking a family
hostage, before killing one man and then herself. Dann had a
series of disruptive relationships in which she made allegations
of rape and abuse, although no charges were ever ﬁled. In the
process, it became clear that Laurie suffered from a variety of
mental problems. She received psychiatric help for obsessive-
compulsive disorder and had been prescribed clomipramine as
well as lithium to address her many phobias. Some have
claimed that it was these medications that resulted in her
aggression, while others blame the mental illness itself.
The following year, a deeply disturbed man named Patrick
Purdy, who had a history of mental illness, abuse of alcohol,
and arrests, shot and killed ﬁve students and wounded 29 stu-
dents and a teacher at Cleveland Elementary in Stockton,
California. All the students that Purdy killed were refugees
from Southeast Asia. Purdy had a rough upbringing and was
twice taken from his mother and stepfather by Child
Protective Services. Neighbors recall him as quiet, odd, and
occasionally violent. Despite telling a mental health profes-
sional about his depression and suicidal thoughts, he never
received any serious mental health counseling. On the day of
the attack, Purdy set ﬁre to his car with a Molotov cocktail,
then entered the school, shooting until he ran out of ammuni-
tion. He then killed himself with a pistol. Investigations of the
hotel room where he had been staying showed a man who was
obsessed with the military and who hated minorities, whom
he blamed for his horrible life. Purdy’s rampage was the catalyst
for several legal changes in the state of California and at the
20
School Violence

federal level. California enacted the nation’s ﬁrst assault weapon
ban, prohibiting the sale, production, and possession of certain
types of assault weapons. The U.S. Congress passed the federal
assault weapons ban years later, but it was this case coupled
with some other mass shootings that pushed it forward.
Another school shooting perpetrated by an adult prompted
international attention in 1996. Thomas Hamilton perpetrated
the worst school shooting in UK history. Hamilton, who was
43, killed or injured 28 of the 29 ﬁve- and six-year-old children
at Dunblane Primary School. Hamilton was obsessed with guns
and with little boys, and he suffered from a long history of
rejection. He had previously been rejected as a scoutmaster
due to his odd behavior.
For the next decade, school shootings occurred occasionally
and tended to involve a relatively small number of fatalities.
National attention turned to school shootings in 1996, when
Barry Loukaitis, 14 at the time, opened ﬁre at his school, killing
one teacher and two students and wounding another student.
Loukaitis seemed to differ from the earlier shooters in that
he was younger and was an honor student at Frontier High
School, a more suburban location than that of most of the pre-
vious school massacres. Despite his successes in the classroom,
Loukaitis came from a disturbing home life where his parents,
who had divorced, tried to pit him against each other. Both
parents suffered from depression as well. Loukaitis had also
been bullied, with one of his victims repeatedly harassing him
for being gay. His case generated attention to the devastating
effects of school-based bullying. Additionally, Loukaitis was
allegedly obsessed with several forms of violent media, includ-
ing the ﬁlm Natural Born Killers and the Pearl Jam song
Jeremy. The video for the song featured a boy shooting class-
mates who had harassed him. Loukaitis also was a huge
Stephen King fan, especially of the book Rage, which tells the
story of a high school boy who goes insane from being bullied,
takes his class hostage, and kills a teacher out of revenge.
Loukaitis was tried as an adult. He pleaded not guilty by reason
Background and History
21

of insanity but was convicted and sentenced to life in prison
without the possibility of parole.
Just over a year after Loukaitis’ attack, 16-year-old Evan
Ramsey killed a popular 15-year-old classmate and Principal
Ron Edwards at Bethel Regional High School in the small town
of Bethel, Alaska. Ramsey wounded several others and then
threatened to kill himself but instead surrendered to police.
Like so many other school shooters, Ramsey’s family life was
difﬁcult. His father was in prison, and his mother an alcoholic
who had been in several abusive relationships. Evan and his
two brothers were removed from the home when he was in
third grade and were separated into different foster homes. As
a child, Evan Ramsey lived with 11 different foster families
and suffered sexual, physical, and verbal abuse at several of
them. By the time he was in high school, Ramsey regularly
smoked marijuana, got terrible grades, and had seen a psychia-
trist because he appeared depressed and suicidal. He was also
teased endlessly by classmates. Also like many of the other
shooters, Ramsey was an avid player of the violent video game
Doom. Ramsey did tell his two friends, both 14 at the time, that
he planned to attack the school, but they did not tell anyone
else. In 1998, Ramsey was tried as an adult on two counts of
ﬁrst-degree murder. He was convicted and sentenced to
210 years in prison. He deeply regrets his actions and has
received many letters from bullied teens to whom he offers sup-
port. Ramsey’s attack, like Loukaitis’s, drew attention to the
fact that school violence is not just an issue of urban gangs
but instead one of disaffected youth.
Only months later, two more suburban school shootings
rocked the nation. On October 1, 1997, Luke Woodham, 16,
ﬁrst killed his own mother and then went on a shooting spree
at Pearl High School in Pearl, Mississippi, wounding seven
and killing two. Then, on December 1, 1997, 14-year-old
Michael Carneal killed three students and wounded ﬁve others
who were participating in a prayer circle at his high school in
West Paducah, Kentucky.
22
School Violence

Woodham, too, did not have a great upbringing. His parents
divorced when he was young. Luke lived with his mother, who
was very controlling and verbally abusive, and his older brother,
who tormented him whenever he was around. Luke was also
bullied at school for his thick glasses and outdated hairstyle
and clothing. The neighbors knew the Woodham boys as
odd and aggressive. When he was 15 a new girl moved to town,
and Luke fell in love with Christina Menefee, who was nice to
him. She broke up with him when he became too controlling,
however, which seems to have been a catalyst for Woodham’s
descent. He twice threatened to commit suicide. Early in
1997 Luke began hanging out with a new crowd of friends he
met through his job at Dominos pizza. The group of misﬁts
liked to engage in role-playing games and called themselves
“the Kroth.” Although the boys all appeared to be good
Christians and good students, they lived dual identities, having
become ﬁxated on satanism and Hitler. School ofﬁcials did
notice a change in Woodham, who wrote a series of disturbing
essays in class, including one that stated he would go on a kill-
ing spree. Woodham was prevented from hurting others during
the attack when he was subdued by Assistant Principal Joel
Myrick. He told police that he had killed his mother and emo-
tionally discussed her lack of love for him. Fueling the com-
munity’s concern that this was an attack not just by
Woodham but by his gang, too, one of the Kroth members,
Justin Sledge, pinned a note to the school door stating that
the group was still strong. At a candlelight vigil he spoke
out in support of Woodham. By October 7, 1997, six of
Woodham’s friends were arrested for conspiracy. Woodham
was tried ﬁrst for the murder of his mother. His attorney’s
asserted that he had borderline personality disorder. Jurors
rejected his insanity defense and found him guilty of ﬁrst-
degree murder. He was then tried for the school murders, was
convicted, and received a life sentence for each of the two
murders plus 20 years for seven counts of aggravated assault.
Charges were dropped against ﬁve of the other boys. The other
Background and History
23

was tried in juvenile court, but his records were sealed. In
October 1998, Kroth ringleader Grant Boyette and Justin
Sledge were charged as accessories to murder. Boyette accepted
a plea bargain and was sentenced to a prison-based boot camp.
Sledge was acquitted (Davis, 2003; Fast, 2008).
Michael Carneal was, in contrast, a seemingly normal young
man who earned average grades, was involved in high school
band, and had not been in any disciplinary trouble at school.
However, he too was bullied by classmates, who accused him
of being a satanist (due to his penchant for wearing dark
clothes) and called him gay. Armed with two shotguns, two
riﬂes, and a semi-automatic handgun, Carneal ﬁred 11 rounds
at the prayer group assembled outside of Heath High School,
killing three girls and injuring three girls and two boys.
Carneal surrendered to school principal Bill Bond. He was tried
as an adult and, despite concerns about his mental health, was
declared competent for trial. He pled no contest and was
sentenced to three consecutive life terms and an additional
120 years in prison for ﬁve counts of attempted murder and
burglary. Carneal’s case generated even more attention about
the role of violent media, as he was said to have been obsessed
with the 1995 ﬁlm The Basketball Diaries, which features a
scene in which the main character shoots up his school.
Parents of the three murdered girls ﬁled suit against Carneal
as well as a number of video game companies (including
Nintendo and Sega) and Sony Computer Entertainment, two
Internet pornography sites, and the makers of the ﬁlm.
Federal courts dismissed all but Carneal from the suit, arguing
the link between the media and his attacks was not clear. On
August 4, 2000, the court issued a $42 million judgment
against Carneal.
In just a four-month period in 1998, the United States saw
ﬁve school shootings. Starting on March 9 with Jeffrey Lance
Pennick II killing one and wounding two at Central Avenue
Elementary School in Summit, Washington, the spree ended
on June 15, 1998, when 14-year-old Quinshawn Booker shot
24
School Violence

a teacher and wounded a counselor at his high school in
Richmond, Virginia. In between, two very young shooters—
Mitchell Johnson, 13, and Andrew Golden, 11—attacked their
school, killing a teacher and four students and wounding
another 10 in Jonesboro, Arkansas. On April 24, 1998,
14-year-old Parker Middle School student Andrew Wurst
killed a teacher and wounded two students at a dance at the
Edinboro, Pennsylvania, school. Less than a month later,
15-year-old Kip Kinkel killed his parents and then two stu-
dents, wounding 23 in the process, at his high school in
Springﬁeld, Oregon.
Andrew Golden had asked to use the restroom on March 24,
1998. Instead, he pulled the ﬁre alarm and then joined Mitchell
Johnson in the woods outside of the school, where the two had
assembled an arsenal that included 13 fully loaded ﬁrearms,
three semi-automatic riﬂes, 200 rounds of ammunition, a
crossbow, and several hunting knives they had taken from
Golden’s family. Both boys had grown up with guns, raising
issues about youth access to dangerous weapons. The case also
generated debate about how to handle dangerous kids. Both
were released from juvenile facilities when they turned 21 and
have no criminal record. Both boys were described by class-
mates as bullies, not as victims.
Andrew Wurst is another shooter who generated discussion
about violent media and whether teachers and school ofﬁcials
take seriously enough the jokes, writings, and other signs of a
disturbed youth. He was a fan of horror writers Stephen King
and Dean Koontz and loved the music of heavy metal bands
like Marilyn Manson, Korn, and Nine Inch Nails. Like many
of the other school shooters, Wurst professed to admire Adolf
Hitler and was nicknamed “Satan” by classmates. In advance
of his trial, Wurst was seen by many psychiatrists. One con-
cluded that he suffered from psychotic thinking and delusions
of persecution and grandeur. Nonetheless, Wurst was tried as
an adult and pleaded guilty to third-degree murder. He was
sentenced to serve 30 to 90 years in prison.
Background and History
25

After murdering his parents on May 20, 1998, Kip Kinkel
left a note describing how he heard voices that made him kill.
Also at the home was a journal that told how he planned to kill
classmates, pictures of classmates he wanted to kill, a sawed-off
shotgun and other weapons, and a book on explosives. Kip had
previously gotten into trouble for researching how to make
bombs and for shoplifting. He was arrested for vandalism and
assigned to see a therapist as well as serve some time at a juve-
nile facility. He began taking Prozac for depression, which
seemed to help. Kip was, as were most of the other school
shooters, obsessed with guns and could easily obtain them. In
fact, his father had encouraged the interest. Defense attorneys
described his background and asserted that he was mentally
ill. Kinkel was convicted and sentenced to 111 years in prison.
Less than a year after Kinkel’s attack, the nation was again
shocked by a school shooting in a suburban area perpetrated
by two middle-class Caucasian boys. Before the April 20,
1999, massacre at Columbine High School, the columbine
was known as Colorado’s state ﬂower. Ever after, it has been
associated with mass violence, the most deadly attack on a
school since Kehoe’s bombing at Bath (later surpassed by
Adam Lanza’s shooting spree at Sandy Hook Elementary). It
was the ﬁrst mass school shooting to receive national media
attention. It also highlighted the challenges for law enforcement
and school ofﬁcials in responding to this type of active shooter
situation, as by all accounts ofﬁcials were unprepared and thus
failed to respond as quickly as possible. Heavily armed Eric
Harris, 18, and Dylan Klebold, 17, killed 12 students and a
teacher, wounded 23 others, and then killed themselves on
April 20, 1999. Chaos reigned as the two paraded through their
school, shooting peers at leisure and saving some. Their initial
plan was to bomb the school, but the homemade bombs they
had planted failed to detonate, so Harris and Klebold entered
Columbine High a little after 11:00 a.m. School video cameras
show the two laughing as they mowed down classmates. At
approximately 12:02 Klebold and Harris entered the library
26
School Violence

and, after counting off to ensure it would happen simultane-
ously, shot themselves. Over an hour later the SWAT team
entered the school and, some ﬁve hours after the attack com-
menced, declared the school to be safe. Subsequent examina-
tions of the situation focused on Harris and Klebold’s
connections to violent media, the fact that they may have
endured bullying and abuse at school, and how their parents
did not discern that they were planning something. Both boys
were avid players of Doom, a violent video game, and were even
so skilled that they programmed for the game. Initial reports
highlighted the fact that the boys identiﬁed with a group of
outcasts called the Trenchcoat Maﬁa, which wore trenchcoats
and dark clothes and had disdain for the more popular school
cliques. Yet later reports showed that neither Harris nor
Klebold were really involved with the group, nor was it really
an organized, oppositional group at the school. Many criticized
Harris and Klebold’s parents, as it is difﬁcult to understand
how the two were able to assemble bombs at their homes unde-
tected. Years later, the focus has been on the boys’ mental
stability, with many asserting that both suffered from some
mental illness. Motives notwithstanding, it is clear that the
Columbine attack spawned both copycat assaults as well as a
new wave of concern about school violence. Indeed, just days
later, Todd Cameron Smith, 14, shot and killed a student and
wounded another in what appeared to be a Columbine copycat
attack, while exactly one month after Harris and Klebold’s mas-
sacre Thomas “T.J” Solomon wounded six people at his school
in Conyers, Georgia. Solomon had left a suicide note at his
home expressing solidarity with the Trenchcoat Maﬁa and
had previously proclaimed that he was a better marksman than
Harris and Klebold.
Less than one year later the nation’s attention was again
focused on school violence, although this time both the perpe-
trator and victim were children. On February 29, 2000,
6-year-old Dedrick Owens brought a loaded gun to school
and shot his classmate, 6-year-old Kayla Rolland, at Buell
Background and History
27

Elementary School in Flint, Michigan. The two ﬁrst-graders
were having a disagreement as the class was lining up to go to
computer class when Dedrick pulled out a .32-caliber pistol
and pointed it at two other girls, then at Kayla. He said, “I
don’t like you,” to which she might have responded, “So?”
Dedrick then pulled the trigger. Teacher Alicia Judd called
911, and Kayla, bleeding profusely, was transported to nearby
Hurley Medical Center, where she was pronounced dead.
Dedrick had run into the hall and was stopped by school ofﬁ-
cials. Investigations revealed that Dedrick Owens also had a
knife with him at school that day, both of which he had stolen
from Jamelle James, a 19-year-old who lived at the house where
Dedrick and his eight-year-old brother were staying with their
uncle. Dedrick’s dad was in prison, and his mother had been
evicted from her home. While Dedrick was too young to be
criminally charged, James was charged with involuntary man-
slaughter, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, and
gross neglect. Reports showed that Dedrick Owens had been
in trouble at school before for cursing, pinching, and hitting.
Some said that Owens had tried to kiss Kayla Rolland the day
before. Yet it is clear that the school did not respond as thor-
oughly as possible to prevent tragedy. A student saw the knife
that Owens had that morning and told a teacher, who took it
away but did not report it to administrators. Immediately after
the incident President Bill Clinton urged Congress to enact
new gun control measures, none of which came to fruition.
Dedrick Owens went on to be enrolled in a private school in
Flint, Michigan.
Concerns about the young age of school perpetrators were
exacerbated less than a month later, when on March 16,
2000, 13-year-old Nathaniel Brazill killed his teacher in Lake
Worth, Florida. It was the last day of classes at Lake Worth
Middle School when seventh-grader Nathaniel Brazill, who
had been sent home for throwing water balloons, returned to
the school with a .25-caliber handgun and demanded to see
two female students in his English class. Teacher Barry
28
School Violence

Grunow refused to let him in, and Brazill shot him in the face.
Grunow died on the spot. Brazill was tried as an adult and
is serving a 28-year sentence. It is unclear precisely what
prompted Brazill’s actions, especially given that he was an hon-
ors student with no history of misbehavior or violence,
although there were likely a number of factors. His grades had
begun to slip that year. Brazill had told others that Grunow
was his favorite teacher and had even conﬁded in him that he
was being picked on and felt suicidal. Further, one of the two
girls Brazill had asked to see was his girlfriend, Dinora
Rosales, whom he had told people he was infatuated with.
Brazill had also witnessed domestic violence in the home, with
his mother enduring abuse from Nathaniel’s father as well as a
series of boyfriends. While there was much outrage about
Brazill’s shooting, many expressed dismay that a boy so young
was sentenced so harshly. Brazill joined 15 other inmates in
Florida who were 13 or 14 when they committed their offenses.
Europe had been generally free of school shootings until
2002, when in just a three-day period attackers killed 17 people
before committing suicide. On April 26, 2002, 19-year-old
Robert Steinhauser killed 13 teachers, two students, and police
ofﬁcer at Johann Gutenberg Secondary School in Erfurt,
Germany. Steinhauser’s attack remains one of the worst in
history. Steinhauser was a gun enthusiast who legally owned
several weapons that he used in the attack. Like many of the
U.S. shooters, Steinhauser was also a fan of violent videos and
video games, igniting debate about gun control and banning
violent video games in Germany. Just days later, Dragoslav
Petkovic killed a teacher and wounded another at a school in
Vlasenica, Bosnia-Herzegovia.
Two years after Steinhauser’s attack, a group of terrorists
took hostage a group of schoolchildren in Beslan, North
Ossettia-Alania, resulting in at least 368 deaths by the end of
the three-day siege. The assailants were intending to direct
the world’s attention to the situation in Chechnya, a part of
Russia that is rich in oil. Chechnyans fought with Russia in
Background and History
29

what is known as the First Chechnyan War from 1994 to 1996.
A peace treaty was enacted in 1997, but the Chechnyans suf-
fered badly. After the ﬁghting ended, poverty and crime
increased in Chechnya, and the instability, coupled with an
increasingly militant Islamic Chechen separatist movement,
lead to the Second Chechnyan War. The rest of the area was
virtually destroyed. The terrorists attacked Beslan because
many of the Russian artillery attacks were staged from bases
there. They chose to attack on September 1, the ﬁrst day of
the school year, as they knew that not only would many stu-
dents be there but so too would their families, as is customary
on what is known as the Day of Knowledge. It is estimated that
approximately 32 men and women were part of the assault in
which they initially took hostage between 1,100 and 1,200
adults and children. Two hours before a planned negotiation
with an adviser to the Russian president, the terrorists allowed
two ambulances into the school grounds to remove the dead
bodies. As they were approaching, however, an explosion
occurred, the gymnasium roof collapsed, and shooting com-
menced. Because authorities were surprised by the explosion
and the shooting, they did not respond immediately. The terro-
rists began detonating bombs, and Russian troops stormed the
building. While there was some increase in the number of
Russians citing their sympathy for Chechnya, many others
stated they wanted to ban Chechens from major cities.
Over the next several years, severe incidents of school vio-
lence occurred sporadically across the country. The next large-
scale attack in the United States occurred in March 2005. Jeff
Weise, 16, killed his grandfather, his grandfather’s girlfriend,
and then ﬁve students, a teacher, a security guard, and himself
at his high school on Red Lake Indian Reservation in
Minnesota. Seven others were wounded. Weise seems to have
been deeply troubled. His father had committed suicide, and
he moved hundreds of miles to live on the remote reservation
with his grandfather. There was a history of depression in the
family, and Weise had been prescribed antidepressants. He
30
School Violence

had been in trouble at school and was eventually expelled.
Additionally, Weise was obsessed with neo-Nazism, as evi-
denced by racist blogs he wrote. It appears that Weise had
shared some of his frustrations with his cousin, Louis Jordan,
who was later charged with conspiracy in the shootings.
While it is shocking when young people perpetrate atrocities
like those described here, it is perhaps even more disturbing
when the offenders are adults. In just a one-week period in
2006, two adult males killed a total of six young girls in attacks
on schools. That same week, a high school student killed his
principal in Cazenovia, Wisconsin. On September 27, 2006,
53-year-old Duane Morrison ﬁrst took six girls hostage and
sexually molested them before killing one and then himself at
Platte Canyon High School in Bailey, Colorado. Morrison,
who had previous arrests for larceny, possession of marijuana,
and obstructing police, entered Platte Canyon High School
armed with a gun and a backpack he claimed contained explo-
sives. He entered a classroom, ﬁred his gun in the air, and
demanded that the students face the chalkboard. He then alleg-
edly let the boys go and carried out his attack on the girls while
police negotiators tried to get him to release everyone and sur-
render. The school was evacuated and reopened one week later.
Then, on October 2, 2006, Charles Roberts, 32, killed ﬁve
girls in the ﬁrst attack on an Amish school. He wounded ﬁve
others before he killed himself in Nickel Mines, Pennsylvania.
Roberts was not Amish but did live near the Amish community
and routinely went to their farms to pick up milk in his capacity
as a milk truck driver. Before killing the girls he tied them up,
allegedly with the intent to sexually molest them, although no
evidence suggests he did so. Three of the girls he shot died at
the school, and the other two died later at the hospital.
Roberts called his wife during the attack and admitted to hav-
ing sexually abused children before. He stated that he was
struggling with the urge to do so again. Roberts had also left a
suicide note proclaiming that he was seeking revenge on God
for having let his baby die in 1997. Co-workers indicated that
Background and History
31

Roberts had been acting differently in the weeks before the
shooting, although none suspected violence. It is clear, how-
ever, that he planned the attack, as investigators found a check-
list of supplies that he purchased six days prior, including KY
Jelly lubricant and restraints. Because the Amish live simply,
they had no security systems in place at the school. This was
likely a factor in explaining why Roberts chose that particular
school. Eleven days after the attack, the Amish community tore
down the school. Morrison’s and Roberts’ attacks are the only
ones in which a sexual motivation has been identiﬁed.
Between November 2006 and November 2007, two more
European
men
perpetrated
mass
shootings
on
schools.
Eighteen-year-old Sebastian Bosse shot ﬁve people at his former
high school in northwestern Germany, wounding ﬁve others.
He also set off a series of pipe bombs that did not hurt anyone,
although 22 people were treated for smoke inhalation. Bosse
was obsessed with guns and violent video games, and classmates
thought he was odd. He had written on his website that he
planned to do something dangerous and that he wanted to seek
revenge on those who had treated him as a loser. Police found
him dead when they entered the school.
On November 7, 2007, 18-year-old Pekka-Eric Auvinen
killed six students as well as the school nurse and principal at
Jokela High School in Tuusula, Finland. He wounded at least
10 others before killing himself. Like Bosse, Auvinen was
described as an outcast. He had been taking antidepressants
for a year and was the victim of bullying. Auvinen made dis-
turbing comments and drawings before the shooting, but
friends thought he was joking. The media called him the
YouTube Killer because they found approximately 90 videos
in which he expressed admiration for Columbine killers Eric
Harris and Dylan Klebold as well as for other mass murderers
like Hitler, Timothy McVeigh, and Jeffrey Dahmer. In one
video he had described his plan for attaching Jokela High
School. Finland considered passing stricter gun laws; although
despite having the third highest gun ownership rate for civilians
32
School Violence

in the world at the time, it had only seen one school shooting
prior to Auvinen’s attack.
Two years later, on March 11, 2009, 17-year-old Tim
Kretschmer, dressed in black combat boots, killed nine students
and three teachers at his former high school in Winnenden,
Germany. After ﬂeeing the school, Kretschmer killed another
person, then took a hostage with him while he engaged in a
shootout with the police. Two passersby were killed, and two
others wounded. Kretschmer died as well, although it was
unclear whether he killed himself or was shot by police. A gun
fanatic, Kretschmer trained at a local shooting club. His family
reportedly had 18 guns in the home. Reports indicated that
Kretschmer was an average student, didn’t really get into trou-
ble, and was not bullied. This and the previously mentioned
attacks put Germany second to the United States in the num-
ber of school shootings.
In the later 2000s, attention was focused on the issue of
bullying after a spate of young people committed suicide after
being bullied in school and online. One of the ﬁrst “bullycides”
to receive national attention was that of Ryan Halligan, who at
age 13 committed suicide on October 7, 2003, after experienc-
ing in-person and cyberbullying from middle school classmates.
Halligan was tormented endlessly. Some students accused him
of being gay. The last straw was when a girl who had been ﬂirt-
ing with him online announced to the world that she had only
been joking and that she thought Halligan was a loser. Less
than two years later, Jeffrey Johnston of Cape Coral, Florida,
committed suicide after experiencing similar forms of harass-
ment at school and online. Months later, 17-year-old Rachel
Neblett killed herself after being bullied online, and just eight
days later, on October 17, 2006, 13-year-old Megan Meier
hung herself after being bullied not just by a classmate but by
the girl’s mother as well.
On January 14, 2010, Phoebe Prince hung herself from the
stairwell in her family’s home after enduring months of harass-
ment at South Hadley High School in Hadley, Massachusetts.
Background and History
33

Prince, an Irish immigrant, had been verbally and physically
harassed by a group of girls who behaved much like the charac-
ters in the 2004 ﬁlm Mean Girls. They threw things at her,
knocked her books from her hands, sent her threatening text
messages, and referred to her as “Irish slut” and “whore” in per-
son and on social networking sites. The girls continued to post
mean comments even after Prince’s suicide. Just months before
Prince’s suicide, 17-year-old Tyler Long killed himself as a
result of the near-constant torment he endured because of his
Asperger’s syndrome. School ofﬁcials did not take the bullying
reports seriously, even when Long was pushed down a ﬂight
of stairs. Both President Barack Obama and Secretary of State
Hilary Clinton have spoken publicly about bullycide.
In another bullying case, a student was killed by a classmate
who had been bullying him. Fourteen-year-old Brandon
McInerney shot classmate Lawrence “Larry” King, 25, at E.O.
Green Junior High School in Oxnard, California. King died
two days after the shooting. King, who was small and had difﬁ-
culties in school, was often bullied. Students teased him about
being gay, picking on him for his stature and for the effeminate
clothing he often wore to school. King liked McInerney, who
was being teased about it. The gay rights community used the
incident to draw attention to the daily abuse many LGBT
youth face at school, although King’s father, Greg, did not
approve. GLSEN has dubbed April 25 the National Day of
Silence in honor of Larry King.
Between 2008 and 2010, the state of Florida was home to
three separate school tragedies. On November 13, 2008, 15-
year-old Teah Wimberly shot and killed her friend and class-
mate Amanda Collette at Dillard High School in Fort
Lauderdale. Less than a year later, Michael Brewer, also 15,
was attacked by a group of teenaged classmates from Deerﬁeld
Beach Middle School, who beat him, doused him with rubbing
alcohol, and then set him on ﬁre. Just months later, Wayne
Treacy, 15 as well, brutally attacked classmate Josie Ratley after
the two exchanged a series of mean text messages. Both Brewer
34
School Violence

and Ratley suffered tremendous physical and emotional injuries
but survived.
Wimberly was friends with Collette but had started to
develop more romantic feelings for her. With Wimberly already
feeling deeply rejected by her family, who did not support her
when she told them she was a lesbian, when Collette rebuffed
Wimberly’s
romantic
overtures
it
was
the
last
straw.
Wimberly had a disturbing family life, having been left in
grandparents’ care when she was just six weeks old, enduring
sexual molestation at the hands of a family member at age six,
and being severely beaten by both parents. Wimberly’s defense
attempted an insanity plea, but it was rejected. In court, she
wept and apologized profusely to Collette’s family. She was sen-
tenced to 25 years in prison. Wimberly is being held in a juve-
nile facility and is being treated for bipolar disorder. When she
turns 21 she will be transferred to an adult prison.
On October 29, 2009, after a dispute about a video game
Michael Brewer allegedly did not pay for, four Deerﬁeld
Beach Middle School boys nearly killed him when they set
him ablaze. Brewer sustained second- and third-degree burns
over 65 percent of his body but survived because he jumped
into a nearby swimming pool. Although he was in a medically
induced coma for many months, he recovered miraculously
and began attending another school just six months after the
attack. One of the assailants, Denver Jarvis, was sentenced to
eight years in prison and 22 years of probation, which was later
reduced to 10. Jarvis was the one to throw the rubbing alcohol
on Brewer. Two other assailants, Michael Bent and Jesus
Mendez, were both sentenced to 11 years in prison. All did
not go perfectly for Brewer, however, as he was arrested a few
years later for possessing marijuana, crack cocaine, morphine,
oxycodone, and drug paraphernalia.
Wayne Treacy, also a student at Deerﬁeld Beach Middle
School, assaulted Josie Ratley at the bus stop after school,
punching her in the head, slamming her head into the pave-
ment, and kicking her with his steel-toed boots. Treacy’s attack
Background and History
35

was stopped when teacher Walter Welsh pulled him off the
girl. The two had exchanged mean text messages, but it was a
message Ratley sent about Treacy’s brother, who had commit-
ted suicide not long before, that made him snap. Ratley was
in a medically-induced coma but eventually regained con-
sciousness. Treacy was waived to adult court, where he was
found guilty of attempted murder and was sentenced to 20 years
in prison.
December 14, 2012, will forever go down in infamy.
Twenty-year-old Adam Lanza killed 20 students and six teach-
ers at Sandy Hook Elementary in Newtown, Connecticut.
Adam Lanza shot his mother in the face, then drove to Sandy
Hook Elementary in Newtown, Connecticut, and killed 26
people, including 20 elementary school students. Four teachers,
the school’s principal, and a school psychologist were among
the victims. The victims were all hit multiple times, some as
many as 11 times, with the semi-automatic riﬂe Lanza used.
Lanza committed suicide after his rampage. Lanza used weap-
ons he took from his mother, Nancy Lanza, who legally owned
them. The shooting was the most deadly involving elementary
school students in U.S. history and might have been worse if
some of the Sandy Hook teachers had not acted quickly to
usher their students to safety.
Although Lanza’s precise motives cannot be discerned, many
theories have been circulated. Reports months later showed
that Lanza had been researching mass murders for several
months before the rampage. Newspaper articles and other
documents were found in Lanza’s bedroom, including material
about Anders Behring Breivik, the Norwegian who was con-
victed of killing 77 people with guns and bombs in July 2011.
Connecticut state police also found evidence that Lanza was
very interested in the 2006 shooting at an Amish schoolhouse
in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Based on these ﬁndings, some
believe Lanza was trying to outdo other school shooters.
Indeed, Lanza shot a bullet every two seconds, and the entire
incident lasted less than ﬁve minutes.
36
School Violence

Lanza was a gun enthusiast, a hobby he shared with his
mother. Additionally, people close to the family say he played
a lot of violent video games, like Call of Duty, and that he was
very introverted. Some have criticized Nancy Lanza for encour-
aging her troubled son’s interest in guns. When police searched
the Lanza home, they found 1,600 rounds of unspent ammuni-
tion. They also found samurai swords and a book, published by
the National Riﬂe Association, titled Guide to the Basics of Pistol
Shooting.
Immediately after the shootings, it was revealed that Lanza
had been diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, a milder form
of autism. Experts caution not to read too much into the diag-
nosis, as persons with Asperger’s syndrome are rarely violent.
Perhaps more important is the fact that Lanza suffered from tre-
mendous anxiety, so bad that his mother had to rush him to the
emergency room when he was 13. Lanza is also said to have suf-
fered from a sensory disorder. He is also described as painfully
shy, with few friends. Yet again, experts are quick to point out
that these disorders are typically not associated with violent
behavior.
The tragedy prompted renewed debate about gun control in
the United States. Connecticut passed one of the country’s
most restrictive laws as a result of the shooting. Since
Newtown, however, 44 shootings took the lives of 28 students
in schools across the United States, with one shooting every
10 days. Seventy percent of post-Newtown shootings were car-
ried out by minors, and three-quarters involved guns brought
from home.
The following section highlights some of the most important
legislative and court decisions relevant to school violence, many
of which emerged after the shootings discussed here.
Legislation and Court Decisions
On October 12, 1984, President Ronald Reagan signed the
Comprehensive Crime Control Act, considered one of the
Background and History
37

biggest and most important changes in the U.S. criminal justice
system. Although there are 23 chapters in the act, the most
important segments address bail conditions, the insanity
defense, victims of crime and justice assistance, sentencing,
and regulation of narcotics. The act authorized courts to con-
sider assessments of an offender’s dangerousness when deter-
mining bail and allowed pretrial detention if the courts
deemed it necessary. Defendants who could prove that they
suffered from a mental disease or defect at the time of the
offense could now use the insanity defense, but those who were
intoxicated or high on drugs were not eligible. The act also
established a Sentencing Commission that collects information
and recommends sentencing guidelines to federal judges. A
Crime Victims Fund was also established in the U.S.
Treasury, which includes restitution monies paid by offenders.
Relevant to juvenile justice, the act gave the Ofﬁce of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention an extension on its operat-
ing power, increased federal penalties for many drug offenses,
and provided for a missing-children hotline.
The 1990 Gun-Free School Zones Act made it a federal
offense to possess a ﬁrearm in a school zone. It prompted many
districts to enact zero tolerance laws. The act was later invali-
dated as unconstitutional in United States v. Lopes (1995). In
1994, Congress enacted the Gun-Free Schools Act, which took
a different approach to addressing weapons on school grounds.
States receiving federal funds were required to enact legislation
that speciﬁed mandatory punishments for speciﬁc offenses, typ-
ically involving guns, drugs, and acts of violence. While it did
not mandate suspension or expulsion, many states included
those punishments in their legislation.
The Safe and Drug-Free Schools Act (SFDFSCA) of 1994
authorized federal funding for states to enact safety-related
measures and drug prevention programs. State and local educa-
tional associations distribute these funds to districts based on
rates of drug and alcohol use, gang activity, and arrests and
convictions. The SFDSCA also provided districts with a list of
38
School Violence

evidence-based practices to guide their selection of programs.
Among the practices listed were school uniform policies and
alternatives to suspension.
Few laws have changed schools as much as the No Child Left
Behind (NCLB) Act of 2001. NCLB expanded the 1998 U.S.
Department of Education principle-of-effectiveness rule, which
required school districts that receive state funding to reconsider
their drug prevention and response programs. Schools were
required to conduct needs assessments, establish measurable
goals and objectives, and implement and evaluate evidence-
based practices. While NCLB includes a number of provisions
relevant to curriculum and testing, related to school violence
it required the establishment of drug- and violence-free school
environments and efforts to graduate all students. The
Department of Education provided districts with lists of
approved programs, which included character education and
peer mediation but not Drug Abuse Resistance Education
(D.A.R.E.). The list also included hiring school resource ofﬁ-
cers, conducting drug testing and locker searches, and establish-
ing or expanding alternative education programs. President
George W. Bush particularly favored student drug testing,
although because it is costly, many districts could not establish
testing programs. A very controversial provision of NCLB
allowed students enrolled in a school that had been labeled
“persistently dangerous” to transfer to another school in the dis-
trict. Critics noted that rather than address what was making
the school violent, this provision would result in ﬂight from
the school. It also gave districts a powerful incentive to underre-
port school violence so as not to lose students. Many others
took issue with the list of evidence-based practices, suggesting
that it was weak on curricular changes and heavy on punitive
and technological bandaids that are incapable of changing the
school culture. Further, critics fear that the emphasis on gradu-
ating all students would result in districts either promoting
youth who had not mastered the required content or ushering
them into alternative schools.
Background and History
39

After the tragic massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary, many
states enacted new gun control laws. While President Obama
has pushed for additional federal controls, none have been
enacted to date. He did, however, issue 23 executive orders
related to gun control. In all, 109 new state laws were passed.
In Democrat-controlled states, laws were more likely to man-
date background checks for gun purchases from a broader audi-
ence. In Republican-controlled states, new gun laws tended to
loosen restrictions. In some states, new laws allowed for educa-
tors to carry loaded weapons. Some 33 states considered such
legislation, but only 5 added laws allowing educators to carry
ﬁrearms on campus. Prior to these new laws, however, some
states posed few restrictions on where someone could carry a
licensed ﬁrearm, and thus educators were sometimes allowed
to bring them on school grounds. For instance, in some states
in which rural districts do not have ofﬁcers on campus, the
schools are allowed to train teachers and then provide them
with guns to carry. While advocates maintain that this can deter
students from acting violently and thereby keep the school
safer, critics contend that educators are not amply trained to
serve in this capacity. Further, many are concerned that, in
the event of a shooter on campus, having more armed persons
would complicate the issue for law enforcement, as they might
be unable to differentiate the perpetrators from other shooters.
Additionally, critics have expressed concern that frustrated edu-
cators might use their weapons inappropriately. Court cases
also shape school responses.
The following section provides an overview of the most
signiﬁcant Supreme Court cases related to school violence.
Supreme Court Cases
In Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District
(1969), the Supreme Court did not say that schools were pro-
hibited from limiting student speech or expression, but rather
that students in public schools do retain freedom of speech
40
School Violence

and expression. John Tinker, 15, MaryBeth Tinker, 13, and
Christopher Eckhardt, 16, were sent home from school for
wearing black armbands to protest U.S. involvement in the
Vietnam War. Their action was in violation of a recently
enacted school policy prohibiting such armbands. The Court
did not prohibit schools from limiting student speech or
expression but rather that they could not prohibit legitimate
political activity. In later cases about free speech, the Court
ruled on the side of the schools. In 1986, the Supreme Court
afﬁrmed that schools could set rules related to appropriate
speech during school-related activities. Matthew Fraser was
nominating a friend for student council, and in his speech
before the student body, he made a variety of sexually provoca-
tive comments and double entendres, which resulted in stu-
dents
yelling
out
inappropriately
and
making
sexually
degrading and suggestive gestures.
In 1975 the Supreme Court made an important decision
regarding students’ due process rights during disciplinary pro-
cedures. In Goss v. Lopez, the Court ruled that schools must
hold a hearing before they can suspend a student. The chal-
lenge involved Dwight Lopez and eight other students who
were suspended for 10 days from Marion Franklin High
School in Ohio for destroying school property. The students
were protesting U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War. Lopez
testiﬁed that at least 75 students were suspended that day,
which was allowed without a hearing per Ohio law at the time.
The students and their parents were invited to attend a
conference after the suspension. The Supreme Court’s decision
was somewhat limited, applying only to suspensions for 10 days
or less, but the Court suggested that stronger safeguards than
just a hearing should be considered before lengthier suspen-
sions could be assigned.
Just two years after Goss, the Supreme Court issued another
important case regarding school disciplinary practices. In
Ingraham v. Wright the Court determined that disciplinary
paddling, generally referred to as corporal punishment, does
Background and History
41

not violate students’ Eighth Amendment right to be free of
cruel and unusual punishment. James Ingraham, a 14-year-old
eighth-grade student at Charles Drew Junior High School,
was accused of failing to promptly leave the stage of the school
auditorium when asked to do so by a teacher. He was taken to
the principal’s ofﬁce, where he denied the accusation. Principal
Willie J. Wright Jr. demanded that Ingraham bend over to be
paddled. When Ingraham refused, Wright forcibly placed him
face down on the top of a table and paddled him more than
20 times while Assistant Principal Lemmie Deliford held his
arms and another assistant, Solomon Barnes, held his legs.
The paddling resulted in signiﬁcant injury, with Ingraham
sustaining a hematoma that required medical attention. His
physician recommended he rest at home for 11 days.
Davis v. Monroe County School Board was a case heard before
the U.S. Supreme Court about the liability of school districts in
preventing and responding to sexual harassment. LaShonda
Davis had complained of repeated sexual harassment by a class-
mate at Hubbard Elementary in Monroe County, Georgia.
The ﬁfth-grader said the boy, known as G. F., would touch
her breasts and genitals and make inappropriate remarks.
LaShonda reported the abuse to her teacher and her
mother multiple times. Her mother reported it to school
administration, but no real action was taken by the school.
After the boy rubbed up against LaShonda in a sexually pro-
vocative way, which she again reported, the boy was eventually
charged and pleaded guilty to sexual battery. LaShonda suffered
tremendously from the months of abuse; her grades fell
dramatically, and her father once found a suicide note.
Subsequent investigations revealed that G. F. had been harass-
ing other students as well. In a suit against the district,
LaShonda’s mother argued that the school district, from
LaShonda’s teachers to the school administration, had failed
to respond in a timely and appropriate fashion, which allowed
the abuse to persist. She also noted that the district had not
instructed staff on how to respond to sexual harassment and
42
School Violence

actually had no school policy on the issue. The Supreme Court
ruled that districts can indeed be held liable for failing to
respond to allegations of sexual harassment. It was a limited
decision, however, as the Court did not mandate preventative
measures.
In 1995, the Supreme Court heard another case related to
school searches. In Vernonia School District 47 J v. Acton, the
Court held that a suspicionless drug test for students seeking
to participate in extracurricular athletics was not a violation of
their Fourth Amendment right. Seventh-grade student James
Acton wanted to be statistician for the school’s football team.
He refused the sign the testing consent form and was prohib-
ited from playing. The school had instituted the policy due to
concerns about students’ drug use. In particular, teachers and
administrators had heard student-athletes boasting about their
consumption of illicit drugs, and thus the district determined
that they were leaders of the school’s “drug culture.” The policy
required students to be tested before the season. A random
selection of students was also chosen to undergo a urinalysis test
weekly during the athletic seasons. Samples were sent to an
independent laboratory to test for amphetamines, marijuana,
and cocaine. Results were disseminated only to the school
superintendent, principals, vice principals, and athletic direc-
tors. Students whose samples showed a positive result were
tested a second time. If that test was negative, no further action
was taken. If the second test was positive for any of the listed
substances, the student athlete could choose between two
options: (1) participate in a substance abuse assistance program
that mandated weekly drug testing, or (2) be suspended from
that athletic season as well as the next season. Students who
tested positive for illicit drugs a second time were automatically
suspended from participating. In a 6–3 vote, the Supreme
Court held that children in schools have less privacy than adults
and that because schools are to act in loco parentis, or in place of
parents, they have an obligation to keep the educational and
athletic environments safe and drug free. Although the case
Background and History
43

did not speciﬁcally address school violence, it served to expand
school ofﬁcials’ ability to search students. In 2002, the
Supreme Court again heard a case about school drug testing.
In Board of Ed. of Independent School District No. 92 of
Pottawatomie County v. Earls, the court again afﬁrmed schools’
use of drug testing as constitutional, expanding the target pop-
ulation to include any student involved in an extracurricular
activity. Lindsay Earls and Daniel James, both 16, and
Lindsay’s sister Lacey were all subject to drug testing in 1999
at Tecumseh High School. Lindsay was in the choir, marching
band, National Honor Society, and the school’s Academic
Team. James was seeking to participate on the Academic
Team. Lindsay Earls did undergo the urinalysis and tested neg-
ative for drugs, but her family decided to pursue a lawsuit
against the school because she and others found the process to
be degrading and dehumanizing. Much like the policy in the
Vernonia case, Tecumseh High School required students to
ﬁrst enroll in counseling if they tested positive as well as to
undergo additional drug tests. They were suspended from
involvement if they refused or if they again tested positive.
The heated oral arguments addressed whether students
involved in academic or arts-related clubs were really more
likely to engage in illicit drug use and whether doing so posed
a threat to school safety. Opponents of drug testing argued that
this type of blanket, suspicionless test of youth who seek to
engage in activities that are part of the school’s curriculum (as
band and choir satisﬁed the school’s ﬁne arts requirement)
was overbroad and violated student’s privacy rights. Earls and
others complained that a monitor watched them urinate and
that they were called onto a stage when they were selected,
which was embarrassing. In a 5–4 decision, the justices upheld
the policy, deeming the drug testing to be administrative in
nature and therefore not actually a search that is protected by
the Fourth Amendment. As in Vernonia, the justices seemed
to believe that school-based drug testing is a deterrent to youth
substance abuse, although studies show it is not. In 2003,
44
School Violence

researchers at the University of Michigan conducted a study of
76,000 students across the United States and found that rates
of drug use did not differ signiﬁcantly between schools that
had drug testing and those that did not. Justices David
Souter, John Paul Stevens, and Sandra Day O’Connor dis-
sented, noting that the extracurricular activities were not neces-
sarily voluntary. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg also dissented,
arguing that the school could not provide a speciﬁc rationale
for the policy and expressing concern that rather than deterring
drug use it would deter involvement. In the years following
these two decisions, the percentage of schools that use some
form of drug testing expanded from approximately 7 percent
to close to 20 percent.
Seven years later, the Supreme Court heard another school
search case, albeit not about drug testing. In Safford United
School District #1 v. Redding, the Court held that the strip
search of a 13-year-old student based on allegations that she
had ibuprofen she had not checked in at the school ofﬁce was
an unconstitutional violation of privacy rights. Another student
at the school was found with ibuprofen and claimed she had
gotten it from Savannah Redding, an honor student. School
ofﬁcials searched Redding’s backpack and outer clothing before
stripping her down to her underwear and asking her to shake
them out so that her breasts and pelvic area were visible.
Nothing was found, and Redding described the incident as
“the most humiliating experience of my life.” The Court deci-
sion was 8–1, with the justices expressing grave concern that
the school’s impetus for the search was so weak, given the alle-
gation that it was a legal substance that Redding allegedly had
and that the search so intrusive. The Court did exempt from
the liability the assistant principal who authorized the search,
arguing that he acted in good faith. Justice Clarence Thomas
dissented, maintaining that the search was logical and that the
Court’s decision would encourage youth to hide drugs in their
underwear. Because the Court only considered the narrow issue
of strip searches for prescription drugs, they left open the issue
Background and History
45

of the constitutionality of school strip searches for other pur-
poses. Previous Court decisions had upheld strip searches based
on anonymous tips that students had illicit drugs, incriminat-
ing letters found in classrooms, and allegations of stolen money.
Critics contend that it is deeply problematic that school ofﬁcials
can conduct such invasive searches on youth and that in cases
where there is strong evidence that youth have illegal substan-
ces, they have the option of detaining the student until law
enforcement can arrive with a warrant for a search.
One of the most disturbing strip search cases involved allega-
tions that Brian Cornﬁeld, a student with learning disabilities,
was “crotching” drugs because his genital region looked larger
than normal and because a teacher’s aide had heard rumors that
his family was involved with drugs. Although Cornﬁeld was
made to strip down to his underwear and hold them out for
an administrator to ensure that he was hiding nothing, no drugs
were found. The Seventh Circuit Court ruled in 1993 that the
search was both reasonable in its inception and not overly
intrusive. In one case, two 13-year-old students were strip
searched after they were accused of stealing $10 from a wallet
they found and turned into their teacher. The school district
settled for an undisclosed amount. In another case, Singleton
v. Board of Education, 894 F. Supp. 386 (F. Kan. 1995),
another 13-year-old was accused of stealing money from a
woman’s car. The assistant principal took Singleton, the stu-
dent, to his ofﬁce, reaching into his pockets, turned them inside
out, removed and searched his socks and shoes, patted him
down, including Singleton’s genitals, felt inside his waistband,
forced him to hold up his arms while his shirt was removed,
and ﬁnally searched the coat, books, and papers in his locker.
No money or other contraband was found, but the court deter-
mined this series of searches was justiﬁed because Singleton had
been in trouble before. It is not yet clear what age is too young
for students to endure strip searching, as previous cases have left
standing schools’ decisions to strip search eight-year-olds who
were accused of taking $7.
46
School Violence

On March 25, 2013, the Supreme Court issued a ruling on the
use of canine searches that may have implications for schools. In
Florida v. Jardines, the Court ruled 5–4 that a canine sniff for ille-
gal drugs outside of someone’s home is indeed a search and thus is
subject to the warrant requirement. Previously, lower courts had
called canine indications “administrative” and thus not actually
searches that are protective by the Fourth Amendment. On the
other hand, Justice Alito noted that the pivotal issue was that
the canine was brought to someone’s home, not a public place.
Schools often conduct lockdowns in which they search stu-
dents’ lockers. The Supreme Court has never ruled on the con-
stitutionality of such searches, but previous courts have held
that such searches are administrative in nature and, because
the lockers are actually school property, the students have no
privacy right to them. In October 2013, the Supreme Court
declined to hear the case Burlison v. Springﬁeld Public Schools,
which would have addressed random lockdowns, mass searches,
and the use of drug-snifﬁng dogs on campus. The Rutherford
Institute had challenged a Missouri school district’s policy of
locking students down in classrooms while the sheriff’s ofﬁce
brought in drug-snifﬁng canines to conduct mass searches of
school grounds, including student lockers and the contents
inside them. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth
Circuit found the lockdown policy was a reasonable procedure
to maintain the safety and security of students at the school.
However, Rutherford Institute attorneys disagreed, insisting
that government ofﬁcials should be required to show particular-
ized suspicion for instituting such aggressive searches and to
operate within the parameters of the Fourth Amendment.
Conclusion
This chapter offered an assessment of the primary tools used to
understand school violence, beginning with the main types of
violence perpetrated in schools, the surveys and other instru-
ments used to collect data about the issue, and a history of the
Background and History
47

most infamous incidents of school violence. Further, the chap-
ter sought to provide readers with an understanding of the ways
that data about school violence has shaped the introduction
of legislation and court cases devoted to responding to and
preventing school violence.
Further Reading
Adelson, E. (2009, April 24). Did Corporal Punishment Save a
Struggling School? Newsweek. Retrieved May 27, 2014,
from http://www.newsweek.com/did-corporal-punishment
-save-struggling-school-77227
Alanazez, T. (2010, March 26). Dillard High School Shooter
Sentenced to 25 Years for Classmate’s Murder. South Florida
Sun Sentinel. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://articles
.sun-sentinel.com/2010-03-26/news/ﬂ-dillard-shooting
-sentencing-20100325_1_teah-wimberly-amanda-collette
-larry-s-davis
Amnesty International. (2008). A Violent Education: Corporal
Punishment of Children in U.S. Public Schools. New York:
Amnesty International.
Anderson, S. (2008). A Call for Drug-Testing of High School
Athletes. Marquette Sports Law Review, 19(2), 325–35.
Arnold, T. (1996). Constitutionality of Random Drug Testing
of Student-Athletes Makes the Cut. . .but Will the Athletes?
Journal of Law & Education, 25(1), 190–98.
Aronson, E. (2000). Nobody Left to Hate: Teaching Compassion
after Columbine. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Associated Press. (2008, May 15). Missouri Woman Indicted
in MySpace Cyberbullying Case That Ended in Teen’s
Suicide. Fox News. Retrieved May 6, 2010, from http://
www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,356056,00.html
Barkley, R., & Murphy, L. (1998). Attention-Deﬁcit Hyperactivity
Disorder: A Clinical Workbook. New York: Guilford.
48
School Violence

Barnes, R. (2009). Supreme Court Rules Strip Search
Violated 13-Year-Old Girl’s Rights. Washington Post.
Retrieved May 27, 2014, from http://washingtonpost
.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/06/25/AR20090625
01690.html
Beger, R. (2003). The “Worst of Both Worlds”: School
Security and the Disappearing Fourth Amendment Rights of
Students. Criminal Justice Review, 28, 336–54.
Blenkinsop, P. (2002, April 27). Shootings to Reignite Debate
on Gun Control. Toronto Star, p. A26.
Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence. (2004). On Target:
The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Act. Retrie-
ved May 27, 2014, from http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2009/06/25/AR2009062501690.html
Burns, R., & Crawford, C. (1999). School Shootings, the
Media, and Public Fear: Ingredients for a Moral Panic.
Crime, Law & Social Change, 32, 147–69.
Caistor, N. (2002, April 28). Proﬁle of a Teenage Killer. BBC
News. Retrieved May 27, 2014, from http://news.bbc.co
.uk/2/hi/europe/1956206.stm
Cannon, A. (2000a). The Youngest Shooter. U.S. News &
World Report, 128(10), 27.
Cannon, A. (2000b). Kayla’s Law: Gun Control. U.S. News &
World Report, 128(11), 39.
Casella, R. (2001). At Zero Tolerance: Punishment, Prevention,
and School Violence. New York: Peter Lang.
Cathcart, R. (2003, February 23). Boy’s Killing, Labeled a
Hate Crime, Stuns Town. New York Times. Retrieved
May 3, 2010, from http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/23/
us/23oxnard.html
Charles Carl Roberts IV. (n.d.). Murderpedia. Retrieved
March 31, 2014, from http://www.murderpedia.org/male
.R/r/roberts-charles.htm
Background and History
49

Chen, S. (2010, October 4). After Student’s Death, a Weeklong
Look into Bullying. CNN. Retrieved October 28, 2010, from
http://www.cnn.com/2010/LIVING/10/04/bullying.special
.explainer/index.html
Clark-Flory, T. (2010, April 8). Phoebe Prince’s Bullies Get
Bullied. Salon. Retrieved May 5, 2010, from http://www
.salon.com/life/broadsheet/2010/04/08/phoebe_prince
_bullies_get_bullied
Clete, S., Bailey, C., Carona, A., & Mebane, D. (2002). School
Crime Policy Changes: The Impact of Recent Highly-
Publicized School Crimes. American Journal of Criminal
Justice, 26, 269–88.
Cloud, J. (1999, May 31). Just a Routine School Shooting.
Time, 153(21), 34.
Cloud, J. (2008, February 18). Prosecuting the Gay Teen
Murder. Time. Retrieved May 3, 2010, from http://www
.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1714214,00.html
Clouston, E., & Boseley, S. (2013, March 14). Sixteen Children
Killed in Dunblane Massacre. The Guardian. Retrieved
March 31, 2014, from http://www.theguardian.com/the
guardian/2013/mar/14/dunblane-massacre-scotland-killing
Coloroso, B. (2004). The Bully, the Bullied, and the Bystander.
New York: HarperCollins.
Conn, K. (2004). Bullying and Harassment: A Legal Guide for
Educators. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.
Cullen, D. (2010). Columbine. New York: Twelve.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2007, May 21). Evaluating “No Child
Left Behind.” The Nation. Retrieved May 4, 2010, from
http://www.thenation.com/article/evaluating-no-child-left
-behind?page=0,0
Dautrich, K., & Yalof, D. (2008). The Future of the First
Amendment: The Digital Media, Civic Education, and Free
50
School Violence

Expression Rights in America’s High Schools. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Davey, M., & Harris, G. (2005, March 26). Family Wonders
if Prozac Prompted School Shootings. New York Times.
Retrieved April 14, 2010, from http://www.nytimes.com/
2005/03/26/national/26shoot.html
Davies, L. (2009, March 11). “Are You All Dead Yet?”—
Teenage Gunman Kills 15 in School Massacre in Germany.
The Guardian. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/11/germany-school
-shooting-winnenden-albertville
Davis, C. (2003). Dare to Be Different: Luke Woodham. In
Children Who Kill: Proﬁles of Pre-Teen and Teenage Killers
(pp. 67–79). London: Allison & Busby.
Death from Ritalin. (n.d). Retrieved April 16, 2010, from
http://ritalindeath.com/ADHD-Truths.htm
Dejong, W., Epstein, J., & Hart, T. (2003). Bad Things
Happen in Good Communities: The Rampage Shooting in
Edinboro, Pennsylvania and Its Aftermath. In M. Moore,
C. Petrie, A. Braga., & B. McLaughlin (Eds.) Deadly Lessons:
Understanding Lethal School Violence (pp. 70–100).
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
DeNies, Y. (2012, March 16). Should Your Child Be Spanked
at School? In 19 States It’s Legal. ABC News. Retrieved
March 31, 2014, from http://abcnews.go.com/US/spanking
-school-19-states-corporal-punishment-legal/story?id=15932135
Devine, J. (1996). Maximum Security. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Dolnik, A. (2007). Negotiating the Impossible? The Beslan
Hostage Crisis. London: Royal United Services Institute.
Do Something. (n.d.). 11 Facts about School Violence.
Retrieved April 1, 2014 from https://www.dosomething
.org/facts/11-facts-about-bullying
Background and History
51

Dupre, A. (2010). Speaking Up: The Unintended Cost of
Free Speech in Public Schools. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Egan, T. (1998, June 14). Where Rampages Begin: A Special
Report. New York Times. Retrieved May28, 2014, from
http://www.nytimes.com/1998/06/14/us/where-rampages
-begin-special-report-adolescent-angst-shooting-up-schools
.html
Eggington, J. (1991). Day of fury: The tory of the tragic shootings
that forever changed the village of Winnetka. New York:
William Morrow.
Epp, J., & Watkinson, A. (Eds.). (1996). Systemic Violence:
How Schools Hurt Children. London: Falmer.
Fast, J. (2008). Ceremonial Violence: A Psychological Explanation
of School Shootings. Woodstock, NY: Overland Press.
Fineran, S., & Bolen, R. (2006). Risk Factors for Peer Sexual
Harassment in Schools. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 21
(9), 1169–91.
Finley, L. (2006). Examining School Searches as Systemic
Violence. Critical Criminology, 14, 117–35.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2007). Encyclopedia of Juvenile Violence.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2011). Encyclopedia of School Crime and
Violence. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Finley, L., & Finley, P. (2004). Piss Off! How Drug Testing and
Other Privacy Violations Are Alienating America’s Youth.
Monroe, ME: Common Courage.
Flowers, R., & Flowers, H. (2004). Murders in the United
States. Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Former Student Storms German School, Shooting Five People.
(2006, November 20). WHDH News. Retrieved April 29,
52
School Violence

2010, from http://www3.whdh.com/news/articles/world/
BO34580/
Giduck, J. (2006). Terror at Beslan: A Russian Tragedy with
Lessons for America’s Schools. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Goldberg, L., et al. (2003). Drug Testing Athletes to Prevent
Substance Abuse: Background and Pilot Study Results of the
SATURN (Student Athletes Testing Using Random
Notiﬁcation) study. Journal of Adolescent Health, 32, 16–25.
Grenoble, R. (2012, October 10). Amanda Todd: Bullied
Canadian Teen Commits Suicide after Prolonged Battle
Online and in School. Hufﬁngton Post. Retrieved March 28,
2014, from http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2012/10/11/
amanda-todd-suicide-bullying_n_1959909.html
Gunderson, D. (2005, March 23). Who Was Jeff Weise?
Minnesota Public Radio. Retrieved October 22, 2013, from
http://news.minnesota.publicradio.org/features/2005/03/
22_ap_redlakesuspect/
Guzman, D. (2013, March 21). Teen Burn-Attack Victim
Michael Brewer Released after Drug-related Arrest. Miami
Herald. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www
.miamiherald.com/2013/03/21/3298180/teen-burn-attack
-victim-michael.html
Harding, T. (2001). Fatal School Shootings, Liability, and
Sovereign Immunity: Where Should the Line Be Drawn?
Journal of Law & Education, 30, 162–70.
Harris, C. (2008, February 21). Lawrence King—Student Who
Was Murdered for Being Gay—to Be Honored with National
Day of Silence. MTV. Retrieved May 3, 2010, from http://
www.mtv.com/news/articles/1582039/20080221/story.jhtml
Harris Interactive. (2001). Hostile Hallways: Bullying, Teasing, and
Sexual Harassment in School. Washington, DC: American
Association of University Women Educational Foundation.
Background and History
53

Henry, S. (2000). What Is School Violence? An Integrated
Deﬁnition. Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 567, 123–39.
High, B. (2007). Bullycide in America: Moms Speak Out about
the Bullying/Suicide Connection. Available at http://www
.bullycide.org
High School Hazing. (n.d.) Alfred University Hazing Site.
Available at http://www.alfred.edu/hs_hazing/
Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. (2008). Cyberbullying: An
Exploratory Analysis of Factors Related to Offending and
Victimization.Deviant Behavior, 29(2), 129–56.
Hyman, I., & Snook, P. (1999). Dangerous Schools. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Jensen, P., Martin, D., & Cantwell, D. (1997). Comorbidity
and ADHD: Implications for Research, Practice, and DSM-
V. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 36, 1065–79.
Johnston, L., O’Malley, P., Bachman, J., & Schulenberg, J.
(2012). Monitoring the Future: National Survey Results on
Drug Use, 1985–2012. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from
http://www.monitoringthefuture.org//pubs/monographs/mtf
-vol1_2012.pdf
Kaplan, J., Papajohn, G., & Zorn, E. (1991). Murder of
Innocence: The Tragic Life and Final Rampage of Laurie
Dann, the Schoolhouse Killer. New York: Warner Books.
Kimmel, M., & Mahler, M. (2003). Adolescent Masculinity,
Homophobia, and Violence: Random School Shootings,
1982–2001. American Behavioral Scientist, 46, 1439–58.
Kleinfeld, N., Rivera, R., & Kovaleski, S. (2013, March 28).
Newtown Killer’s Obsessions, in Chilling Detail. New York
Times. Retrieved October 25, 2013, from http://www
.nytimes.com/2013/03/29/nyregion/search-warrants-reveal
-items-seized-at-adam-lanzas-home.html?pagewanted%253
Dall&_r=0
54
School Violence

Kraybill, D. (2011, September 30). Amish Memorials: The
Nickel Mines Pasture and Quiet Forgiveness. Hufﬁngton
Post. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.hufﬁngton
post.com/donald-kraybill/amish-memorials-the-nickel-mines
-memorial_b_982144.html
Langevin, M., Bortnick, K., Hammer, T., & Wiebe, E. (1998).
Teasing/Bullying Experienced by Children Who Stutter:
Toward Development of a Questionnaire. Contemporary
Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 25, 12–24.
Langman, P. (2009). Why Kids Kill: Inside the Minds of School
Shooters. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Larkin, R. (2007). Comprehending Columbine. Philadelphia,
PA: Temple University Press.
Li, Q. (2006). Cyberbullying in Schools: A Research of Gender
Differences. School Psychology International, 27(2), 157–70.
Lieberman, J. (2008). School Shootings: What Every Parent and
Educator Needs to Know to Protect Our Children. Yucca
Valley, CA: Citadel.
Lieberman, J., & Sachs, B. (2008). School Shootings. New York:
Kensington.
Little, L. (2002). Middle-class Mothers’ Perceptions of Peer
and Sibling Victimization among Children with Asperger’s
Syndrome and Nonverbal Learning Disorders. Issues in
Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing, 25, 43–45.
Man Kills Eight at Finnish School. (2007, November 7). BBC
News. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/
2/hi/7082795.stm
Mannuzza, S., Klein, R., Bessler, A., Malloy, P., & LaPadula, M.
(1993). Adult Outcome of Hyperactive Boys: Educational
Achievement, Occupational Rank, and Psychiatric Status.
General Psychiatry, 50, 565–76.
Messerschmidt, J. (2000). Nine Lives: Adolescent Masculinities,
the Body, and Violence. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Background and History
55

Meyer, E. (2009). Gender, Bullying, and Harassment: Strategies
to End Sexism and Homophobia in Schools. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Moore, M., Petrie, C., Braga, A., & McLaughlin, B. (Eds.).
(2003). Deadly Lessons: Understanding Lethal School Violence.
Washington, D.C: National Academies Press.
Moskovitz, D. (2012, October 22). Wayne Treacy Sentenced
to 20 Years in Broward Prison for Beating Girl. Miami
Herald. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www
.miamiherald.com/2012/10/22/3061156/sentencing-for
-wayne-treacy-set.html
Mulrine, A. (1999). Once Bullied, Now Bullies, with Guns.
U.S. News and World Report, 126, 24–26.
Muschert, G. (2007). The Columbine Victims and the Myth
of the Juvenile Superpredator. Youth Violence and Juvenile
Justice, 351–66.
Naughton, K., Thomas, E., & Raymond, J. (2000). Did Kayla
Have to Die? Newsweek, 135(11), 24.
Newman, K., Fox, C., Harding, D., Mehta, J., & Roth, W.
(2004). Rampage: The Social Roots of School Shootings. New
York: Basic.
Nuwer, H. (2000). High School Hazing: When Rites Become
Wrongs. New York: FranklinWatts.
Nuwer, H. (2004). The Hazing Reader. Bloomington, ID:
Indiana University Press.
O’Toole, M. (2000). The School Shooter: A Threat Assessment
Perspective. Quantico, VA: Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Ollove, M. (2010, April 8). Bullying and Teen Suicide: How
Do We Adjust School Climate? Christian Science Monitor.
Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www.csmonitor.com/
USA/Society/2010/0428/Bullying-and-teen-suicide-How
-do-we-adjust-school-climateOwens, B. (2001). Governor’s
Columbine Review Commission Report. Denver, CO: State
56
School Violence

of Colorado Governor’s Ofﬁce. Available at http://www
.state.co.us/columbine.
Paterson, T. (2009, March 15). In Europe’s League of School
Shootings, Germany Comes Top. The Independent (UK).
Retrieved April 10, 2010, from http://www.independent.co
.uk/news/world/europe/in-europes-league-of-school-shoot
ingsgermany-comes-top-1645387.html
PBS Frontline. (2000). The Killer at Thurston High.
Documentary available at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/
frontline/shows/kinkel/
PBS Frontline. (2008). Growing Up Online. Documentary
available at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/kids
online/view/
PBS Frontline. (2010). Digital Nation: Life on the Virtual
Frontier. Documentary available at http://www.pbs.org/
wgbh/pages/frontline/digitalnation/view/
PBS Frontline. (2013, February 19). Raising Adam Lanza.
Documentary available at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/
frontline/raising-adam-lanza/
Phillips, R. (2009, January 18). Purdy Recalled as Bigot and
“Sick, Sick Man.” Retrieved July 19, 2009, from http://
www.recordnet.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20090118/
A_NEWS/901170304/-1/A_SPECIAL0252
Phillips, T. (2007). Beslan: The Tragedy of School Number 1.
London: Granta Books.
Piatigorsky, A., & Hinshaw, S. (2004). Psychopathic Traits in
Boys with and without Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder: Concurrent and Longitudinal Correlates. Journal
of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32(5), 535–50.
Potter, M. (2001, May 2). Friend Says She Saw Teenager Pull
Trigger. CNN. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://edition.
cnn.com/2001/LAW/05/02/teacher.shooting.03/index.html
Powers, R. (2010, October 22). Obama “Shocked and
Saddened” by Gay Bullying Suicides. NBC News. Retrieved
Background and History
57

May 28, 2014, from http://www.nbcnews.com/id/398000
08/ns/us_news-life/t/obama-shocked-saddened-gay-bullying
-suicides/#.U4YnmSj6GFg
PR Newswire. (2014, January 15). Twenty Years since a
Nightmare: Stockton, CA School Shooting of 35 Led to
Strengthening of Gun Laws. PR Newswire. Retrieved
May 28, 2014, from http://www.prnewswire.com/news
-releases/twenty-years-since-a-nightmare-stockton-ca-school
-shooting-of-35-led-to-strengthening-of-gun-laws-60948
957.html
Prospero, M. (2007). Young Adolescents Boys and Dating
Violence: The Beginning of Patriarchal Terrorism. Afﬁlia:
Journal of Women and Social Work, 22(3), 271–80.
Ramirez, X. (2011, November 7). National Study Reveals
Striking Findings on School Sexual Harassment. Care2.
Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.care2.com/
causes/national-study-reveals-striking-ﬁndings-on-school
-sexual-harassment.html
Randall, K. (2001, August 3). Another Florida Teenager
Receives Harsh Adult Sentence. World Socialist Web Site.
Retrieved April 18, 2014, from http://www.wsws.org/
articles/2001/aug2001/ﬂor_a03.shtml
Reinhold, R. (1989, January 19). After Shooting, Horror but
Few Answers. New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2009,
from http://www.nytimes.com/1989/01/19/us/after-shooting
-horror-but-few-answers.html?pagewanted=all
Roche, T. (2001, May 28). Voices from the Cell. Time.
Retrieved December 18, 2008, from http://www.time.com/
time/printout/0,8816,999966,00.html
Rocky Mountain News. (n.d.) Columbine High School
Shootings. Retrieved December 14, 2008, from http://www
.rockymountainnews.com/news/special-reports/columbine/
Rollini, G. (2003). Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education:
A Hollow Victory for Student Victims of Peer Sexual
58
School Violence

Harassment. Florida State University Law Review, 30,
987–1014.
Rosler, M., Retz, W., Retz-Junginger, P., Hengesch, G.,
Schneider, M., Supprian, T., Schwitzgiebel, T., Pinhard, K.,
Dovi-Akune, N., Wender, P., & Thome, J. (2004).
Prevalence of Attention Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD) Comorbid Disorder in Young Adult Male Prison
Inmates. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 254, 365–71.
The Rutherford Institute. (2013, October 8). U.S. Supreme
Court Refuses to Hear Case of Student Subjected to
Random Lockdown and Mass Search by Police in Public
School. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from https://www
.rutherford.org/publications_resources/Press%20Release/
supreme_court_refuses_to_hear_case_of_student_subjected
_to_random_lockdown/
Segal, K., Couwels, J., & Brumﬁeld, B. (2013, October 21).
Mother of Girl Accused of Bullying Florida Teen Arrested
on Unrelated Charges. CNN. Retrieved October 24, 2013,
from http://www.cnn.com/2013/10/17/justice/rebecca
-sedwick-bullying-death/index.html
Sieczkowski, C. (2012, October 16). Amanda Todd’s Alleged
Bully Named by Anonymous after Teen’s Tragic Suicide.
Hufﬁngton Post. Retrieved March 28, 2014, from http://
www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2012/10/16/amanda-todd-bully
-anonymous-suicide_n_1969792.html
Simmons, R. (2010, October 5). Responding to the Bullycides:
How We Can Stand Up and Honor Their Memories.
Hufﬁngton Post. Retrieved October 28, 2010, from
http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/rachel-simmons/
responding-to-the-bully_b_747806.html
Stopbullying.gov. (n.d.). Facts about Bullying. Retrieved
April 1, 2014, from http://www.stopbullying.gov/news/
media/facts/.
Background and History
59

Survivors Recall 1927 Michigan School Massacre. (2009, April 17).
National Public Radio. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=103186662
Teppo, G. (2007, April 19). Experts Ponder Patterns in School
Shootings. USA Today. Retrieved April 19, 2010, from
http://www.usatoday.com/news/education/2007-04-18
-school-shooters_N.htm
Twemlow, S., & Fonagy, P. (2005). The Prevalence of
Teachers Who Bully Students in Schools with Differing
Levels of Behavioral Problems. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162, 2387–90.
Uttley, S. (2006). Dunblane Unburied. London: Book Publishing
World.
Vossekuil, B., Fein, R., Reddy, M., Borum, R., & Modzeleski,
W. (2002). The Final Report and Findings of the Safe School
Initiative: Implications for the Prevention of School Attacks in
the United States. Jessup, MD: Education Publications
Center, U.S. Department of Education.
Walsh, M. (2013, October 14). Education-related Cases Part
of High-Court Workload. Education Week. Retrieved
March 31, 2014, from http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/
2013/10/16/08scotus.h33.html
Watkinson, A. (1997). Administrative Complicity and Systemic
Violence in Education. In J. Epp & A. Watkinson (Eds.),
Systemic Violence in Education: Broken Promises (pp. 3–24).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Webley, K. (2011, May 5). Teens Who Admitted to Bullying
Phoebe Prince Sentenced. Time. Retrieved October 24,
2013, from http://newsfeed.time.com/2011/05/05/teens
-who-admitted-to-bullying-phoebe-prince-sentenced/
Wiener, J., & Mak, M. (2009). Peer Victimization in Children
with Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Psychology in
the Schools, 46(2), 116–131.
60
School Violence

Wise, T. (2001, March 6). School Shootings and White
Denial. Alternet. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www
.alternet.org/story/10560/school_shootings_and_white
_denial
Yamaguchi, R., & Hinkle-DeGroot, R. (2002). The Legal and
Educational Issues behind Drug Testing in School. Ann Arbor,
MI: Institute for Social Research.
Background and History
61


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
This chapter examines the effects of school violence, looking
beyond individual victims to address broader impacts. In addi-
tion, the chapter highlights the most important criminological
theories to explain why school violence occurs. The chapter also
offers an overview of the risk and protective factors for individ-
uals, families, schools, and communities, providing an up-to-
date compendium of research from various ﬁelds. Further, the
chapter offers a critical discussion of common interventions
and prevention efforts used in school.
Effects of School Violence
The effects of school violence are widespread. Beyond the
immediate and longitudinal effect on those who are victimized,
there are long-term effects on perpetrators, on educators, and
on the school climate. Additionally, fear of school violence
prompts parents and law-makers to demand changes that may
be helpful or, in other cases, counterproductive.
Individuals who are bullied, harassed, or assaulted in school
suffer from a variety of short- and long-term consequences.
These youth often feel stressed and report higher levels of
63
A student pays tribute to his deceased classmates at a makeshift memorial
outside the Red Lake Senior High School in Red Lake, Minnesota on
March 25, 2005. Jeff Weise, a 16-year-old student at Red Lake High
School, killed ten people in a shooting spree. (AP Photo/Ann Heisenfelt)

anxiety, depression, and hopelessness. They are more likely
to skip school, tend to report lower grades, and are more
likely to drop out of school. School violence victims are also at
greater risk for attempting self-harming behaviors, including
drinking, using drugs, and suicide. Girls and LGBT youth
who are bullied and harassed report poorer mental health
than do boy victims. In the late 2000s, the nation began
to pay more attention to the issue of bullycide, or when a bully-
ing victim commits suicide, after a spate of high proﬁle
incidents.
Often, the lines between bully and bullied are blurred.
That is, many bullied youth also bully others. Additionally,
those who have experienced repeated victimization by school
peers may take extreme responses to protect themselves, to stop
the abuse, and to win the respect of classmates. Victims of
bullying are more likely to carry weapons to school, increasing
the risk that someone will be seriously hurt or killed.
According to a report by the U.S. Secret Service, 71 percent
of all high-proﬁle school shooters had been bullied at school.
Victims of dating violence also suffer immediate and long-
term effects. They may endure bruises, lacerations, and other
physical injuries, or they may experience sexual health prob-
lems (such as sexually transmitted infections) or unwanted
pregnancies. In extreme cases, dating violence can be fatal.
The risk that an abusive relationship will become deadly
increases dramatically when victims attempt to leave their abus-
ers, with 75 percent of domestic and dating violence fatalities
occurring when the victim announces she or he is ending the
relationship. Several homicides have occurred on school
grounds as well. On March 28, 2003, Marcus McTear stabbed
his girlfriend, Ortralla Mosley, in their Texas high school.
Mosley, just 15 at the time, died on the spot.
There are lifetime effects of experiencing an abusive relation-
ship as well. Like bullying victims, victims of abuse are more
likely to engage in risky sexual behavior, unhealthy or disor-
dered eating, self-mutilation, substance abuse, and suicidal
64
School Violence

ideation. Dating violence is also a signiﬁcant predictor of later
involvement in abusive domestic relationships.
Even youth who have not experienced bullying or harass-
ment are affected when it happens. Studies have shown that
between 5 and 10 percent of high school students skip at least
one day of school each year due to safety concerns.
For teachers, incidents of victimization may lead to profes-
sional disenchantment and even departure from the profession
altogether. Teachers lose almost 1 million paid work days
because of actual or fear of harassment, according to the
American Psychological Association. Annually, the national
cost of teacher victimization to teachers, parents, and taxpayers
may exceed $2 billion.
Adults’ concern about school violence has prompted many
state laws as well as school policies, as detailed in this and other
chapters. Many have discussed the fact that while school vio-
lence is always a serious issue, disproportionate attention has
been paid to the risk of school shootings. That is, there has
been far more discussion and debate, as well as policies and laws
enacted, to address these relatively rare incidents in comparison
to the more frequently occurring forms of school violence like
bullying and sexual harassment. Some have called this a moral
panic. Moral panic refers to a period in which there is great fear
or hysteria about a speciﬁc social issue. Coined by sociologist
Jock Young in the early 1970s and popularized by sociologist
Stanley Cohen in 1973, moral panics generate great concern
and a call to “do something.” In the case of high-proﬁle school
shootings, many parents demanded that districts enact tighter
security measures. Critics contend that moral panics reinforce
stereotypical thinking about social issues and that reactionary
responses can be costly, wasteful, and even damaging. Some
adults have even moved their children to different schools as a
result of the moral panic about school violence.
Given the many ways school violence affects different par-
ties, it is important to try to explain why it occurs so that the
most effective responses and prevention efforts can be created.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
65

The following sections provide an overview of the primary
criminological theories that have been used to explain school
violence.
Biological Theories
A number of biological theories have been offered to explain
the criminal activity of both adults and juveniles. The idea is
that genetic and biological factors affect both the brain and
the central nervous system, impacting offenders’ choices.
Some of the earliest biological theories suggested that offenders
could be identiﬁed because they looked different than did non-
offenders. For instance, Cesare Lombroso, an Italian physician
considered the father of criminology, maintained that delin-
quents were biologically inferior, what he called “criminal
atavists,” and were mentally less evolved. They could be identi-
ﬁed by speciﬁc physical characteristics, like long arm spans and
hooked noses, according to Lombroso. He studied prison
inmates, taking scientiﬁc measurements of their eyes, ears,
teeth, jaws, and arms. Although he advanced the ﬁeld because
he was the ﬁrst to use scientiﬁc methods, Lombroso’s work
has been discredited because he only studied inmates, not a
comparison group of nonoffenders.
Other criminologists picked up on Lombroso’s emphasis on
intelligence. Charles Goring maintained that inferior intelli-
gence was a heritable trait, and thus those who were “feeble-
minded” were prone to criminality. Richard Dugdale and
Arthur Estabrook also studied genetics and intelligence, this
time focusing speciﬁcally on one family that had a criminal
record going back decades. Between the 1700s and 1870s, the
Jukes family had produced seven murderers, 60 habitual
thieves, 50 prostitutes, and approximately 90 other criminals.
Again, later scholars took issue with the methodologies
employed by these criminologists and asserted that their work
was socially or politically motivated. Very dangerous policies
have been enacted as a result of this type of thinking. The
66
School Violence

U.S. eugenics movement, an effort to maintain “racial purity”
by ensuring that people of color, who were deemed feeble-
minded, could not reproduce, is an example of the policy impli-
cations of some biological theories. Approximately 7,600 women
in North Carolina were sterilized as a result of the eugenics
movement, which continued until the 1960s. Further, there is
documentation that Adolf Hitler read literature from U.S.
proponents of eugenics in crafting his ﬁnal solution.
William Sheldon picked up Lombroso’s emphasis on body
characteristics. He believed that certain body types made youth
more prone to criminal activity. According to Sheldon, there
were four basic body types: (1) endomorphs, who had soft,
rounded bodies and were often overweight individuals; (2)
mesomorphs, who tend to be large, muscular, and athletic; (3)
ectomorphs, or those who were thin and fragile; and (4) bal-
anced or “normal” bodies. Calling his theory somatotyping,
Sheldon posited that mesomorphs were the most likely to be
aggressive and violent, and thus more criminal. Sheldon’s
theory was also developed from deeply ﬂawed studies that failed
to account for important variables. In the 1950s, the husband-
and-wife team of Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck compared 500
white male delinquents with 500 white male nondelinquents
and agreed with Sheldon that it was mesomorphs who were
responsible for a disproportionate amount of the offending.
They postulated that it was not that the body type made juve-
niles delinquent but rather that youth with this body type
relieved their tensions and frustrations through socially unac-
ceptable ways. The idea that people can identify offenders by
their physical characteristics persists today, in particular in
popular culture images that depict demonic-looking offenders.
Several of the school shooters, most notoriously Eric Harris
and Dylan Klebold in the Columbine massacre, were said to
have worn speciﬁc types of clothing, what is often called a goth
look. Research by a number of scholars and investigators, how-
ever, cautions against any such form of proﬁling, as it can be
dangerously biased and can limit thinking, thus failing to
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
67

prepare educators and others to look for warning signs among
youth who look or dress in more mainstream ways.
One of the best ways to study biological links to crime is
through studies of identical twins who have been reared apart.
In doing so, researchers can account for socialization as a factor
that explains criminality, thereby isolating biological factors.
Several studies have produced statistically signiﬁcant results,
suggesting some biological links to crime, but biology still tends
to explain a small percentage of an individual’s behavior.
Further, these studies tend to involve very small samples.
Indeed, there has never been a study of this kind speciﬁcally
related to school violence.
Many researchers today are studying biochemical explana-
tions for crime and violence. Studies have focused on the role
that sugar and food additives, as well as vitamin and mineral
deﬁciencies, may play in explaining crime. Further, studies have
also examined the linkage between exposure to certain toxic
chemicals, like lead, copper, and zinc, and criminal activity. A
2000 study determined that gasoline lead exposure between
1879 and 1940 explained approximately 70 percent of the
variation in murder rates in that time period (Stretesky &
Lynch, 2001). Several studies in the 1980s found that youth
delinquency decreased when young people were fed well-
balanced diets including protein, vitamins, and little sugar and
carbohydrates. For instance, Alexander Schauss, Clifford
Simonsen, and Jeffery Bland conducted a study of the diets of
juvenile offenders in 1979 and found that compared to a con-
trol group, they consumed 32 percent more sugar. A longitudi-
nal study published in 2004 by researchers at the University of
South Carolina found that children who were deﬁcient in zinc,
iron, vitamin B, and protein at age three were more likely to be
irritable and to pick ﬁghts at age eight. By age 11, those same
youth were more likely to swear, cheat, and get into ﬁghts, and
by age 17, they were bullies who frequently stole and used drugs.
The effects were more pronounced for those with greater nutri-
tional deﬁciencies (“Poor Diet Linked to Bad Behavior,” 2004).
68
School Violence

While it is unclear what role dietary and other biochemical fac-
tors may have had in the school shooting incidents, there have
been links between bullying behavior and inadequate nutrition.
Other biological theories have explored the connection
between brain defects and crime. Often called minimal brain
dysfunction (MBD), these defects may be caused by the moth-
er’s addiction to drugs or alcohol during pregnancy, by trauma
to the fetus or to the infant baby, or to birth complications.
They may also be heritable traits. To date, however, electroen-
cephalogram analyses are inconclusive in regard to MBD and
juvenile offending. Many studies have linked MBD with
domestic violence perpetration, again suggesting a possible link
with impulse control and aggressive behavior. One expert who
analyzed the brain scan of school shooter Kip Kinkel found that
he had the same damage to the frontal lobe as did 20 of 31
other murderers whose brain scans she analyzed. She said that
these abnormalities might have impaired his ability to learn from
social cues and to control his impulses and reﬂexes. Much con-
cern was raised about the connections between brain abnormal-
ities and violence after reports came out that the Newtown,
Connecticut, shooter Adam Lanza had been diagnosed as having
Asperger’s syndrome, a milder form of autism. Experts were
quick to point out that persons with Asperger’s syndrome or
autism are typically not violent and that it was likely mental
illness and other factors that lead to Lanza’s attack.
Some studies have examined the link between learning dis-
abilities and delinquency. Studies have conﬁrmed that persons
with learning disabilities are overrepresented in prisons and
jails. In 1976, Charles Murray posited two potential reasons
for the high rate of delinquents with learning disabilities. One
is that these youth are impulsive, do not learn from punish-
ment, and thus are more likely to reoffend. The second pos-
sibility is that because these youth tend to struggle in school,
they act out in frustration. It is clear that several of the
infamous school shooters struggled with learning disabilities;
however, many did not.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
69

Another major limitation of the biological theories is that
they tend to be used to explain an individual’s aggressive behav-
ior rather than the actions of those in authority whose policies
and practices are themselves a form of violence.
Psychological Theories
Psychology focuses on looking at the individual, or micro-level,
mental
processes
associated
with
behavior.
Psychologist
Sigmund Freud’s work has been applied to explain delinquent
behavior. Freud maintained that crime is the result of repressed
and unconscious emotional trauma experienced in childhood.
Children who experience and repress trauma develop overactive
ids, what Freud described as our self-centered impulses and
instincts. They fail to develop effective superegos, which
represent social and cultural restraints on the id, or effective
egos, which moderate between the id and the superego. Thus
the impulses prevail, often accompanied by a deep sense of
guilt, which can become abnormal and dangerous. According
to Freud and neo-Freudian psychologists, children and youth
may misbehave so that they can be caught and punished,
thereby assuaging their guilt. The challenge with Freudian
analyses is that these concepts are abstract and thus not meas-
ureable, and so they cannot be proven or disproven.
Other psychological approaches focus on disorders that
might result in a youth acting out. A conduct disorder, which
is behavior that repeatedly violates the rights of others as well
as major norms for conduct, may be connected with school-
based bullying and cheating. To be diagnosed with a conduct
disorder, according to the American Psychiatric Association
(2000), a youth must exhibit at least three of the following
behaviors in a six-month period:
1. Frequent lying
2. Running away from home overnight twice or running
away without returning
70
School Violence

3. Frequent truancy from school or, for working youth,
absence from work
4. Nonconfrontational stealing like shoplifting more than
once
5. Vandalism and destruction of property
6. Breaking and entering into houses, cars, or buildings
7. Arson
8. Cruelty to animals
9. Frequent initiation of physical ﬁghts
10. Use of weapons in physical ﬁghts on more than one
occasion
11. Stealing with confrontation, such as muggings, purse
snatchings, and armed robberies
12. Forcing another person to engage in sexual activity, such as
prostitution or sexual assault
13. Physical violence or cruelty toward people
Critics contend that while this list of criteria is intended to
help distinguish those with conduct disorders from those who
do not have them, there are still a number of vague concepts.
Further, it is unclear why diagnosticians speciﬁed that three
incidents in six months is the pivotal number.
Some have maintained that most school shooters suffer from
sociopathology. Sociopaths are incapable of feeling anguish or
guilt and do not learn from experience. They are often charm-
ing and manipulative, making it difﬁcult for others to identify
their problems. Many sociopaths have above-average intelli-
gence. Reports have suggested that Eric Harris of Columbine
infamy was a sociopath.
One concern about the psychological theories as a whole is
that the ﬁeld is what has been called a soft science. That is,
diagnostic criteria for the various psychological disorders are
not always quantiﬁable and may be quite subjective. So, if it is
unclear whether an individual is properly diagnosed, it is next
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
71

to impossible to determine that his or her actions are the result
of any speciﬁc disorder.
Rational Choice Theory
Rational choice theory is one of many choice-related theories.
Emerging out of Enlightenment-era thinking, choice theories,
often referred to as classical theories, posit that individuals have
free will and agency and thus make decisions or choices about
their behaviors. According to this viewpoint, people weigh the
costs and beneﬁts before deciding which actions to take. Just
like any other behavior, then, rational choice theory explains
that crime is a choice someone might make when he or she
has decided that the beneﬁts outweigh the consequences.
There is support for the fact that some kinds of school violence
are planned well in advance, which would seem to suggest the
offender went through some decision-making process. Many
of the school shooters plotted for months. For instance, Eric
Harris and Dylan Klebold planned their attack, made videos
about what they intended to do, acquired guns, and assembled
and planted bombs. Similarly, one could argue that when
school ofﬁcials perpetrate school violence through the use of
corporal punishment, it is clearly a decision they have thought
about. In 1992, researcher Felix Padilla studied gang members
and found that the gang offered the only real economic oppor-
tunity for youth. His study, then, suggested that gang members
choose to participate because they have weighed their other
options and found them not viable.
Critics of rational choice theory maintain that juveniles,
whose brains are not yet fully formed, do not necessarily have
the mental capacity to weigh costs and beneﬁts in the same
way as do adults. Because juveniles engage in short-term think-
ing, they may not be able to think through the long-term con-
sequences of behaving violently in school. Juveniles notoriously
believe they will not get caught for any indiscretions and
thus are unlikely to perceive apprehension as a risk or cost.
72
School Violence

Additionally, many maintain that the mentally ill do not have
the same ability to weigh costs and beneﬁts. Further, each per-
son’s understanding of the costs and beneﬁts of a particular
action will differ depending on their background, their stakes
in conforming to societal norms, and their ability to understand
all of the costs and beneﬁts. Critics also contend that these the-
ories are too micro-focused; that is, they look only at the indi-
vidual’s choices and not at the social factors that led to them.
Rational choice theory is closely linked with deterrence theory,
which explains that an offender can be deterred from commit-
ting a criminal act or an act of violence if he or she believes
the punishment will be signiﬁcant. Harsher or longer punish-
ments, then, are supposed to deter an offender from repeating
the same behavior (called speciﬁc deterrence) as well as prevent
others from choosing to commit an offense because they know
what will happen if they do (general deterrence). However, crit-
ics contend that the tremendous scope of school violence, even
given harsh sanctions like zero tolerance laws, clearly shows that
youth are not deterred from problem behavior by simple pun-
ishments. In sum, the basic premise that youth weigh the costs
and beneﬁts before acting may simple be wrong.
Similar to rational choice theory, routine activities theory
also posits that crime and violence are behaviors that some peo-
ple choose after weighing the costs and beneﬁts. This theory
adds the notion that opportunity is also a signiﬁcant factor.
Routine activities theory maintains that three things must
happen for crime or violence to occur: (1) a motivated offender,
(2) a suitable target, and (3) lack of capable guardians. A person
motivated to bully others, for instance, is likely to choose a
victim who he or she sees as vulnerable and to pick on that
person when no authority ﬁgures are around. Studies show sup-
port for the fact that bullying in schools occurs most frequently
at lunch time or before or after school (and increasingly, on-
line), all times when authorities are less likely to see what is hap-
pening. Yet critics note that this theory presumes a motivated
offender rather than offering any explanation for what made
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
73

that individual prepared to act out. Advocates of this theory
often recommend greater security measures, like increased
police presence, video cameras, and metal detectors, as a means
of decreasing the suitability of a particular target and increasing
the guardianship, and thereby deterring offenders. Called target
hardening, the idea is that an offender will not choose to com-
mit an act of crime or violence if it is likely that he or she will be
caught. On the other hand, target hardening may simply shift
crime and violence, as motivated offenders may move on to
another location or another suitable victim.
Another theory that comes from the same set of assumptions
about human behavior is called seductions of crime. Jack Katz
studied juvenile offenders and determined that most engaged
in delinquent acts because of what he called “the sneaky thrill.”
These offenders chose to commit criminal acts because they
enjoyed the risk involved. “Pulling one over” gave these youth
a thrill that they considered a beneﬁt of the act. While Katz ini-
tially studies minor, nonviolent acts, he found similar logic
employed by both youth and adults who engaged in more
serious, violent crime as well. The fact that many of the
school shooters have seemed to enjoy their acts of violence
supports Katz’s theory. For example, video recordings of the
Columbine massacre show Harris and Klebold smiling and jok-
ing as they shot up their school library. Yet again, choice theo-
ries do little to explain why offenders are motivated in the ﬁrst
place. In this case, why would a youth choose the “sneaky
thrill” of school violence over some other risk-taking behavior,
like skydiving or bungee jumping? If the seductions of crime
do accurately explain school violence, the logical prevention
effort would include involving students in other activities in
which they can gain that same sense of thrill.
Social Strain Theories
Strain theories emerged from the work of sociologist Emile
Durkheim. Durkheim, a Frenchman, observed that during
74
School Violence

periods of rapid social change in his country (the French
Revolution, industrialization, etc.) suicide rates increased dra-
matically. He speculated that this was the result of anomie, or
a condition in which there are high degrees of confusion and
chaos and thus contradictions in a group or society’s basic social
norms. The norms that usually constrain people from commit-
ting socially unacceptable acts are so weakened that individuals
do not know what is expected of them. Criminologist Robert
Merton expanded the concept of anomie to describe how it
leads to criminal offending. Merton deﬁned anomie as a dis-
juncture between an individual’s aspirations and the means he
or she has to achieve them. Focusing on the United States spe-
ciﬁcally, Merton maintained that people are constantly told the
importance of “getting ahead” and achieving the so-called
American Dream. The emphasis is on attending school, work-
ing hard, and saving money. Yet some people’s social situation
precludes them from achieving these successes easily, if ever.
Persons born into lower socioeconomic classes may not be able
to attend good schools or get good-paying jobs. Merton main-
tained that people will respond to this disjuncture in ﬁve spe-
ciﬁc ways. They may conform, which means they simply keep
working hard in legitimate, socially acceptable ways. Ritualists
respond to the strain by overconforming, or rigidly adhering
to the culturally approved methods of getting ahead, despite it
being unlikely that they ever will. The remaining three adapta-
tions may be deviant. Some adapt by innovating. That is, they
still believe in the ultimate goal of ﬁnancial success but instead
of using legitimate means to achieve it they may engage in
illegal or deviant behavior such as stealing or dealing drugs.
Retreatists reject both the goal and the means of achieving it.
These individuals may run away, become hard-core drug
addicts or alcoholics, or otherwise “drop out” of society.
Suicide is the ultimate retreat. The ﬁnal adaptation is rebellion.
Rebels seek to replace the goals and socially accepted means
with new ones. While some rebels become social reformers,
others become neo-Nazis, Satanists, or violent gang members.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
75

Many of the school shooters made comments verbally and in
writing to suggest that they were seeking to rebel against a sys-
tem that had not served them well. Several had also expressed
deep admiration of Hitler and other notorious criminals. It is
less clear, however, how social strain theory might apply to
bullying, hazing, or systemic violence.
Another strain-related theory was developed by Albert
Cohen in 1955. Cohen studied lower-class boys and main-
tained that they experienced “status frustration” because of the
perception of blocked goals, which resulted in three speciﬁc
responses. The “college-boy response” is much like Merton’s
conformity in that these youth accept the middle-class value
system and generally work hard to meet those expectations.
The most common response is Cohen’s “corner-boy,” which
suggests that lower-class boys form subcultures in which they
can gain status without adhering to middle-class values. These
boys often become delinquent, engaging in alcohol and drug
consumption, truancy, and other minor acts. Those who
respond in what Cohen called the “delinquent boy” mentality
become frustrated with their situation and form subcultures
that overtly oppose middle-class values. Again, this theory
may be useful for explaining gang-related school violence that
occurs in lower-class communities, but it does not seem to
apply to other forms.
Similar to Cohen, Richard Cloward and Lloyd Ohlin devel-
oped a strain theory focused on lower-class boys that they called
delinquency and opportunity. Their idea was that, in the same
way that legitimate opportunities for success are limited, so too
are illegitimate opportunities. Thus, youth may form subcul-
tures around the speciﬁc types of illegitimate opportunities that
are available in their area. Cloward and Ohlin proposed three
types of gangs that form: (1) the crime-oriented gang, (2) the
conﬂict-oriented gang, and (3) the retreatist-oriented gang.
Crime-oriented groups respond to their feelings of deprivation
and alienation by engaging in theft, fraud, extortion, and other
activities in which they can make money. These gangs tend to
76
School Violence

be largely orchestrated by adults who serve as “apprentice delin-
quents.” Conﬂict-oriented gangs engage in ﬁghting and
violence to secure their status, in particular in neighborhoods,
when opportunities for upward mobility are essentially non-
existent. Retreatist gangs demonstrate their contempt for soci-
etal norms by engaging in substance abuse. This type of
formation occurs in communities in which there is a ready
supply of illicit substances.
In the 1990s, criminologist Robert Agnew developed what
he called general strain theory. Agnew asserted that it was not
just lower-class boys who experience strain but also middle-
class boys and girls. Instead of a disjuncture between goals
and expectations, Agnew theorized that there are three major
sources of stress that lead to strain, which might result in some-
one acting out delinquently: (1) A discrepancy between means
and goals or between expectations and outcomes, much like a
sense of anomie; (2) loss of a positive stimuli, such as a parent
or close friend or a breakup with a boyfriend or girlfriend; and
(3) introduction of a negative stimuli, such as living in slum
conditions or experiencing abuse. According to Agnew, a youth
will respond differently to these strains based on his or her
motivation, self-esteem, social supports, levels of anger, and
experience being punished. In a number of school shooting
incidents, the perpetrator had just endured some hardship, like
breaking up with a girlfriend. Many had grown up in abusive
homes, suggesting that these strains may have played a role in
their crimes. Research on dating violence has shown that these
perpetrators have often been exposed to traumatic abuse in
their homes as well. Yet, just like the theories presented so far
in this chapter, the strain-related theories seem not to apply to
institutional forms of violence.
Walter Miller developed a theory of lower-class culture in
1958. Instead of a lack of commitment to middle-class values,
Miller argued that it was an acceptance of different, lower-
class values that resulted in crime and delinquency. He identi-
ﬁed six lower-class “focal concerns” or values: (1) Trouble, or
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
77

the need to avoid confrontations with police or other author-
ities; (2) toughness, including physical and verbal prowess; (3)
smartness, or verbal agility and quick-wittedness; (4) excite-
ment, including the need for thrill-seeking and risk-taking; (5)
fate, or a tendency to believe that luck is the primary reason
for one’s lot; and (6) autonomy, speciﬁcally the need to be
independent.
A concern about strain theories is that so many of the theo-
rists studied lower-class cultures exclusively, thereby overlook-
ing the crime and violence perpetrated by youth of other
social classes. Critics also contend that these theories focus too
much on boys and fail to postulate why girls commit offenses
and, even more, why they generally do not.
Other strain-related theories focus on communities that
experience anomie and the concomitant impact on formal and
informal social controls. In the 1920s and 1930s, University
of Chicago sociologists Robert Park, Ernest Burgess, R. D.
McKenzie, and others—and later in the 1960s, Clifford Shaw
and Henry McKay—looked at the ways that rapid change in
that city resulted in a state of anomie and how it correlated with
the breakdown of efforts to deter and to hold accountable
offenders. Using maps of juvenile and adult arrests, these theo-
rists found that crime and violence were heavily clustered in
industrial areas. These “disorganized” neighborhoods produced
delinquency, theorists speculated, as new social norms are
created. Further, as people begin to engage in minor acts of
delinquency, such as vandalism and theft, others disinvest in
the community, thereby weakening informal social controls.
Additional community disinvestment reduces funding and sup-
port for formal social controls like policing, thereby further
increasing the chance of crime. Although school violence is not
exclusive to traditionally disorganized communities, some have
argued that it might be the schools themselves that are disorgan-
ized. These schools fail to set clear prosocial norms and lack both
formal and informal means of reinforcing positive behavior.
78
School Violence

Social Learning Theories
Another category of theories to explain crime and violence are
the learning-related theories. In general, these theories posit
that offenders learn to commit crime and violence just like they
learn how to engage in other behaviors. One of the learning
theories is called differential association. Developed by Edwin
Sutherland, one of the founders of criminology in the United
States, differential association explains that people will learn
both the motivation as well as the techniques, or the “how-
to,” from people with whom they have intimate, frequent,
and priority relationships. That is, if people we see frequently
and value greatly engage in crime or violence, we might learn
to do the same. The most obvious place where someone would
learn about crime and violence and how to commit it is in their
family. This is supported by the mountains of data showing
that perpetrators of school violence often grow up in abusive
or neglectful homes. In addition, school violence might be
learned from watching and interacting with peers who act out.
Further, while this theory seems logical, what remains unclear
is why and how some people who are surrounded by others
who engage in crime and violence still do not follow that path.
Is it personal characteristics? Opportunities? Social constraints?
The importance of differential association theory lies in the rec-
ognition that crime and violence are far from innate. Thus,
offenders can “unlearn” them. Prevention programming, then,
is a logical application of differential association theory, as the
idea is that youth could learn prosocial values and behaviors
that would constrain them from offending.
Another learning theory is differential identiﬁcation. Similar
to differential association, differential identiﬁcation maintains
that crime and violence are learned. In addition to those with
whom we are close, differential identiﬁcation theory asserts that
people learn crime and violence from those with whom they
identify. This could be people we have never met, as in the case
of the many serial killers who say that they read about and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
79

identiﬁed with Jack the Ripper. Many of the school shooters
have been infatuated with earlier shooters. Many have also been
avid followers of infamous violent ﬁgures like Adolf Hitler.
Further, differential identiﬁcation theory implies that the per-
sons with whom we identify need not even be real; that is, some
offenders identify with ﬁctional book, television, ﬁlm, or video-
game characters. This clearly has been a factor in a number of
school shootings, as many of the perpetrators were heavy media
consumers who loved to play violent videogames and to watch
hyper-violent ﬁlms. Although all were eventually dismissed, a
number of lawsuits against ﬁlm production companies and
videogame makers alleged that they bore some responsibility
for the shooters’ behavior.
It is clear that even the worst offenders do not perpetrate
crime 100 percent of the time. That is, offenders move between
adhering to and violating social norms. As such, criminologists
have attempted to explain what allows offenders to drift
between offending and not. When they do commit acts of devi-
ance, Sykes and Matza (1957) maintain, juveniles experience a
sense of guilt, which prompts them to mentally neutralize or
rationalize their behaviors. Techniques of neutralization is a
theory which asserts that offenders use ﬁve speciﬁc techniques:
(1) Denying the victim, (2) denying the injury, (3) denying
responsibility, (4) condemning the condemners, and (5)
appealing to higher loyalties. Like self-talk, offenders tell them-
selves that no one was really hurt, that the victims deserved
what they got, that it was really someone else who was respon-
sible, that authorities are simply out to get them, or that they
had to do it because of some other loyalty. Often applied to
explain the behavior of gang members, this theory can also help
explain why some perpetrators of school violence seem to be
“nice kids” from good families. Many believed that because
they were picked on, their victims deserved to be targeted.
Likewise, perpetrators of dating violence often tell themselves
that it is the victim’s fault, not theirs. Hazing can also be
explained through techniques of neutralization theory, as
80
School Violence

perpetrators often were hazed themselves, believe that their
actions are not harmful, and condemn those who condemn
the practice. This theory might also explain why school ofﬁcials
and educators use violent and demeaning punishments and
practices, as they typically justify these actions as being “for
their own good.”
Social Control Theories
Social control theories are unique in that they ask a slightly
different question. Rather than wondering why people offend,
social control theorists believe that everyone has the capacity
to commit criminal acts and thus begin with the question of
what factors constrain individuals from offending. One of the
ﬁrst social control theorists was Walter Reckless, who in the
1960s posited that it was both inner and outer containment
that resulted in or constrained one from perpetrating crime or
violence. Inner containment is a person’s internal ability to
resist temptations to deviate while outer containment refers to
the societal pressures to resist offending, including laws and
the punishments of the legal system. Because individuals are
subject to push factors (mental conﬂicts, anxiety, feelings of
alienation and frustration) as well as pull factors (societal and
peer pressures), there is a constant process of balancing their
containment with the internal and external pressures.
The most widely cited control theory is Travis Hirschi’s
social bond theory. Hirschi focused on social bonds, generally
established in early childhood and cultivated throughout the
lifetime, that model and reinforce conformity. According to
Hirschi, there are four key elements of a social bond: (1)
Attachment, or an emotional regard and respect for others; (2)
commitment, meaning the development of career and social
goals that conform to societal norms; (3) involvement, or
investment of time and effort in conventional pursuits; and
(4) belief, or one’s understanding and commitment to laws
and other moral and social norms. It is clear that many school
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
81

shooters lack positive bonds with others. Most were described
as outcasts by peers.
One of the major contributions of social control theories is
the recognition that both internal, or micro-level, and external,
or macro-level, factors are important. Studies have also shown
that youth who commit delinquent acts tend not to be as
attached to parents, peers, and teachers. Importantly, Hirschi
found that lower-class youth are no more likely to offend than
are middle-class youth—the pivotal factors, instead, are the
support systems each individual has. Critics note that these
internal and external pushes and pulls or social bonds are difﬁ-
cult if not impossible to accurately measure. Further, some peo-
ple have the four qualities Hirschi outlined but are bonded to a
deviant lifestyle. That is, many gang members are deeply com-
mitted to one another and have developed their own belief sys-
tems. Hazing is allegedly all about bonding to a group or team,
yet it is also an act of violence. Likewise, it is hard to argue that
school teachers and administrators who paddle students or who
demean them through invasive searches are doing so because of
a lack of social bonding.
Labeling Theories
Sociological theories emerging from the notion of social con-
structionism include the labeling theories. The basic idea is that
a number of social institutions, ranging from schools to crimi-
nal justice and more, label youth as “bad” or “delinquent.”
This often results in a self-fulﬁlling prophecy whereby individ-
uals take on a deviant identity. There is a wealth of evidence
showing that students who do what they are told, do not ques-
tion authority, and suppress their own values are more likely to
be labeled as “bad kids” in schools. These labels tend to be rei-
ﬁed throughout the system as teachers and administrators pass
them along, and other students reinforce them as well. Edwin
Lemert (1951) articulated the concepts of primary and secon-
dary deviance. His argument was that individuals only progress
82
School Violence

to secondary deviance after they are labeled. Howard Becker
elaborated, showing how a criminal or deviant identity may
become one’s master status, or an overpowering characteristic
of their self-identity. In his classic study “Saints and the
Roughnecks,” William Chambliss showed that a group of boys
who were deemed “good,” called the Saints, committed as
many deviant and delinquent acts as did the boys who he called
the Roughnecks. But because the Roughnecks were labeled
“bad,” they did not receive the beneﬁt of the doubt from school
ofﬁcials or from local law enforcement. Thus it was the label,
not their actions, which resulted in harsher consequences. It is
clear that many perpetrators of school violence have been
labeled. Some of the school shooters were “known” as outcasts
or nerds or had been labeled as “gay.” Bullies often seem to take
on that identity, exacerbating their abuse. Further, evidence
shows that youth who have had any involvement with the juve-
nile justice system do not tend to fare well in a school setting,
which in turn increases the likelihood that they will reoffend.
On the other hand, many people who are labeled work extra
hard to reject the label rather than take it on. Thus, it is unclear
what internal mechanisms, support systems, or other factors
allow some to reject a label and others to accept it.
Conﬂict Theories
Conﬂict theories are rooted in the work of Karl Marx and were
developed by criminologists in the 1960s. According to these
theories, crime is rooted in the modern capitalist economy,
which creates inequalities. Those who own the means of produc-
tion, what Marx called the bourgeoisie, tend to also control other
institutions, while those who labor, the proletariat, have little
social or economic power. Capitalist societies are then character-
ized by struggles or conﬂicts between these two groups, as the
bourgeoisie seeks to maintain or expand what they have while
the proletariat wants more. Richard Quinney, a radical conﬂict
theorist, identiﬁed several propositions that delineated the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
83

theory: (1) Ofﬁcial deﬁnitions of crime are created by the domi-
nant class; (2) crime is deﬁned as behaviors that conﬂict with the
interests of the dominant class; (3) the dominant class is largely
involved with the enforcement and administration of criminal
law; and (4) the dominant class perpetuates an ideology about
crime and who commits it. In essence, Quinney’s work suggests
that youth crime is perceived as a threat to adults and that minor-
ity and underprivileged youth, like adults from those demo-
graphics, are most likely to see their actions deﬁned as criminal
and to be labeled as such. This very macro-level perspective is
more difﬁcult to apply to any individual perpetrator’s behavior
but might be best at explaining systemic violence. It is those
who have power in schools, the administrators and teachers,
who make and apply the rules for students.
David Greenberg (1977) drew on the radical/conﬂict tradi-
tion as well as the strain theories to develop the theory of ado-
lescent frustration. He maintained that youth are told that
money and material possessions are the key to success, yet are
largely unable to obtain them. In particular, youth in a capital-
ist society experience three basic frustrations that may lead
some to delinquency: (1) Lack of money, which is particularly
acute for poor youth; (2) lack of respect, as youth often feel
demoralized because adults fail to see them as valuable or to
solicit their voices; and (3) lack of employment. Many youth
are unable to ﬁnd work and hence cannot make money or feel
the dignity of earning for themselves. Males in particular may
feel emasculated by these frustrations and may act out in
response. This theory might explain why most forms of school
violence are disproportionately perpetrated by males. Further,
it is also clear that the young males who have perpetrated mass
acts of school violence were indeed feeling disrespected by peers
as well as school ofﬁcials; hence they chose to act out in those
locations. As Aronson (2000) explained,
Young mass shooters don’t mow down their neighbors or
shoot up the local video arcade. They kill their classmates
84
School Violence

and teachers, and sometimes themselves, in or around the
school building itself. Looking for root causes in individ-
ual pathology is an approach that seems sensible on the
surface, but it does not get to the root of the problem.
What is it about the atmosphere in schools themselves
that makes these young people so desperate, diabolical,
and callous? (87–88)
Integrated Theories
In the 1980s, several theorists began to develop integrated or
developmental theories. These theories tend to include both
micro and macro theories. Given that the bulk of youth offend-
ers “age out,” or mature and no longer offend, it is important to
look at the factors that may make a juvenile offender persist
into adult criminality. Robert Sampson and John Laub devel-
oped a theory they called turning points in which they
explained that juveniles’ successful navigation through impor-
tant life-changing events either encourages or discourages their
involvement in crime as adults (Thompson & Bynum, 2012).
High school graduation, marriage, parenting, and employment
are all markers along this trajectory. Terrie Mofﬁt’s life-course
theory explains that there are two types of offenders: life-
course persistent and adolescence-limited (Thompson &
Bynum, 2012). The former are those who begin early and con-
tinue to engage in crime, typically perpetrating offenses of esca-
lating severity. Another integrated theory is the general theory
of
crime,
developed
by
Travis
Hirschi
and
Michael
Gottfredson (Thompson & Bynum, 2012). Containing ele-
ments of social bond theory and others, the basic focus is on
lack of self-control coupled with opportunities for offending.
While it is clear that many of the most infamous school shoot-
ers had acted out at early ages, many others had not. These
theories do not seem very applicable to explaining sexual
harassment, hazing, dating violence, bullying, or systemic
violence.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
85

Feminist Theories
One important and ever-evolving area of criminological theory
is the exploration of feminist perspectives. For a long time, the
ﬁeld has suffered from androcentrism, or the privileging of male
perspectives. Indeed, most criminologists were males who stud-
ied males to develop theories of male delinquency. While some
maintain the dramatic differences between male and female
offending is due to biology, other theorists assert that it is socio-
logical factors that explain the discrepancy. One early feminist
theory was the liberation hypothesis offered by Freda Adler in
1975 (Thompson & Bynum, 2012). Adler maintained that as
women are more involved in every aspect of life in the United
States, from politics to the corporate world, they will also be
more involved in crime. While some data bears this out, other
sources do not. Some have argued that incidents of girl-on-girl
bullying and hazing among girls are indicative of the greater
involvement girls have in school and extracurricular activities.
Deborah Prothrow-Stith has argued that because the United
States is still a patriarchal culture in which violence is equated
with power, women and girls may act aggressively as a means
of obtaining power (Thompson & Bynum, 2012). John
Hagan’s power–control theory asserts that criminal behavior is
inﬂuenced by both family structure and societal structure
(Thompson & Bynum, 2012). Given that the United States is
a male-dominated society, families too are patriarchal in that
fairly strict gender norms are still common. Boys are encour-
aged to take risks and are given greater freedoms, which allow
them more opportunities and reinforcement for deviant behav-
ior. In a study of 28 school shooters, researchers found that all
were overconforming to masculine norms.
It is possible, however, that besides school shootings, girls
commit other kinds of offenses with similar frequency as do
boys but are simply less likely to be caught and punished (and
therefore not reﬂected in statistics). The chivalry hypothesis
postulates that the deviant behavior of women and girls is
86
School Violence

minimized by institutions of formal social control, like police
and school administrators. There is some support for the idea
that women and girls are treated more leniently for minor
offenses, such as trafﬁc violations. Further, research on bullying
suggests that girls do it differently than do boys and that these
differing tactics result in increased likelihood that boy bullies
will be caught. For instance, girls are more likely to bully other
girls by spreading rumors and hateful gossip or through dirty
looks and mean comments on social media. Boys are more
likely to act out in front of others, either verbally or physically,
and thus may be detected by teachers. Research does show,
however, that when women or girls commit serious violent acts,
they are more likely to receive harsh punishments, thus present-
ing a limitation on the chivalry hypothesis.
In sum, all theories have their strengths and limitations.
Understanding the various explanations can help practitioners
better respond to school violence. Likewise, understanding the
risk factors for school violence as well as the factors that serve
a protective function can allow for improved prevention efforts.
Risk Factors
Many individual, family, school, and community factors put
youth
at
greater
risk
for
perpetrating
school
violence.
Similarly, research has identiﬁed characteristics that make a
young person at greater risk for being victimized in school.
Individual
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists
low IQ, deﬁcits in social–cognitive or information-processing
abilities, and history of treatment for emotional difﬁculties
among the individual risk factors for school violence. In many
cases, it is exposure to violence that has lowered someone’s
IQ. Children in early elementary school with a history of expo-
sure to violence or being victims of violence score signiﬁcantly
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
87

lower on IQ and reading ability (on average, over 7 points
lower on IQ and almost 10 points lower in reading
achievements).
A recent study found that ﬁghting between teens may
actually reduce young people’s IQs. On average, the teens
who had been involved in serious ﬁghts had a 2-point drop in
their IQ score. Although boys engage in physical ﬁghts more
often, the drop in IQ appears to be greater for female teens
who ﬁght.
Some studies have shown that youth who have been diag-
nosed with attention-deﬁcit disorder (ADD) or attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (AD/HD) are overrepresented in
incidents of school violence. Youth may be diagnosed with
these disorders if they exhibit one or more of these behaviors:
attention difﬁculties or short attention span, restless behavior,
impulsivity, motor hyperactivity, irritability or temper out-
bursts, and distractibility. Youth struggling with these disorders
face many challenges in a school setting. They may be chroni-
cally truant, have a hard time focusing on school work, and be
prone to interpreting others’ actions as hostile. This may lead
them to respond in aggressive or violent ways. A longitudinal
study conducted in Sweden found that 13-year-old boys who
were described as restless and who had difﬁculty concentrating
were ﬁve times more likely to be arrested for violent crimes at
age 26 than were youth who were not described in those ways.
Youth with ADD or AD/HD diagnoses are also often diag-
nosed with other disorders, what is called co-morbidity.
Common additional diagnoses include conduct disorders, anxi-
ety disorders, learning disabilities, Tourette’s syndrome, per-
sonality disorders, and affective disorders. This co-morbidity
exacerbates the school and other challenges and thus may
increase the risk that youth will engage in risky or aggressive
behavior. Many persons diagnosed with ADD or AD/HD also
attempt to self-medicate by engaging in substance use.
Others argue that the criteria for these disorders are very
ambiguous and thus result in more youth being diagnosed.
88
School Violence

It is clear that AD/HD is one of the most frequent diagnoses in
child and adolescent psychiatry. One study in 2002 found that
approximately 16 percent of school-aged youth in the United
States had been diagnosed with ADD or AD/HD. It could be
that changes in technology as well as the increasing expectations
of youth in schools make it challenging to focus, not that youth
suffer from an actual disorder. Others contend that it is slick
marketing campaigns from pharmaceutical companies that tell
parents and teachers that youth must be suffering from a disor-
der if they are easily distracted. Because the primary interven-
tion for ADD and AD/HD is the prescription of a
psychoactive drug like methylphenidate, typically in the form
of Ritalin or Adderall, the pharmaceutical companies that make
these substances stand to beneﬁt tremendously when more
young people are diagnosed. Prescriptions for methylphenidate
have grown dramatically, with the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Agency (DEA) noting that in some regions, 15 to 20 percent
of young people had been prescribed Ritalin. Similarly,
Britain saw a nine-fold increase in Ritalin prescriptions from
1995 to 2000. Stimulants much like cocaine, these drugs can
result in dangerous side effects like mood swings and appetite
loss. Some youth sell their prescription drugs to others, who
use them to get high. Between 1990 and 2000, 569 children
were hospitalized and 186 died from Ritalin overdoses. Several
school shooters were taking Ritalin at the time of their attacks.
T. J. Solomon was taking Ritalin when he wounded six stu-
dents at his Georgia school in 1999, and Kip Kinkel was taking
it as well when he killed his parents and two students, wound-
ing 23 others as he attacked students and teachers at his
Springﬁeld, Oregon, school.
Other prescription drugs have been associated with youth
violence in general and school violence in particular. Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), a class of antidepres-
sants, have been linked to several serious incidents on school
grounds. This class of drugs includes Prozac, Paxil, Zoloft,
Celexa, Lexapro, and Luvox as well as Remeron and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
89

Anafranil. A similar category, the serotonin norepinephrine
reuptake
inhibitors
(SNRIs),
includes
Effexor,
Serzone,
Cymbalta, and Pristiq, while welbutrin, marketed as Zyban, is
a dopamine reuptake inhibitor. Although all have been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), none
of these were tested for side effects on youth populations.
Known effects include mania, abnormal thinking, personality
disorders, hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, amnesia, alcohol
craving and abuse, hostility, paranoia, sleep disorders, delu-
sions, confusion, and restlessness. Persons withdrawing from
these substances also typically suffer from tremendous emo-
tional and physical challenges.
Many of the school shooters from the last three decades had
been prescribed one or more of these substances. A sample
includes Laurie Dann, who had been taking Anafranil and
Lithium before she killed a child and wounded six at an
Illinois elementary school in 1988; Kip Kinkel, who was taking
Prozac when he killed four people and wounded 23 others at
Thurston High School in Springﬁeld, Oregon, in 1998; Eric
Harris, one of the Columbine killers, who had been taking
Luvox; and Jeff Weise, who had been taking Prozac before he
killed nine and wounded ﬁve at Red Lake High School in
Minnesota in 2005. These high-proﬁle and deadly incidents
prompted the FDA to mandate, on September 14, 2008, that
pharmacies provide an Antidepressant Patient Medication
Guide to parents or guardians of minors who had been pre-
scribed antidepressants. It also ordered that a “black box” warn-
ing be placed on all antidepressants that describes the risk of
suicide for users under the age of 18.
Some have identiﬁed mental illness as one of the most sig-
niﬁcant factors in extreme acts of school violence such as ram-
page school shootings. Most of the assailants had a history of
depression, isolation, and suicidal thoughts or attempts,
although many had not received a particular diagnosis. In his
book Columbine, Dave Cullen asserted that it was mental ill-
ness, not bullying, that was the main reason for the attack
90
School Violence

perpetrated by Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold. Cullen asserted
that Klebold suffered from depression and was suicidal, while
he called Harris a calculating, cold, homicidal psychopath.
Another infamous shooter, Jeff Weise (mentioned above), had
previously been admitted to a psychiatric facility. He had been
banned from entering Red Lake High School just ﬁve weeks
before his attack due to his erratic and threatening behavior.
Alcohol is the drug most associated with violence as well as
the drug most commonly used by persons ages 12 to 20.
Associated with both victimization and perpetration, alcohol
use impacts the brain development of adolescents, reduces
self-control, and inhibits users’ ability to process incoming
information. Further, alcohol consumption is associated with
the carrying of weapons. Studies have documented that youth
who admit to using alcohol are three times more likely to carry
handguns than are youth who do not drink, and binge-
drinking, deﬁned as consuming four to ﬁve drinks in a two-
hour time period, increases the likelihood that an individual will
carry a handgun four-fold in comparison to nondrinking peers.
Students with disabilities, only 14 percent of all students in
the United States, make up 19 percent of those who suffer
corporal punishment, or abuse by teachers and administrators.
Jonathan C., a 15-year-old boy with autism, was repeatedly
subjected to corporal punishment at his Florida public school.
One day, after he screamed in the cafeteria and ran away from
a staff member, a male staff member picked him up and ﬂung
him on the tile ﬂoor face ﬁrst. Staff members dragged him to
a meeting room, where the male staff member put him in a
chokehold. His mother described what happened: “Three or
four [staff members] tackle[d] him, and he [was] thrown to
the ﬂoor again.” The staff members used their strength and
body weight to pin Jonathan, face down, to the ﬂoor.
Studies in the United Kingdom have found similar overrep-
resentation of youth with disabilities as victims of bullying,
with one study ﬁnding 82 percent of students with disabilities
to have endured bullying.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
91

Several studies have found that individuals who are heavy
consumers of media, especially violent media, are more prone
to engage in acts of violence. According to the American
Psychological Association (2013), a child who watches two to
four hours of television per day will have witnessed 8,000 mur-
ders and more than 100,000 acts of violence before he or she
leaves elementary school. A longitudinal study conducted by
Dr. Leonard Eron found that watching more television at age
eight was connected with committing more serious crimes at
age 30. Thus, the study implies that the most risky time for
viewing violence is when children are under age 10, as they
may not be able to distinguish between what is real and what
is not. Others have noted that television, ﬁlm, and videogame
violence is often depicted as though it is funny and without
consequences. That is, the violence does not appear to really
hurt anyone, or at least nor permanently, and is often presented
in a way that is supposed to inspire viewers to laugh. This
“happy violence” is very common in programming marketed
to young people, and it may be the most dangerous for them
to see.
Boys are more likely inﬂuenced by violent movies, television,
and videogames than are girls, and aggressive boys may be
drawn to those forms of media. Since the 1960s, studies have
shown links between viewing violent media and aggressive
behavior. Albert Bandura’s famous “Bobo Doll” experiments
showed that children learn and imitate aggressive behavior from
watching television, as the kids in his experiment repeatedly
punched, kicked, and beat a blow-up doll after viewing vio-
lence. Studies show that the link between viewing violence
and acting violently is strongest when the viewer identiﬁes with
the aggressor. Media Education Foundation has produced a
number of documentary videos in which they critically analyze
the effect of violent media on youth. In Tough Guise, Jackson
Katz and Sut Jhally document the ways that television and ﬁlms
depict aggressive masculinity as the norm. Violent men are
depicted as heroes who are unable to show emotion. Men and
92
School Violence

boys whose looks or behaviors challenge this norm, what is
called hegemonic masculinity, are often harassed and bullied.
The same narratives belittle and dehumanize women, making
them appear to be little more than sex objects. In Jhally’s
Dreamworlds series, Katz explores the way that music and music
videos depict women as sexualized objects and how the story-
lines in music often feature dangerous themes involving men’s
and boys’ aggression against women and girls. In their 2002
ﬁlm Wrestling with Manhood: Boys, Bullying, and Battering,
Katz and Jhally focus on the violence and narratives common
in professional wrestling. While the violence itself is problem-
atic, given that it is typically gratuitous and yet depicted as
though it is without consequence, even funny, the storylines
used to develop the characters are equally problematic.
Viewers are told that violence against those perceived as weaker
or as gay is acceptable, and when women are the targets it is
almost always presented as though “she deserved it.”
Rather than directly affect viewers in the form of imitation,
some media scholars maintain that viewing, listening to, or
playing violent media has a desensitizing effect. That is, people
who are consistently exposed to violent media may begin to see
it as normal and to feel less sympathy for those who are victims
of it. Many studies have provided support for this contention.
Bushman and Anderson (2009) found that after playing a vio-
lent videogame, people took longer to intervene when they
heard a physical ﬁght occurring. In another study, they found
that people who had just watched a violent movie were less
likely to offer help to someone who was injured. Likewise,
Fanti, Vanman, Henrich, and Avraamides (2009) found that
people who watched a series of violent movies felt less sympathy
towards the victims depicted and actually enjoyed watching the
aggression.
Numerous studies have shown that cartoons and children’s
programming fail to accurately portray the negative or danger-
ous effects of violence, instead making it seem as though vio-
lence is without consequence. Children today grow up with
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
93

more media than has any generation prior. On average, even
children under the age of six consume approximately two hours
per day of screen media, as many have a television, VCR, video-
game player, or other device in their rooms. Twenty-ﬁve per-
cent of children under the age of three have a personal
computer. When families leave the television on at home, not
surprisingly, children watch more. These children also spend
less time outdoors or reading and thus may not be building
important prosocial bonds.
In 1985, Tipper Gore, wife of then-senator and later vice
president Al Gore, helped found the Parents Music Resource
Center, which was devoted to educating parents about what they
saw as the dangers of rock music. The group’s efforts resulted in
mandatory parental advisory notiﬁcations on music albums with
explicit lyrics. In the late 1990s, President Clinton commis-
sioned the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to study the mar-
keting of violent media to youth, while Reverend Al Sharpton
asked the FTC in 2005 to punish musicians who had been
involved in violence by prohibiting radio and television stations
from playing their music for 90 days. These critics assert that it
is not just the violent lyrics but also the criminal activity of some
of the musicians that make the music dangerous for youth.
Research is not as clear about the connection between listening
to violent lyrics and acting out violently as it is about viewing
violence or interacting with it in videogames.
Interestingly, while research is clear that marginalized youth
are at risk for being bullied, popular youth may suffer as well.
In fact, researchers found that popular youth are often bullied
by those who resent their social status and that these youth
report more anxiety, depression, and anger than the more tradi-
tional victims of bullying.
Family
Family size and birth order are factors that are correlated with
delinquency. Large families may lack the ﬁnancial resources
94
School Violence

and time to devote to each child. Additionally, less communica-
tion, inconsistent discipline and supervision, and simple over-
crowding might relate to delinquency. Yet caution is needed,
as clearly any speciﬁc larger family may be very supportive and
able to provide both ﬁnancially and emotionally. Several studies
have also shown that birth order plays a role in regard to delin-
quency. Thompson and Bynum (2012) found that ﬁrstborn
children relate well to adults and tend to conform to the societal
norms introduced by their parents. Youngest children also seem
to fare well, as studies document that parents have gained
wisdom from previous parenting experiences, “babies” of the
family often receive the most attention, and younger children
learn from their older siblings. Thus, it is middle children
who may get “lost” in the childrearing process, resulting in a
greater propensity for delinquency. Family social class is associ-
ated with higher arrest rates for juveniles, although it is impor-
tant to recognize that this may not be related to greater
perpetration but instead to bias in the criminal justice system.
The CDC recognizes that certain types of childrearing tech-
niques can put children at risk for victimization or for criminal
involvement. Authoritarian or excessively harsh parenting and
lax or inconsistent discipline have both been considered as risk
factors. Additionally, parents who are not involved in their
children’s lives, who do not monitor their children’s activities,
or who show little emotional attachment are putting their chil-
dren at greater risk. Further, parental substance abuse is a risk
factor.
One controversial aspect of family life is whether youth
raised by working mothers are more likely to engage in delin-
quency. The 2010 Census found that more than 70 million
women and over 75 percent of mothers ages 25 to 54 work out-
side of the home. While some claim that children who are in
daycare are more prone to delinquency, research does not seem
to bear that out. In fact, some studies ﬁnd that working moth-
ers make tremendous efforts to spend more time, and more
quality time, with their children as a means of compensating
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
95

for being away. Other studies bear out that experiences in the
home have more of an impact on later delinquency than does
time spent in childcare.
Children who grow up experiencing physical, sexual, verbal,
or emotional abuse are more likely to become either perpetra-
tors of crime or victims. Additionally, child neglect, or when
caretakers fail to provide adequate nutrition, clothing, shelter,
access to education, or medical care, is also correlated with
higher rates of later victimization or criminal perpetration.
Families serve as the ﬁrst role models for children, and when
the model is one of abuse or neglect, it is not surprising that
children are at greater risk for repeating that behavior. Each
year more than 3 million incidents of child abuse are reported
in the United States, or an incident every 10 seconds. Nearly
ﬁve children die every day from child abuse, with more than
75 percent of those being younger than four years old.
Additionally, research shows that simply being exposed to
domestic violence in the home, even if a child is not actually
being abused, increases the risk of later criminal involvement
and adds to the likelihood that as adults these individuals will
be involved in abusive relationships. While research shows that
girls are at greater risk for enduring sexual abuse, boys are more
likely to experience emotional neglect and serious physical
injuries.
Young people who experience abuse and neglect suffer from
higher rates of depression, anxiety, anger, and aggression and
are more likely to struggle in school, to engage in risky behav-
iors such as substance abuse, and to exhibit suicidal behavior.
Studies show that youth who have experienced one or more
forms of abuse are more likely to end up in juvenile detention
or prison than are youth who do not experience abuse.
Studies of school shooters have uncovered histories of abuse.
Evan Ramsey, who killed two and injured two others at his
school in Bethel, Alaska, in 1997, was said to have experienced
abuse at the hands of several of the foster parents with whom he
lived. Asa Coon, who wounded four at his Cleveland, Ohio,
96
School Violence

school in 2007, grew up witnessing domestic violence in the
home. Approximately 36 percent of women and 14 percent of
all men in prisons in the United States were abused as children.
School
School administrators, teachers, and other staff must help
ensure that the school climate is not just safe but also welcom-
ing to all. Shaﬁi and Shaﬁi (2000) argue that poor school
climate and inadequate or damaging teacher–student relation-
ships are the main reasons for school violence. School climates
in which youth feel scared, marginalized, and voiceless create
the
conditions
for
other
forms
of
violence
to
occur.
As Aronson (2000) explained,
It is reasonably clear that a major root cause of the recent
school shootings is a school atmosphere that ignores, or
implicitly condones, the taunting, rejection, and verbal
abuse to which a great many students are subjected. A
school that ignores the values of empathy, tolerance and
compassion, or, worse still, pays lip service to these values
while doing nothing concrete and effective to promote
these values, creates an atmosphere that is not only
unpleasant for the “losers” but one that shortchanges the
“winners” as well (p. 70).
Although administrators have a duty to ensure that school is
a safe place for all students, sometimes the rules, policies, prac-
tices, and interventions they enact actually make the school cli-
mate worse. Research has shown that installing metal detectors
in schools with no history of gun-related violence on campus
actually makes students more fearful, not less. Similarly, zero
tolerance laws that mandate suspension or expulsion for youth
who commit speciﬁed offenses (like bringing a weapon to cam-
pus or ﬁghting) may actually be counterproductive in that they
decrease the morale at the school. Metal detectors are a form of
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
97

target hardening; that is, they make a particular space more
difﬁcult to victimize. But research about these kinds of efforts
shows that they do not stop crime but rather displace it to
different locations.
Schools often use practices that label and stigmatize youth,
which has been associated with greater rates of crime and delin-
quency. Tracking, or using standardized tests or prior grades to
place students in a particular classroom, is a way of differentiat-
ing those who achieve at higher levels from those who do not.
While the practice is often praised by educators who ﬁnd it eas-
ier to teach when the class is more homogeneous, others con-
tend that tracking correlates signiﬁcantly with social class and
is yet another means of distinguishing lower-class students from
upper-class students and maintaining the status quo. Students
in lower tracks are more likely to be perceived and labeled as
less intelligent, and thus teachers may have lower expectations
to which those students rise. These students are more likely to
skip school, as they believe they do not belong and cannot suc-
ceed. Each school day, thousands of youth, especially those
who perceive that they are of little value, skip school. Research
veriﬁes that juveniles who skip school are more likely to be
involved with drugs, gangs, and violence.
Another damaging practice is corporal punishment, or the
use of physical punishments like paddling to correct students’
behavior. As noted in the previous chapter, corporal punish-
ment is not prohibited in 20 states, and an estimated 200,000
students are paddled in school each year. In their book
Dangerous Schools (1999), Hyman and Snook describe the dan-
gers of paddling by sharing the stories of youth who were
beaten so badly they suffered internal damage simply for being
late to class. They also describe the other controlling behaviors
educators use that demean and degrade youth, for instance
not allowing them to use the restroom or arranging classroom
seating so that the students who do well are seated in the front
and the ones who do not are stigmatized by having to sit in the
back.
98
School Violence

Youth who do not like school often strike back. The most
typical response is not bringing a weapon but rather engaging
in destruction of school property. Yet others retaliate against
the teachers they perceive as responsible, with an estimated
250,000 teachers threatened or injured in the job each year.
As Thompson and Bynum (2012) explain,
students who feel they are being treated like numbers rather
than people are likely to develop a sense of alienation in the
school environment. The assembly line model of education
that has dominated our educational philosophy since the
industrial revolution has led to viewing schools as analogous
to factories. Thus, incoming students are seen as raw materi-
als to be shaped, molded, and transformed into ﬁnished
products (i.e., productive citizens) by those trained and
skilled to do so (the teachers). Students’ views of teachers
and teachers’ views of students are affected by the roles they
are forced to fulﬁll within the bureaucratic structure (p. 232).
Community
One community-level factor that places youth at risk for a variety
of forms of violence is the presence of gangs. A 2010 survey found
that 45 percent of high school students and 35 percent
of middle school students reported that there were gangs or
students who considered themselves to be gang members in their
school.
Rates
were
much
lower
in
private
schools,
where only 2 percent of students reported gangs or students
who considered themselves to be gang members. Gang members
do not leave their conﬂicts or illegal activities behind when they
enter school grounds, and thus the presence of gangs in schools
increases the likelihood of violence and other forms of crime.
Youth who grow up in communities with high levels of
violence often feel hopeless, angry, and ashamed. Youth who
witness violence report higher rates of posttraumatic stress,
depression, distress, aggression, and externalizing behavior.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
99

High poverty levels and lack of economic opportunity are
also community-level risk factors. School violence is also more
common in communities that have high levels of transiency,
according to the CDC.
Protective Factors
Conversely, a number of protective factors at each of these
levels have been identiﬁed. Thus, even youth who have some
of the risk factors may be deterred from involvement in vio-
lence if there are protective factors in their lives as well.
Researchers have developed the list of protective factors
described below from studying resilience, or what allows some
to adapt positively to challenging conditions.
Individual
Youth with higher IQs and good grade point averages are less
likely to be involved in violence at school, according to the CDC
(2013). Thus parents’, schools’, and communities’ efforts to help
students do well in school pay off in reduced violence. Youth
who have skills in conﬂict resolution fare better than do their lesser
skilled peers. Thus efforts to strengthen children’s and adolescents’
ability to understand conﬂict and to select nonviolent strategies for
handling disagreements serve a protective role.
Strong connections to others can be protective as well. While
this is true of families, it is also true of peers who hold prosocial
values. Many studies have conﬁrmed that a relationship with a
caring adult enables youth to be resilient. Youth who are more
religious also tend to be less involved with violence, although it
seems to be more related to those connections and the sense of
community faith can bring than speciﬁcally to the doctrine.
Family
Maintaining clear guidelines for children’s behavior and consis-
tent but fair discipline have been found to help nurture youth,
100
School Violence

who are less likely to be victimized or involved in violence.
Students who perceive that their families have high expec-
tations for them in terms of school achievement are less
involved with violence, as are those who spend time in quality
activities with their caretakers. The simple but consistent pres-
ence of a caretaker in the morning, when arriving home from
school, during mealtimes, or at bedtime can help protect youth
(CDC, 2013).
Thompson and Bynum (2013) have identiﬁed eight primary
things families can do to prevent youth delinquency: (1)
Provide clearly deﬁned roles within the family so that youth feel
valuable, not marginalized; (2) make sure that children and
youth have opportunities for meaningful discussion and that
they participate in family decisions and interactions; (3) super-
vise children and adolescents; (4) provide clear rules and consis-
tent discipline; (5) provide a stable home environment; (6)
offer love, affection, and concern; (7) be aware that socialization
occurs constantly and through a number of mediums (i.e., what
we say, how we behave, what is in our media); and (8) develop
a strong social bond.
Both families and schools can help youth understand the
differences between media and reality. Families can limit the
amount of screen time of children and adolescents as well as
monitor the types of music, videogames, television, and ﬁlms
they are consuming. Additionally, parents and guardians can
help engage youth in conversations about media and its effects.
School
Schools that have high expectations for students, provide
opportunities for involvement in the classroom, and are sup-
portive and caring can promote competence and protect against
the effects of adverse conditions. School-based research indi-
cates that teacher support and student connection and involve-
ment with school can protect against the effects of difﬁcult
conditions. Mentoring programs that couple youth with
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
101

successful older students or community members can reduce
misbehavior, enhance students’ self-esteem, and increase stu-
dents’ school performance. Schools that help students set realis-
tic and achievable career goals are best suited to remain free of
violence.
The safest schools are those in which attention is paid to
both physical and affective elements. Safe school climates
ensure that LGBT students are supported. One way to do this
is to establish a Gay Straight Alliance (GSA). More than
4,000 schools across the United States have GSAs, which have
been found to reduce the amount of homophobic comments
and decrease the harassment and assault of LGBT students.
Allowing youth opportunities for prosocial involvement is an
essential component of a safe school climate. Supporting stu-
dent clubs and extracurricular activities allows youth to share
their passions and to develop leadership skills. According to
the National Association of School Psychologists (2013), effec-
tive school discipline (1) is designed to teach and instruct; (2)
focuses not on what went wrong but on how to improve behav-
ior; (3) directly connects misbehaviors to consequences; (4) is
coordinated privately rather than as a public means of embar-
rassment; and (5) never involves name-calling, shouting, berat-
ing, or other disrespect.
Schools can include a number of curricular elements that
help prevent violence. Critical media literacy helps to engage
students in dialogue and reﬂection about violence in media
and about the dangerous and demeaning narratives often used.
Comprehensive school safety plans also include teaching
youth about safe technology use, including using privacy pro-
tections; always logging out of their e-mail, chat room, and
social networking sites; and posting only “PG” photos on social
networking sites. Hinduja and Patchin (2010) also recommend
that schools remind students about safe technology usage
through posters and other signage at computer labs and to
ensure that school bullying policies cover this form of harass-
ment. If cyberbullying either occurs at school or originates off
102
School Violence

campus but has an effect on the learning climate, school dis-
tricts are legally liable to intervene.
Many schools also incorporate some type of bullying pre-
vention program. One bullying prevention program that is
receiving attention from empirical researchers speciﬁcally at
the elementary and middle school level is the Olweus
Bullying Prevention Program (OBPP). The OBPP is a com-
prehensive, school-wide program that was designed to reduce
bullying and achieve better peer relations among students in
elementary, middle, and junior high school grades. Studies that
have evaluated the OBPP in diverse settings in the United
States have not been uniformly consistent, but they have
shown that the OBPP has had a positive impact on students’
self-reported involvement in bullying and antisocial behavior.
The best bullying prevention efforts teach youth about bully-
ing but also inspire them to help disrupt it. Bystander preven-
tion approaches teach young people not as would-be bullies or
would-be victims but rather as individuals who will likely wit-
ness bullying and thus can play an active role in stopping it.
Bystander intervention programs empower both youth and
educators to disrupt bullying when they see it. The key is that
each individual realizes that he or she is a member of a com-
munity and thus must take an active role in ensuring that the
community is safe for all. It is an essential component of com-
munity building that can ensure that a school climate is wel-
coming and safe for all students.
Dating violence education, which often discusses sexual har-
assment as well, is another important curricular addition that
can prevent school violence. A number of organizations have
developed curricula about healthy relationships that the CDC
recognizes as best practices. These are listed in the recom-
mended resources.
A growing body of research shows that schools that have
adopted peace education into their curriculum experience less
violence. Although it originally emerged as an educational
response to war and violence, peace education today involves
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
103

teaching about the dangers of violence (from interpersonal
violence to international conﬂicts), as well as about what has
been called structural violence, or violence that is perpetrated
through the way that institutions and societies are structured.
This might include addressing poverty as a form of violence.
Further, peace education is concerned not just with teaching
youth about alternatives to violence but also with inspiring
them to apply these alternatives in their daily lives. Carr and
Porﬁlio (2012) explain that peace educators seek to develop
“a culture of peace not only to prevent the calamity and
devastation caused by war, but also to create more just and sus-
tainable societies where there is some level economic and social
security for all citizens” (pp. 5–6). Peace educators typically use
alternative teaching methods that are more egalitarian, such as
group projects, dialogues, and service-learning. One of the pio-
neers of peace education was Maria Montessori, known best
for the educational philosophy that bears her name, who
believed that schools should and could play powerful roles
in countering hate. Peace educators also advocate for whole-
school approaches in which disciplinary practices, extracurricu-
lar activities, and other efforts outside of the classroom
also reinforce the importance of nonviolence, respect, and
acceptance.
In sum, research has identiﬁed ﬁve factors that are impor-
tant in the development of a positive and safe school climate:
(1) Collaborative leadership, meaning schools in which
administrators work with students, faculty, and the commu-
nity to determine what is best; (2) teacher collaboration, or
the degree to which teachers are afforded opportunities
and encouraged to work together; (3) professional develop-
ment, which involves opportunities for continued educational
opportunities for teachers and staff; (4) collegial support,
or the degree to which all in the school work towards
a common vision and common goals; and (5) learning part-
nerships, or the involvement of parents and community
members.
104
School Violence

Community
Although schools cannot necessarily rid communities of gangs,
they are ideally suited to incorporate gang prevention efforts
into their curricula. One such program is Gang Resistance
Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.), which was developed
in 1991. The 13-week school-based curriculum implemented
by trained law enforcement ofﬁcers focuses on life skills as well
as myths and realities about gangs. Research has found it to
result in lowered levels of victimization, more negative views
about gangs, more positive views of police, and reductions in
risk-seeking behaviors among students who completed the
program.
Other community programs that offer youth a chance to
voice their concerns and to be respected and valued can help
protect against school violence. This might involve arts-based
efforts, service opportunities, and other efforts to allow youth
to be active agents in their communities.
Drawing on these risk and protective factors, the next section
offers an assessment of some of the most common efforts to
respond to and prevent school violence.
Interventions
Anonymous Tip Lines
Many studies have shown that school shooters typically plan
their attack and tell others in advance. In a 2002 study that ana-
lyzed 41 school shooters, the U.S. Secret Service found that in
almost every case the assailants had told someone they planned
to attack, typically a peer. Yet these individuals tend not to tell
authorities, which could potentially prevent the shooting. Some
do not tell because they do not believe their peer is serious, but
many do not because they fear repercussions were they to
“snitch” on a classmate. Many school districts instituted anony-
mous tip lines after the 1999 Columbine massacre. While it is
not clear how many incidents these lines have averted,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
105

authorities believe they have deﬁnitely helped. Further, these
tip lines can be used to report bullying behaviors in a way that
ensures that bullies will not know who reported them and thus
cannot retaliate.
Proﬁling
As a result of the attention paid to the school shootings in the
mid-to-late 1990s, many school districts began to wonder
whether there was a speciﬁc proﬁle of assailants that might
prove useful. Indeed, the fact that most school shooters were
white males who had been bullied seemed to suggest that a
description of the type of student who might commit a major
attack at school was possible. After media attention to the
notion that Columbine killers Harris and Klebold were mem-
bers of the “Trenchcoat Maﬁa,” which was a clique that alleg-
edly wore dark clothes and presented as “goths,” schools began
to target these students as potential shooters. Yet according to
the FBI, the American Psychological Association, and other
expert bodies, proﬁling can be dangerously limiting. Instead,
they assert that educators and parents should look out for
warning signs that a youth is troubled and might act out in
school.
According to the Center for the Study and Prevention of
Violence (n.d.), the following principles should be followed
when seeking to identify early warning signs:
• Develop caring, supportive relationships with students.
• DO NO HARM.
• Understand violence and aggression within a context.
• Avoid stereotypes such as those regarding race, socioeco-
nomic status, academic ability, and appearance.
• View warning signs within a developmental context.
• Understand that children typically exhibit multiple signs (do
not overreact to one single sign).
106
School Violence

Warning signs include:
• Social withdrawal
• Excessive feelings of isolation and being alone
• Excessive feelings of rejection
• Being a victim of violence
• Feelings of being picked on and persecuted
• Low school interest and poor academic performance
• Expression of violence in writings and drawings
• Uncontrolled anger
• Patterns of impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating and
bullying behaviors
• History of discipline problems
• Past history of violent and aggressive behavior
• Intolerance for differences and prejudicial attitudes
• Drug use and alcohol use
• Afﬁliation with gangs
• Inappropriate access to, possession, of and us of ﬁrearms
• Serious threats of violence (http://www.colorado.edu/cspv/
publications/factsheets/safeschools/FS-SC06.pdf)
Dress Codes and Uniforms
Many schools have implemented dress codes as a way to create
a safe and orderly school environment. Dress codes range from
simple prohibitions on speciﬁc logos or inappropriate images
and phrases to actual clothing requirements. President Bill
Clinton encouraged schools to enact dress codes in his 1996
State of the Union speech. Proponents assert that school dress
codes increase student self-esteem, increase attendance, reduce
dropout rates, enhance school unity, reduce violence, and
decrease discrimination based on social class. Many were
enacted speciﬁcally to address gang-related violence and thus
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
107

prohibit certain colors or common gang-afﬁliated apparel, like
bandanas. Some 89 percent of the schools surveyed in a 2006
study (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2011) stated that the preven-
tion of gang-related activity was their primary motive for imple-
menting a dress code policy. Court decisions have generally
supported schools that have enacted dress codes, with the
exception of students who are expressing legitimate political
views through their clothing choices. In Tinker v. Des Moines
in 1969, the Supreme Court allowed student free expression
that does not create a “material or substantial disruption.”
Many districts allow parents to vote on whether to implement
dress code policies.
Research is mixed regarding whether dress codes achieve the
purported results. While some schools have reported fewer dis-
ciplinary problems, others have noted an increase in student
suspensions for dress code violations but no real change in
school atmosphere. Critics also contend that dress codes and
uniform policies restrict students’ creativity in unnecessary
ways and that these may be tied to racial or other biases. For
instance, a seven-year-old girl was repeatedly reprimanded for
wearing her hair in dreadlocks, which school ofﬁcials deemed
distracting and were explicitly prohibited in the school dress
code. Her parents eventually moved her to a different school.
Metal Detectors
After the series of suburban school shootings in the mid-to-late
1990s, many schools added metal detectors in the hopes of
identifying youth who were bringing weapons to campus and
deterring students from doing so. Many urban districts that
had long histories of violence, largely the result of gang con-
ﬂicts, had been using metal detectors for years. Metal detectors
are still most common in urban schools, with about 12 percent
of high schools, 9 percent of middle schools, and 2 percent
of elementary schools having metal detectors on campus.
Schools may install the large walk-through detectors commonly
108
School Violence

associated with prisons, courthouses, and airports. These are
expensive, however, so some schools employ security guards
with hand-held metal-detecting wands. Proponents maintain
that because people are relatively accustomed to metal detectors
they are not excessively invasive. The Supreme Court has never
heard a challenge to the constitutionality of school-based metal
detectors, but lower courts have tended to afﬁrm them as
administrative in nature and thus not technically a search
that would raise Fourth Amendment issues. An additional con-
cern is that the installation of metal detectors, as well as other
technological measures like video cameras and the hiring of
school resource or police ofﬁcers, makes schools feel more like
prisons.
Data do not show that metal detectors are particularly help-
ful in deterring students from bringing weapons on school
grounds. One issue is that there are generally many ways for
students to get around being scanned by the metal detector.
Most schools do not have them at every possible entrance,
which means students who are committed to bringing a
weapon to campus can enter where the detectors are not. If stu-
dents can only access one entrance that does have a metal detec-
tor, schools face the problem of having a bottleneck at the start
of the day, as students typically arrive to school in a tight win-
dow of time before the start of classes. Some schools address
this issue by randomly searching students, but generally they
resort to searching students via some pattern, such as every
third person, which is fairly easy to identify. Additionally,
research has shown that in districts that have had problems with
weapons, installing a metal detector might be useful. However,
when schools install them due to fear and not to actual neces-
sity, research suggests it makes students feel more fearful.
Some have also noted that metal detector searches are often
the catalyst for more invasive searches due to noncontraband
triggers, such as jewelry. Further, several of the school shootings
have occurred in schools where there was a metal detector,
suggesting it is far from a fool-proof intervention.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
109

Video Cameras
An increasing number of schools, especially high schools, have
installed video cameras as a way to both deter offenders who
might believe they are being watched as well as a means of
apprehending those who have committed acts of crime and vio-
lence. Critics contend that the installation, upkeep, and moni-
toring of these cameras is not cost effective, given that
students are quick to ﬁnd ways around being captured on cam-
era as well as the fact that those students who are most moti-
vated to commit mass atrocities at school care little about
being apprehended; indeed, that might be part of their motiva-
tion. Further, there is the concern that video cameras might be
used to monitor other activities that are not in violation of
school rules or state laws, such as the clock-in time of teachers.
Conﬂict Resolution and Peer Mediation
Conﬂict resolution in schools often takes the form of peer
mediation. In peer mediation programs, schools train student
mediators who help peers negotiate the resolution of their con-
ﬂicts. Key to peer mediation is the respect for all parties’ voices
and needs, including the commitment to keep all interactions
conﬁdential. The ﬁrst peer mediation program, Teaching
Students to Be Peacemakers, began in the 1960s. Today, there
are a number of great peer mediation programs, including the
widely acclaimed Peace Pals. Generally, peer mediation pro-
grams consist of six steps: (1) Disputants agree to meet with a
peer mediator; (2) peer mediators listens to all disputants; (3)
peer mediators help disputants ﬁnd shared interests; (4) all par-
ties brainstorm win–win options; (5) all parties evaluate all the
options; and (6) all disputants agree to a resolution. Peer media-
tion recognizes that it is the disputants themselves who need to
come to some kind of common ground and that when a mutual
agreement is determined it is more likely to succeed. According
to evaluation research, schools with peer mediation programs
report fewer physical ﬁghts among students and reductions in
110
School Violence

disciplinary problems. Critics contend that peer mediation can-
not address all types of conﬂict and thus is only suited to
address the most minor issues. Some claim that the training
for these programs is inadequate and that peer mediators are
not fully capable of solving many disputes. Some dislike peer
mediators, seeing them as “favorites” or “snitches.” Some dis-
putants may simply go through the motions of peer mediation
as a way to avoid a tougher sanction. In order to coordinate a
successful peer mediation program, both teachers and students
should receive ongoing training, ideally starting in elementary
school.
Peaceable Schools
As noted earlier, peace education is even more effective in creat-
ing a positive school climate when it is embraced school-wide.
Some have referred to such school-wide efforts as peaceable
schools.
One
such
initiative
is
the
Resolving
Conﬂict
Creatively Program (RCCP), which seeks to increase students’
emotional intelligence, or their self-awareness, self-control,
self-motivation, empathy, and social competence. RCCP began
in 1985 in the New York Public Schools. It includes curricu-
lum for elementary and secondary schools that focuses on de-
escalating violence and promoting respect for others through
the use of role-plays, brainstorming activities, and discussion.
It also includes a peer mediation program in which students
mediate sessions involving conﬂict between their peers, helping
the disputants to reach a mutually agreeable solution. Finally,
RCCP includes training for classroom teachers and parent
training components. Schools that use RCCP have reported
less violence in classrooms, improvements in children’s self-
esteem, and more caring and accepting behaviors among stu-
dents. Peaceable schools, then, help build both the intellectual
and emotional capacity of students, faculty, and staff. They
are schools in which all feel valued and all have an opportunity
to share their ideas and concerns.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
111

Restorative Justice
Restorative justice is an alternative to retributive justice. A
retributive system, also known as an adversarial system, focuses
on punishing offenders. In contrast, restorative justice aims to
use cooperative and participatory practices to hold offenders
accountable, to give voice to victims, and to repair the harm
that was the result of the offense. Through facilitated dialogue,
victims, offenders, and community members identify what
happened, who was impacted and how, and what should be
done about it in a way that will allow the offender to reintegrate
into the community rather than be stigmatized and ostracized.
Many schools have begun to integrate restorative practices in
their disciplinary procedures. Some do so through teen courts
in which youth coordinate the disciplinary hearings and
collectively determine appropriate sanctions and reparations.
Research has shown that restorative practices are effective
because they involve all affected parties in identifying solutions.
School Police Ofﬁcers
School districts have increasingly employed police ofﬁcers,
often called school resource ofﬁcers (SROs) as a means of
increasing school safety. The idea is that not only will ofﬁcers
on campus deter youth from engaging in violent or illegal
behavior but that if an incident does occur it can be immedi-
ately handled. Further, advocates of SROs maintain that their
presence on school grounds can help students see law enforce-
ment as helpful rather than with the animosity that so often
characterizes teen–police relations. SROs are typically sworn
police ofﬁcers whose positions are often secured through federal
funds. Thousands of schools, mostly middle and high schools
but some elementary schools as well, have SROs. In light of
the Newtown, Connecticut, school shooting the Obama
administration has proposed an increase in the number of
ofﬁcers in schools, pledging $45 million for an additional 356
new ofﬁcers. Data are unclear as to whether having ofﬁcers on
112
School Violence

campus deters students from acting violently. Advocates like
the National Riﬂe Association (NRA) cite examples such as
when a Mississippi assistant principal got a gun from his truck
and disarmed a student who had killed two classmates in
1997 and when a SRO in 2001 wounded and arrested a
California student who had opened ﬁre with a shotgun.
Yet critics say the most obvious effect of having police on
campus is that more children and youth are being arrested,
often for minor and nonviolent behavior like cursing at teach-
ers. Black students, Hispanic students, and youth with disabil-
ities are overrepresented in those whose minor misbehavior is
now being handled by law enforcement instead of schools. In
Texas, police ofﬁcers based in schools wrote more than
100,000 misdemeanor tickets in 2012 alone.
Further, some maintain that law enforcement ofﬁcers are ill
equipped to respond to students in need of mental health atten-
tion. Because police are not trained in ﬁelds such as education
and developmental psychology, decisions such as whether to
arrest a student rely solely on legal criteria.
One difﬁculty lies in differentiating between school disci-
pline and criminal matters. This is particularly problematic in
regards to school searches. School police often search students
with far less than probable cause, and the evidence of those
searches then gets used in criminal proceedings against the
youth. TIPS is the general criteria for distinguishing when an
ofﬁcer can conduct a search in school. The “T” stands for the
thing or contraband to be seized while the “I” refers to the
information that prompted the search. These roughly correlate
with the standard for school searches developed by the Supreme
Court, which state that searches of students must be justiﬁed at
their inception. The “P” refers to the place or location to be
searched while the “S” is the search method employed.
Together, the “P” and “S” relate to the intrusiveness of the
search. Countless examples, however, suggest that school-
based police ofﬁcers are using the lesser “reasonable suspicion”
standard the Supreme Court upheld for schools and not the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
113

probable cause standard that is required outside of a school set-
ting. A 2011 longitudinal study of 470 schools nationwide
examined school safety over a period of years (2003–2004,
2005–2006, and 2007–2008) during which police ofﬁcers
were added to some schools but not others over time. The
researchers found “no evidence suggesting that [SROs] or other
sworn law-enforcement ofﬁcers contribute to school safety.
That is, for no crime type was an increase in the presence of
police signiﬁcantly related to decreased crime rates. The pre-
ponderance of evidence suggests that, to the contrary, more
crimes involving weapons possession and drugs are recorded
in schools that add police ofﬁcers than in similar schools that
do not.”
Canine Searches
Schools across the United States rely on random canine
searches as a way of detecting contraband, usually drugs but
occasionally weapons and bombs. In United States v. Place (462
U.S. 696 [1983]), the U.S. Supreme Court held that a canine
sniff is not actually a search and thus no probable cause or even
reasonable suspicion is required to bring dogs to a scene,
including schools. However, a recent Court decision deter-
mined that canine detections are indeed searches, although it
is unclear whether that decision, which involved an incident
on private property, is applicable to schools. While proponents
maintain that these random searches serve to deter youth from
bringing drugs or weapons to campus, critics contend that the
use of dogs accompanied by police in SWAT gear creates fear
and disrupts the educational climate more than it helps.
Because previous court decisions have established that the can-
ines cannot sniff people, students have learned that if they keep
contraband in their pockets it is unlikely to be detected. Most
concerning, though, is the fact that the canines are not always
effective at identifying illicit items but are a costly investment.
Further, use of canines, coupled with video cameras, lockdown
114
School Violence

searches, metal detectors, ID badges, and the increasing pres-
ence of police on campus, has prompted comparisons between
schools and prisons. As Mari McLean, cited in Educate,
Medicate, or Litigate? explained, “When students view schools
as prisons and teachers and administrators as guards and
wardens, they will begin to behave more like prisoners than
students, and violence in the schools will become its own
self-fulﬁlling prophecy” (DiGuilio, 2001, p. 215).
Zero Tolerance Laws
Rooted in the concept known as the broken windows thesis,
which states that low-level problems cause citizens to disengage
in their communities and thus allow greater opportunity for
offending, zero tolerance laws aim to crack down on speciﬁc
offenses with the idea that it will deter additional acts. The idea
became popular in the 1990s as a result of scares about school
violence and predictions of a coming wave of “superpredator”
teens. Although data does not bear out that there was a surge
in violent crime perpetrated by youth, zero tolerance laws
remain in effect in many places. The 1990 Gun-Free School
Zones Act required students to expel students for no less than
a year if they brought weapons to school. Later, the 1994
Gun-Free Schools Act provided funds to schools to enact man-
datory minimum policies for speciﬁc offenses. All 50 states have
since added zero tolerance laws, with most addressing weapons,
drugs, and alcohol. Most state laws also have some more vague
references to “persistent disobedience” or “disrespect.” Lee
(2014) argues that thousands of preschoolers are suspended
each year for zero tolerance violations and that the overrepre-
sentation of boys, and particularly minorities and those with
disabilities, begins as early as preschool.
Supporters contend that zero tolerance laws help keep
schools safe and drug-free, allowing educators to focus on
teaching. Critics note the many problems with zero tolerance
laws, arguing that they disproportionately impact minority
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
115

youth and youth with disabilities; that they fail to address the
root problems that prompt youth to bring weapons, drugs, or
alcohol to campus; and that instead of helping troubled youth
change their ways, zero tolerance laws simply expel the problem
to the community. Further, suspension or expulsion dramati-
cally increase the likelihood that a young person will have some
type of interaction with the criminal or juvenile justice systems.
This is what criminologists refer to as “widening the net,” or
expanding the chance that troubled youth will be handled by
criminal or juvenile justice instead of school or other informal
methods of social control. Many have argued that the “school-
to-prison pipeline” begins with zero tolerance laws. The
American Bar Association has called on districts to remove their
zero tolerance laws and develop alternatives like in-school sus-
pension and counseling.
Many
studies
have
documented
the
disproportionate
impact of zero tolerance laws on youth of color. Most
recently, a study by the U.S. Department of Justice and the
U.S. Department of Education about racial disparity and zero
tolerance led both agencies to urge districts to scale back or
repeal their laws. The study found that African American
males are three times more likely to be suspended or expelled
than white males and that African Americans make up
35 percent of students suspended once, 44 percent of those
suspended more than once, and 36 percent of students
expelled. Further, more than 50 percent of students who were
involved in school-related arrests or referred to law enforce-
ment are Hispanic or African American. Researchers stated
that the disparities were not related to disproportionate
offending but instead to racial bias.
Other Laws
No federal law speciﬁcally addresses bullying. A number of
laws, however, are applicable in that they address other forms
of discriminatory behavior. Federal civil rights laws require
116
School Violence

schools to address behaviors like bullying, harassment, and haz-
ing when they are severe, pervasive, or persistent; create a hos-
tile environment at school; or are based on a student’s race,
color, national origin, sex, disability, or religion. Schools that
fail to respond appropriately may be in violation of one or more
of these federal civil rights laws: Title IV and Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, Titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities
Act, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA).
Many states added bullying laws in the 1990s and 2000s. As
of March 2014, every state except Montana has some type of
anti-bullying legislation, although Montana does have an anti-
bullying policy. Bully Police, a bullying watchdog organization,
identiﬁes 12 elements of effective anti-bullying laws:
1. Use the word “bully” in the actual text of the bill, law, or
policy
2. Clearly prohibit bullying rather than addressing school
safety in general terms
3. Explicitly deﬁne bullying and harassment while ensuring
that anyone can be a victim
4. Include recommendations for making model school policy
5. Involve all stakeholders, including students, educators,
administrators, guidance counselors, and parents, in the
creation of the law
6. Mandate, not suggest,
the implementation
of anti-
bullying educational programs
7. Include a timeline for implementation
8. Incorporate protection against reprisal and retaliation
9. Protect schools against lawsuits if they implement and
follow a good policy
10. Include provision of counseling for victims
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
117

11. Require the submission of accountability reports and
authorizes consequences for districts that do not comply
12. Speciﬁcally include cyberbullying.
Using these criteria, Bully Police assigns states grades for
their anti-bullying laws. As of May 2013, three states had C
or below grades (Minnesota, Mississippi, and Louisiana), with
Montana receiving an F grade for its lack of anti-bullying laws.
New Jersey, Michigan, Texas, Virginia, Kentucky, Delaware,
North Dakota, Florida, Massachusetts, Georgia, Maryland,
New Hampshire, and Wyoming were given grades of A++ for
their laws.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has
identiﬁed 11 key components of anti-bullying laws:
1. A purpose statement that outlines the detrimental effects
of
bullying
on
students,
teachers,
and
the
overall
educational climate and that declares any form of bullying
and harassment to be unacceptable.
2. A statement of scope, which delineates that the policy
covers conduct that occurs on the school campus, at
school-sponsored activities or events (regardless of the
location), on school-provided transportation, or through
school-owned technology or that otherwise creates a sig-
niﬁcant disruption to the school environment.
3. Clear speciﬁcation of which conduct is prohibited in a
manner consistent with other state and federal laws. The
deﬁnition should include a nonexhaustive list of verbal and
nonverbal behaviors as well as prohibit retaliation for reporting
an incident and perpetuating bullying by forwarding messages
or sharing hurtful and demeaning material. It is also
important that the deﬁnition be written in a way that is easy
for students, parents, and educators to understand.
4. Enumeration of speciﬁc characteristics, which “explains
that bullying may include, but is not limited to, acts based
118
School Violence

on actual or perceived characteristics of students who have
historically
been
targets
of
bullying,
and
provides
examples of such characteristics.” Laws should also specify
that
bullying
may
not
be
based
on
a
particular
characteristic, however.
5. Development and implementation of local educational
administration (LEA) policies. LEAs should work with all
stakeholders to create and implement anti-bullying poli-
cies speciﬁc to local needs.
6. Components of LEA policies, which should include
deﬁnitions of bullying, requirements and procedures for
reporting it, processes for investigating and responding to
incidents, the keeping of written records, a graduated
range of consequences and sanctions, and appropriate
referrals for victims, perpetrators, and others.
7. Review of local policies, including provisions for the state
to review local policies regularly to ensure compliance
with state and federal laws.
8. A communication plan that details how students, staff,
and parents will be notiﬁed of policies and consequences
related to bullying.
9. Training and preventive education, including a provision
for school districts to train all school staff on preventing,
identifying,
and
responding
to
bullying
as
well
as
encouraging school districts to implement age-appropriate
school- and community-wide anti-bullying programs.
10. Transparency and monitoring, including a provision for
LEAs to report annually to the state the number of bullying
incidents and the responses taken and for making aggregate
data about bullying publicly available while maintaining
student privacy.
11. Statement of rights to other legal recourse, which articulates
that victims can pursue legal remedies outside of the school
district.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
119

As of February 2014, 19 states still do not speciﬁcally
include
cyberbullying
in
their
anti-bullying
legislation.
Legislation has been proposed in several other states.
Many states also have legislation requiring dating violence
education. As of March 2014, 21 states require some form of
dating violence education. Legislation is pending in four other
states. For examples, Delaware’s Vol. 77 Del. Laws Chap. 357
“Requires school districts and charter schools to establish a pol-
icy on responding to Teen Dating Violence and Sexual Assault,
including guidelines on mandatory reporting and conﬁdential-
ity, a protocol for responding to incidents of Teen Dating
Violence and Sexual Assault and training on the issue.” The
law also requires school districts and charter schools to add
comprehensive healthy relationship programming as part of
the student health classes.”
Forty-four states have hazing laws, although many of these
laws only specify that hazing is prohibited and that are sanc-
tions for violation. Ideally, hazing prevention would be
included as well.
One federal bill under consideration is the Safe Schools
Improvement Act (SSIA). The bill was introduced in the
House of Representatives by Democratic Representative
Linda Sanchez (CA) and in the Senate by Senator Bob
Casey (PA). SSIA would require that states and school dis-
tricts develop comprehensive anti-bullying and harassment
policies that include all students. Schools would be required
to report incidents of bullying and harassment to their state
departments of education so that additional improvements
can be made.
Further, SSIA would require that teachers and other per-
sonnel receive professional development related to these
issues. When educators and administrators know how to cre-
ate classroom and school climates in which all students feel
safe and welcomed, it can only result in a better educational
experience, one in which all youth can live up to their true
potential.
120
School Violence

Conclusion
As is clear from the material presented in this chapter, school
violence affects many parties. Further, there are myriad theo-
retical explanations for why it occurs, all of which can be used
by educators, politicians, and others to develop the most effec-
tive responses, while a better understanding of the individual,
family, school, and community-level risk and protective factors
is helpful in devising prevention programs. It is imperative that
educators, policy-makers, and parents understand the beneﬁts
and limitations of existing approaches as they seek to implement
cost-effective measures that afﬁrm the worth and dignity of all.
Further Reading
Ackers, M. (2012). Cyberbullying: Through the Eyes of
Children and Young People. Educational Psychology in
Practice, 28(2), 141–57.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed., text rev.
(DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychological Association. (2013). Violence in the
Media: Psychologists Study TV and Video Game Violence
for Potential Harmful Effects. Retrieved May 28, 2014,
from http://www.apa.org/research/action/protect.aspx
Aronson, E. (2001). Nobody Left to Hate. New York: Holt.
Balfour, S. (Ed.) (2005). How Can School Violence Be
Prevented? Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven.
Bazelon, E. (2013). Sticks and Stones: Defeating the Culture of
Bullying and Rediscovering the Power of Empathy. New York:
Random House.
Bellini, J. (2001). Child’s Prey. New York: Pinnacle.
Benbenishty, R., & Astor, R. (2005). School Violence in
Context: Culture, Neighborhood, Family, School, and Gender.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
121

Blanchard, K. (2003). How to Talk to Your Kids about School
Violence. New York: Onomatopoeia.
Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence. (2004). On Target:
The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Act.
Retrieved May 27, 2014, from http://www.waveedfund.org/
sites/waveedfund.org/ﬁles/on_target.pdf
Brady, N. (2011). Student Perceptions of High-Security
School Environments. Youth & Society, 43(1), 365–95.
Brezina, C. (2000). Deadly School and Campus Violence. New
York: Rosen Publishing.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2011). Indicators of School Crime
and Safety: 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/iscs11.pdf
Burns, R., & Crawford, C. (1999). School Shootings, the
Media, and Public Fear: Ingredients for a Moral Panic.
Crime, Law & Social Change, 32, 147–69.
Bushman, B., & Anderson, C. (2009). Comfortably Numb:
Desensitizing Effects of Violent Media on Helping Others.
Association for Psychological Science, 20(3), 273–77.
Carr, P., & Porﬁlio, B. (Eds). (2012). Educating for Peace in a
Time of “Permanent War.” New York: Routledge.
Casella, R. (2001). At Zero Tolerance: Punishment, Prevention,
and School Violence. New York: Peter Lang.
Casella, R. (2001). “Being Down”: Challenging Violence in
Urban Schools. New York: Teachers College.
CDC. (2013). School Violence: Risk and Protective
Factors. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www.cdc
.gov/violenceprevention/youthviolence/schoolviolence/risk
.html
Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence. (n.d.). Fact
Sheet: Early Warning Signs. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from
http://www.colorado.edu/cspv/publications/factsheets/safe
schools/FS-SC06.pdf
122
School Violence

Chalmers, P. (2009). Inside the Mind of a Teen Killer.
Nashville, TX: Thomas Nelson.
Chambliss, W. (1988). The Saints and the Roughnecks.
In Henslin, J. (Ed.), Down to Earth Sociology, 5th ed.
(pp. 188–202). New York: The Free Press.
Cianciotti, J., & Cahill, S. (2012). LGBT Youth in
America’s Schools. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
Press.
Clark-Flory, T. (2010, April 8). Phoebe Prince’s Bullies
Get Bullied. Salon. Retrieved May 5, 2010, from http://
www.salon.com/life/broadsheet/2010/04/08/phoebe_prince
_bullies_get_bullied
Clete, S., Bailey, C., Carona, A., & Mebane, D. (2002). School
Crime Policy Changes: The Impact of Recent Highly-
Publicized School Crimes. American Journal of Criminal
Justice, 26, 269–88.
Coloroso, B. (2003). The Bully, the Bullied, and the Bystander:
From Preschool to High School—How Parents and Teachers
Can Help Break the Cycle of Violence. New York:
HarperCollins.
Conn, K. (2004). Bullying and Harassment: A Legal Guide for
Educators. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.
Cornell, D. (2006). School Violence: Fears versus Facts. Lawrence
Erlbaum & Associates.
Dahl, M. (2014, April 1). It’s Not Just “Drama”: Bullying
Happens to Popular Teens, Too. Today. Retrieved April 1,
2014, from http://www.today.com/health/its-not-just
-drama-bullying-happens-popular-teens-too-2D79463459
Davey, M., & Harris, G. (2005, March 26). Family Wonders if
Prozac Prompted School Shootings. New York Times.
Retrieved April 14, 2010, from http://www.nytimes.com/
2005/03/26/national/26shoot.html
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
123

Delaney-Black, V., Covington, C., Ondersma, S., Nordstrom-
Klee, B., Templin, T., Ager, J., Janisse, J., & Sokol, R. J.
(2002). Violence Exposure, Trauma and IQ and/or Reading
Deﬁcits among Urban Children. Archives of Pediatric
Medicine, 156, 280–85.
DeNies, Y. (2012, March 16). Should Your Child Be Spanked
at School? In 19 States It’s Legal. ABC News. Retrieved
March 31, 2014, from http://abcnews.go.com/US/spanking
-school-19-states-corporal-punishment-legal/story?
id=15932135
DeWitt, P. (2012). Dignity for All: Safeguarding LGBT students.
New York: Corwin.
DiGuilio, R. (2001). Educate, Medicate, or Litigate? What
Teachers, Parents, and Administrators Must Do about Student
Behavior. New York: Corwin Books.
Dupre, A. (2009). Speaking Up: The Unintended Costs of Free
Speech in Schools. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Early Warning Signs. (2000). Center for the Study and
Prevention of School Violence. Retrieved April 1, 2014,
from http://www.colorado.edu/cspv/publications/factsheets/
safeschools/FS-SC06.pdf
Eaton, D., Kann, L., Kinchen, S., Shanklin, S., Flint, K.,
Hawkins, J., Harris, W., Lowry, R., McManus, T.,
Chyen, D., Whittle, L., Lim, C., & Wheschler, H. (2012,
June 8). Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States,
2011. Centers for Disease Control. Retrieved March 31,
2014, from http://www.cdc.gov/MMWR/PDF/SS/SS6
104.PDF
Eisler, R., & Miller, R. (Eds.) (2004). Educating for a Culture of
Peace. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Englander, E. (2013). Bullying and CyberBullying: What Every
Educator Needs to Know. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
124
School Violence

Fanti, K., Vanman, E., Henrich, C., & Avraamides, M.
(2009). Desensitization to Media Violence over a Short
Period of Time. Aggressive Behavior, 35(2), 179–187.
Farmer, A. (2011, October 14). U.S: Protect Children with
Disabilities from School Violence. Human Rights Watch.
Retrieved April 1, 2014, from http://www.hrw.org/news/
2011/10/14/us-protect-children-disabilities-school-violence
Fast, J. (2008). Ceremonial Violence: A Psychological Explanation
of School Shootings. Overlook Press.
Fearnley, F. (2004). I Wrote on All Four Walls: Teens Speak Out
on Violence. Toronto, Canada: Annick.
Finley, L. (2012). Building a Better World: Creative Peace
Education for the 21st Century. Charlotte, NC: Information
Age.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2007). Encyclopedia of Juvenile Violence.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2011). Encyclopedia of School Crime and
Violence. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Finley, L., & Finley, P. (2005). Piss Off! How Drug Testing and
Other Privacy Violations are Alienating America’s Youth.
Monroe, ME: Common Courage.
Fox, J., & Burstein, H. (2010). Violence and Security on
Campus: From Preschool to College. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Fried, S. (2003). Bullies, Targets, and Witnesses: Helping
Children Break the Pain Chain. New York: M. Evans.
Galtung, J., & Udayakumar, S. (Eds.). (2011). More Than a
Curriculum: Education for Peace and Development. Charlotte,
NC: Information Age.
Gerler, E. (2004). Handbook of School Violence. Binghamton,
NY: Haworth.
Goldberg, L. et al. (2003). Drug Testing Athletes to Prevent
Substance Abuse: Background and Pilot Study Results of the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
125

SATURN (Student Athletes Testing Using Random
Notiﬁcation) Study. Journal of Adolescent Health, 32, 16–25.
Goodstein, A. (2007). Totally Wired: What Teens Are Really
Doing Online. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Greenberg, D. (1977). Delinquency and the Age Structure of
Society. Contemporary Crises, 1, 189–223.
Guynn, K. L., & Aquila, F. D. (2005). Hazing in High Schools:
Causes and Consequences. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa
Educational Foundation.
Harding, T. (2001). Fatal School Shootings, Liability, and
Sovereign Immunity: Where Should the Line Be Drawn?
Journal of Law & Education, 30, 162–70.
Hinduja, S. (2008). Bullying Beyond the Schoolyard: Preventing
and Responding to CyberBullying. New York: Corwin.
Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. (2010). Cyberbullying:
Identiﬁcation, Prevention, and Response. Cyberbullying
Research Center. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www
.cyberbullying.us/Cyberbullying_Identiﬁcation_Prevention
_Response_Fact_Sheet.pdf
Holtham, J. (2009). Taking Restorative Justice to Schools: A
Doorway to Discipline. Tulsa, OK: Homestead Press.
Hunnicutt, S. (Ed.) (2006). School Shootings. Farmington Hills,
MI: Greenhaven.
Hyman, I., & Snook, P. (1999). Dangerous Schools. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Katz, A. (2012). Cyberbullying and E-Safety: What Educators
and Other Professionals Need to Know. Philadelphia, PA:
Jessica Kingsley Publications.
Kellner, D. (2008). Guys and Guns Amok: Domestic Terrorism
and School Shootings from the Oklahoma City Bombing to the
Virginia Tech Massacre. New York: Paradigm.
Kimmel, M. (2009). Guyland: The Perilous World Where Boys
Become Men. New York: Parker.
126
School Violence

Kindlon, D. (2007). Alpha Girls: Understanding the New
American Girl and How She Is Changing the World. New
York: Rodale.
King, M. (2014). School Violence: Crisis and Opportunity.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Klein, J. (2013). Bully Society: School Shootings and the Crisis
of Bullying in America’s Schools. Albany, NY: New York
University Press.
Kohn, A. (2005). Shooters: Myths and Realities of America’s Gun
Cultures. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kowalski, R., Limber, S., & Agatston, P. (2007). Cyber Bullying:
Bullying in the Digital Age. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Langman, P. (2009). Why Kids Kill: Inside the Minds of School
Shooters. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lawrence, R. (2006). School Crime and Juvenile Justice, 2nd
edition. New York: Oxford.
Lemert, E. (1951). Social Pathology: Systematic Approaches to the
Study of Sociopathic Behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lieberman, J. (2008). School Shootings: What Every Parent and
Educator Needs to Know to Protect Our Children. Yucca
Valley, CA: Citadel.
Lin, J., Brantmeier, E., & Bruhn, C. (2008). Transforming
Education for Peace. Charlotte, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
Lipsett, A. (2007, June 18). Eight Out of Ten Disabled
Children Bullied, Report Finds. The Guardian (UK).
Retrieved April 1, 2014, from http://www.theguardian.com/
education/2007/jun/18/schools.children
Messerschmidt, J. (2000). Nine Lives: Adolescent Masculinities,
the Body, and Violence. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Meyer, E. (2009). Gender, Bullying, and Harassment: Strategies
to End Sexism and Homophobia in Schools. New York, NY:
Teachers College Press.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
127

Monaghan, T., & Torres, R. (Eds.). (2009). Schools under
Surveillance: Cultures of Control in Public Education. Rutgers,
NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Moore, M., Petrie, C., Braga, A., & McLaughlin, B. (Eds.).
(2003). Deadly Lessons: Understanding Lethal School Violence.
Washington, D.C: National Academies Press.
Mulrine, A. (1999). Once Bullied, Now Bullies, with Guns.
U.S. News and World Report, 126, 24–26.
Murray, C. (1976). The Link between Learning Disabilities and
Juvenile Delinquency: Current Theory and Knowledge.
Washington, D.C: National Institute for Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention.
National Association of School Psychologists. (2013). A
Framework for Safe and Effective Schools. Retrieved May 28,
2014, from http://www.nasponline.org/resources/
handouts/Framework_for_Safe_and_Successful_School
_Environments.pdf
Newman, K., Fox, C., Harding, D., Mehta, J., & Roth, W.
(2004). Rampage: The Social Roots of School Shootings. New
York: Basic.
Nuwer, H. (2000). High School Hazing: When Rites Become
Wrongs. New York: FranklinWatts.
Nuwer, H. (2004). The Hazing Reader. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Ollove, M. (2010, April 8). Bullying and Teen Suicide: How
Do We Adjust School Climate? Christian Science Monitor.
Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www.csmonitor.com/
USA/Society/2010/0428/Bullying-and-teen-suicide-How
-do-we-adjust-school-climate
Olweus, D. (2004). Bullying at School: What We Know and
What We Can Do. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Orr, T. (2001). Violence in Our Schools: Halls of Hope, Halls of
Fear. New York: Franklin Watts.
128
School Violence

Padilla, F. (1992). The Gang as an American Enterprise. Chapel
Hill, NC: Rutgers University Press.
Patchin, J., & Hinduja. S. (2013). Words that Wound: Delete
Cyberbullying and Make Kindness Go Viral. Minneapolis,
MS: Free Spirit Publishing.
Phillips, R., Linney, J., & Pack, C. (2008). Safe School
Ambassadors: Harnessing Student Power to Stop Bullying and
Violence. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Poor Diet Linked to Bad Behavior. (2004, November 22). BBC
News. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/
2/hi/health/4032449.stm
Porter, S. (2013). Bully Nation: Why America’s Approach to
Childhood Aggression Is Bad for Everyone. St. Paul, MN:
Paragon House.
Raloff, J. (2013). Teen Fighting May Harm IQ. Student
Science. Retrieved April 1, 2014, from https://student
.societyforscience.org/article/teen-ﬁghting-may-harm-iq
Ramirez, X. (2011, November 7). National Study Reveals
Striking Findings on School Sexual Harassment. Care2.
Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.care2.com/
causes/national-study-reveals-striking-ﬁndings-on-school
-sexual-harassment.html
Roberts, S., Zhang, J., Truman, J., & Snyder, T. (2012,
February). Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2011.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2012/2012002rev.pdf
Savage, D., & Miller, T. (2012). It Gets Better: Coming Out,
Overcoming Bullying, and Creating a Life Worth Living. New
York, NW: Plume Press.
Schier, H. (2008). The Causes of School Violence. Abdo
Publishing.
Sexton-Radek, K. (2005). Violence in Schools: Issues,
Consequences, and Expressions. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
129

Shaﬁi, M., & Shaﬁi, S. (2000). School Violence: Assessment,
Management, Prevention. Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Publishing.
Simmons, R. (2002). Odd Girl Out: The Hidden Culture of
Aggression in Girls. New York: Harcourt.
Snyder, M. (n.d.). Understanding Bullying and Its Impact on
Kids with Disabilities or ADHD. Great Schools. Retrieved
April 1, 2014, from http://www.greatschools.org/special
-education/health/823-understanding-bullying-and-its
-impact-on-kids-with-learning-disabilities-or-ad-hd.gs?
page=all
Stevenson, L. (2003). From the Inside Out: A Look into Teen
Violence and Rebellion. Authorhouse.
Stretsky, P., & Lynch, M. (2001). The Relationship between
Lead Exposure and Homicide. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 155(5): 579–582.
Sykes, G., & Matza, D. (1957). Techniques of Neutralization:
A Theory of Delinquency. American Sociological Review, 22,
664–670.
Thomas, R. (2006). Violence in America’s Schools: Understanding,
Prevention, and Responses. Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Thompson, W., & Bynum, J. (2012). Juvenile Delinquency,
9th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Turk, W. (Ed.). (2004). School Crime and Policing. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Twemlow, S., & Fonagy, P. (2005). The Prevalence of
Teachers Who Bully Students in Schools with Differing
Levels of Behavioral Problems. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 162, 2387–90.
United States Secret Service and Department of Education.
(2002). The Final Report and Findings of the Safe School
Initiative: Implications for the Prevention of School Attacks in
130
School Violence

the United States. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.secretservice.gov/ntac/ssi_ﬁnal_report.pdf
Vossekuil, B., Fein, R., Reddy, M., Borum, R., & Modzeleski,
W. (2002). The Final Report and Findings of the Safe School
Initiative: Implications for the Prevention of School Attacks in
the United States. Jessup, MD: Education Publications
Center, U.S. Department of Education.
Webber, J. (2003). Failure to Hold: The Politics of School
Violence. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Weill, S. (2002). We’re Not Monsters: Teens Speak Out about
Teens in Trouble. New York: HarperTempest.
Winslade, J., & Williams, M. (2011). Safe and Peaceful Schools:
Addressing Conﬂict and Eliminating Violence. New York:
Corwin.
Young, J., Ne’eman, A., & Geiser, S. (2011, March 9).
Bullying and Students with Disabilities. National Council on
Disabilities. Retrieved April 1, 2014, from http://www.ncd
.gov/publications/2011/March92011
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
131


3
Perspectives
The essays in this chapter represent some of the best, most
current, and most innovative thinking about the issue of school
violence. Contributors include college students (Lashanti Jupp,
Lauren Lorance, and Stephanie Wong), nonproﬁt leaders (Bob
Knotts and Larenda Twigg), academics (Kelly Concannon),
and long-time educators (Evelyn Jackson, Sarah Raitter, and
De Palazzo). Each offers a personal viewpoint on the extent of
school violence, the forms it takes, and how best we can
respond. Further, these essays help shine a light on some of
the many creative and effective conﬂict resolution, peace educa-
tion, and youth-driven prevention programs.
A Student’s Perspective on the Dangers of Bullying:
Lashanti Jupp
My brother and I are twins, but we have always been very dif-
ferent. In our ﬁrst year of high school, I automatically ﬁt in
with the “in crowd” whereas my brother was considered a loser
and was picked on a lot. Most people simply referred to him as
my brother and not even by his name. Some days he would be
133
Steve Goldstein, front left, with Garden State Equality, speaks to a gathering
of people holding signs while they stand outside the New Jersey Statehouse
on November 15, 2010, as lawmakers hold hearings inside regarding a bill
that would toughen New Jersey’s anti-bullying laws. (AP Photo/Mel Evans)

walking with his backpack on wheels and classmates would fol-
low him around just kicking his bag because they thought it
was funny. My bag had wheels as well, but they never bothered
me. After my brother had enough of this, my mother ﬁnally got
us backpacks. This did not help either; they would simply start
tripping him down. They would even follow him down the
stairs and “jokingly” push him. Everyone thought this was
funny, and no one would say to stop except me. My brother
hated that; he would always tell me to stay out of it and that
he could handle it himself. I started avoiding my brother
altogether, but I would still hear about it and witness the name
calling in classes we had in common. The main thing they
picked on him for was his crooked teeth, as if their teeth were
so perfect (about a year later my mother got us braces).
Sometimes I would chuckle at the jokes along with the class. I
knew it was wrong, but he had already told me to stay out of
it, and everyone else was laughing too. People began to forget
that he was even my brother.
One day, a few guys in our grade decided that they would
form a group for select male students only. One of my brother’s
few friends wanted to be in this group of “cool guys.” The
leader of the pack told my brother’s friend that his initiation
would be simple; all he had to do was slap my brother in the
face. Giving into peer pressure, my brother’s friend approached
him and told him what was going on. Instead of saying that he
wouldn’t do it, he tried to ask my brother to just let him do it.
My brother would not stand for this. One boy from the group
of “cool guys” came over and informed my brother’s friend that
he was taking too long and decided, just for the fun of it, he
would slap my brother to show him how it’s done. This was
the ﬁnal straw for my brother. Being made fun of by everyone
is one thing, but to be physically assaulted was a completely dif-
ferent story. My brother stood his ground and slapped the boy
back. They began to slap each other back and forth. My broth-
er’s friend called a teacher, and the altercation stopped. When
the principal began handling the matter, no one would come
134
School Violence

forth as a witness stating what really happened. The only people
who would come forth told a story that made their friend look
like the victim. The principal was very skeptical, given the rep-
utation of these boys, so he dismissed the case altogether. My
brother went down as being a snitch, and everyone in our grade
began calling him names like “sissy,” “punk,” and “gay.”
Occasionally, they would ask him if he borrowed my under-
wear because he was such a “pussy” that he could only be my
girl twin with short hair. I tried to stand up for him, but there
is only so much I could do. He dealt with this until one day
these same guys began to mess with his school bag. They would
put garbage in it after recess or lunch and even go so far as to
take the time to take everything out, turn it inside-out, and
zip it back up so that it was impossible to re-open. During
gym, they would get back to the changing room before him
and try to hide pieces of his clothing. They would try to pants
(pull down the pants and boxers of) each other, but my brother
was the main target, kind of like the prize. My parents got
involved, but that didn’t make his life any easier. I recall my
mother saying how another boy’s mother informed the princi-
pal that she taught her son to hit back if he was ever hit—little
did she know her son was the bully and not the victim. I think
this never helped because everyone began to “see” what the
guys were saying about him: that he was soft and couldn’t stick
up for himself. It always came down to my brother’s word
against them and the rest of the student body. The principal
would never ask for my account because he felt like it would
be biased. People began referring to my brother as a snitch.
Eventually we all grew out of it; I can never really be sure
why. I believe it was because my brother got involved in the
sports teams and the other boys began to join after. They must
have ﬁnally gotten to know my brother because it was almost
like overnight there was peace in the corridors. My brother
began to do music with one of his new friends toward our last
year in high school, so now he’s known as Juppo and, by
default, I’m known as Juppo’s sister. He now gets along with
Perspectives
135

all of the “cool guys,” and we choose not to speak about the
dark times in high school.
When we reconnect with old school mates today, about nine
years later, we are now equally known as the Jupp twins.
Faculty members at the school remember us and the issues he
went through and always commend my brother for being so
resilient whenever the topic is brought up. He doesn’t make
much of it these days, and I know he doesn’t stand for people
being bullied, either. Some summer jobs he had would be as
an assistant teacher in summer camps, and he inspires kids so
much, especially the ones known as “rejects” in the group. He
can be in a room full of kids that are segregated and bring them
together in a heartbeat. I always think it’s really funny how by
the end of high school, my brother left being cooler than me.
Lashanti Jupp is an undergraduate student at Barry University,
where she is studying marine biology. She serves as a resident assis-
tant and is president of the Caribbean Student Association.
Reflections on Mean Girls: Lauren Lorance
A man once said, “One’s dignity may be assaulted, vandalized
and cruelly mocked, but it can never be taken away unless it
is surrendered.” This quote is so true. My story began the day
I walked into my freshman year of high school. I was so enlight-
ened and hopeful for all the new opportunities to come.
Halfway through the year, though, my optimism changed.
My experience with bullying opened my eyes to so much cor-
ruption, even within my own high school.
I never thought that I would be a victim of bullying, but I
was. Let me give you a preview of my high school—rich, white
families. If you did not meet this stereotype, people would
judge you. There was clearly an “in” group and an “out” group.
I was somewhere in the middle. Not only did students judge
each other, but teachers and faculty judged students as well.
136
School Violence

This certainly did not help my circumstances when I began get-
ting bullied. It also did not help my circumstances that the bul-
lying was all over a senior boy. I never felt like I brought this
upon myself, though some might argue that I did. Victims of
bullying should never feel like they deserved what happened
to them, because they do not.
This senior boy deceived me. I was young and naive. I began
seeing him and later found out that I was not the only one he
was seeing. This other girl, a junior at the time who he was seeing,
also knew about me before I knew about her. She began harassing
me by sending me nasty text messages and voicemails and expos-
ing me on social media. Then she became more aggressive. I
remember one day in particular so vividly. She was a softball
player. She and a few other girls from the softball team at my high
school cornered me by my locker during a passing period. They
did not touch me at this time, but they came really close. They
were calling me awful names and threatening me. By this time,
I knew I had to tell my parents. My mom insisted that we inform
the school immediately when I told her, but I knew how stereo-
typical the faculty were at my school. Disregarding that factor,
because my mom was hopeful the school would take action, she
informed the school. The bullying still continued, and now even
teachers and faculty looked at me differently. It made me feel
even worse. I did not know who to turn to for help.
The ultimate bullying occurred at a party near campus. It
was the weekend, and I was out with my friends. I knew that
one girl and her sister, who was also bullying me at school,
could potentially show up at this party, but my friends prom-
ised to have my back. But everything happened so fast. One
minute I was standing by the stairs talking to one of my friends.
Next thing I knew, I looked up and this girl was running
towards me. The only place I could turn was to the stairs. I
was set up. I turned around, and her sister was behind me.
One of them held me down on the stairs so I could not move
while the other girl punched me directly in the nose and gave
Perspectives
137

me a bloody nose. My friend who I was talking to kicked the
girl off of me and helped me outside.
After this incident, the school still did nothing. They told us
that since it happened out of school they could not help—we
would have to involve the police. My mom ﬁled a police report
and attempted to take these girls to court. All fell through, and
the charges were dropped because we were all at a party and
they would have to charge everyone with minor consumption.
I never wanted to ﬁle any charges because it only caused me more
struggle at school, but I wanted to share my story because if I had
to do this all over, I would have walked away. If you are being
harassed and bullied, keep your dignity. Be the bigger person
and ﬁnd the help you need. I did not know who to turn to back
then, but now I know that there are many people who are pas-
sionate about bullying who would have been there to help.
To prevent bullying in school, most importantly, there needs
to be more awareness. Along with more awareness, I think that
faculty and staff need to be more available for help when bully-
ing occurs. If students realize there is awareness and they are
not alone, then students would see help available and maybe
the issue could be resolved before it progresses. To stop this
problem we need to come together for a better cause. Having
more people involved will create awareness about bullying and
stop the problem altogether.
Lauren Lorance is an undergraduate student at Barry University,
where she is studying communications.
Sticks and Stones Can Break My Bones, but Names Will
Never Hurt Me? Approaches to Language Mis(uses) in
Schooling: Kelly Concannon
“You are so gay!”
“No homo.”
“You are a pussy.”
138
School Violence

“What a faggot!”
“She’s such a slut.”
“She’s a bitch.”
“He’s a douche bag.”
“He is acting like a nigga.”
These phrases were taken from a series of informal conversa-
tions between students that I have heard as I walk from my
ofﬁce to the classroom where I teach at a private university in
South Florida. These separate statements each reﬂect a way to
label an individual. More to the point, they represent a method
through which to reduce an individual to something, and some-
one, who is not valued in our heterosexist, homophobic, racist,
and able-bodied culture. Each individual phrase, when placed
on an individual body, represents much more than what we
hear on a playground or in the halls of a college building.
Taken together, these phrases create a negative effect. They
create a climate that reveals agreed-upon values and assump-
tions about what is right and good. They create an identity
for an individual. They create a map for how an individual
can assume a position of power to construct an identity for
others. They create violence.
The misuse of these phrases solidiﬁes what our culture, as a
whole, values and does not value. Words matter.
With school shootings on the rise and increasing incidents of
school bullying that emerge in the classroom and manifest
through cyberspace, it is imperative that we understand the
complexities of bullying and how it is inextricably linked to
power and the language that reﬂects abuse of that power.
According to stopbullying.org,
Bullying is unwanted, aggressive behavior among school
aged children that involves a real or perceived power
imbalance. The behavior is repeated, or has the potential
Perspectives
139

to be repeated, over time. Both kids who are bullied and
who bully others may have serious, lasting, problems.
Thus, we need to ask how to make visible the complex ways
power operates in a violent interaction and how those interac-
tions reﬂect power dynamics embedded in our culture.
According to stopbullying.gov, threats that are enacted by a
bully involve the misuse of power (physical strength or popular-
ity in school) to hurt others. The website indicates that “Power
imbalances can change over time and in different situations,
even if they involve the same people.”
Bullying is a massive issue to address. As such, it requires a
kaleidoscopic approach—one that is not often reﬂected
through popular culture and initiatives—where we ask students
to think critically about how the language that we use reﬂects
our thoughts and actions.
Understanding how larger questions of violence in our
schools are connected to bullying and more direct forms of vio-
lence requires that we directly address the larger historical and
cultural forces that deﬁne and shape us. It forces us to engage
with larger issues of social (in)justices that are reﬂected in the
language that we use on a daily basis, as language use reﬂects
realities of oppression. Such attentiveness requires development
of assignments that establish conditions for students to explore
the ethical implications of language (mis)use.
As a professor of writing, I have created a series of assign-
ments that have directly addressed the violences and misuses
of language that students encounter on a daily basis. Drawing
from work from websites like teachingtolerance.org, I initially
ask students to discuss words and phrases that have a negative
connotation and association. Often it is a struggle to get stu-
dents comfortable enough to talk openly about the words that
they both use and encounter on a daily basis.
This process requires students to move beyond the individ-
ual and the personal and, instead, to get students to understand
how their (mis)uses of these words are not necessarily about
140
School Violence

them individually. Rather, our work in the classroom is to look
at how popular culture publicly makes claims about who is and
who is not valued in the language that is used throughout the
music we listen to, the magazines we read, and the movies that
make the most money in the box ofﬁce.
Students are given assignments where they are asked to delin-
eate where they have heard pejorative terms. They are then asked
to directly outline what the word means. To that end, students are
challenged to identify the origin of the word. Often this exercise
gets students thinking about how limited their knowledge is of
the histories that are embedded in the use of particular words.
Students are then challenged to engage in the process of inquiry
as they examine the ethical dimensions of language use. They
describe, assess, and engage in research on the use of particular
terms. They ask larger questions about the relationships between
intentions (“I did not mean to hurt someone by using this particu-
lar word”) and the effects of using the word (“How does my use of
this word affect attitudes about a particular individual? How does
that individual relate to a particular group?”) Students are encour-
aged to understand their active role as language users. They are
forced to think about who they are and who they want to become
as they construct their realities through words.
What remains hypervisible in our discourses about schooling
and violence is the series of school shootings that have signiﬁ-
cantly impacted our educational system over the course of the
past 15 years. Even as there have been several initiatives
intended to resist the impulse to identify the events as isolated
incidents, often educators need to critically examine the very
social fabric of our culture which produces instances of aggres-
sion towards individuals based on their gender identity, sexual-
ity, race, ethnicity, and ability. A careful examination of the
language that we use can create powerful messages and the links
between our thoughts and our actions. The relationship
between thoughts and words—as reﬂected through the lan-
guage that we use—is a powerful tool to not only ignite vio-
lence but to extinguish violence.
Perspectives
141

Kelly Concannon is assistant professor of communication and rhet-
oric in the Division of Humanities at Nova Southeastern
University in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. Her work focuses on
empowering students to be active agents for social change.
The People’s Court in a South Bronx Elementary School:
Evelyn Jackson
Third-grade testimony, Latifah: “Herbert was sitting behind
me in art class. When Mr. _______ was not looking,
Herbert took a scissor and cut off my whole braid.”
Second-grade testimony, Delajhi: “I was washing my hands
in the boy’s room. Tyrone came up behind me and
punched me on my left cheek. He said it was because
I was not skipping a stall (what boys say you need to do
to show you are not gay) and did I want to ﬁght. Then
he ran out. He punched me out of the blue.”
Fourth-grade testimony, Kevin: “At dismissal that day on
March 26 Tyquan was coming toward me. He circled
around me and then I felt a ﬁst in my face. He had
punched me on my right cheek.”
Mother of Kevin: “I was waiting for my son in the car at dis-
missal. I was wondering why he was late. I saw Tyquan
and Melvin across the street beating up another boy. I
have seen them do this every day. Tyquon’s mother was
in the street. She was wearing slippers. I have seen her
there often smoking and drinking. My son Kevin can not
come to school under this kind of pressure. I can’t protect
him in this school. He is defenseless. I have to stop what I
am doing from my education to try to get my kid out of
this neighborhood I have to choose my child’s safety. I
can’t live here with my own people.”
These testimonies were taken from the records of 2003—the
last year I ran the “People’s Court” in the Mott Haven, Bronx,
142
School Violence

K–5 school where I was a Project Read teacher. In those years
Mott Haven was one of the poorest congressional districts in
the United States. Almost 98 percent of the students were eli-
gible for free school lunches. Many children did not have
involved fathers; some were being raised by their grandparents.
Some came from the large homeless shelter a few blocks west of
the school.
When I began teaching in 1987, I soon realized that much of
classroom learning was disrupted by violence. Fights in the lunch-
room were common. A lesson might be undone because Carlos
broke Bernice’s pencil and she smashed her book in his face in
revenge. Or Brian might have walked past Rosa’s desk and
scratched her hand hard enough to make it bleed. After such
behaviors, it was hard to get the class back to noticing how
Curious George was naughty again or comparing the words not
and note and getting them to understand the role of silent e.
Too many ﬁghts—too much aggressive behavior and out-
raged victims. I therefore conceived of a program, the People’s
Court.
The program was open to all those in the ﬁfth grade who
wanted to try out to be jury members. I ﬁrst gave the ﬁfth-
graders an information packet to study. They learned about tri-
als, the concept of guilt, the role of a judge, and the jobs of a
lawyer and of a witness. I then gave them a “bar exam,” asking
questions from the packet and requiring them to judge a sam-
ple case about two children who got into a ﬁght. The 30 high-
est scorers—who were also recommended by their classroom
teachers—became the jury pool and, taking turns weekly, the
prosecutor and the defense attorney.
The two student lawyers then came to my reading room
during my lunch hour and, with the help of community volun-
teers, interviewed the accused, the victims, and any available
witnesses. Then every Wednesday, their rough draft of opening
and closing statements and witness reports in hand, the student
lawyers and the other 28 members of the jury would make the
three-block walk to the courthouse.
Perspectives
143

For this program I had the full support of Robert Johnson,
Bronx district attorney. Every Wednesday for over 15 years,
DA Robert Johnson made two or three assistant district attor-
neys (ADAs) available to us for an hour during lunch.
The three ADAs gave up their lunch hour to coach the arriv-
ing student lawyers. The students learned to deliver a more pol-
ished opening and closing argument and to examine witnesses.
They learned to follow the correct procedure of the court. They
learned to dress appropriately for the occasion and to speak
clearly and audibly. Parents often attended.
Cases were real—they came from complaints ﬁlled out by
children at the school who wanted to bring charges. It could
be that someone had, for example, punched them, pointed a
toy gun at them, stolen $5 from their backpack, or kicked them
in the knee. Instead of ﬁghting back, they would come to my
reading room at all times of the day, politely ask for a complaint
form, and ﬁll it out, hoping that their case merited the walk to
the criminal court building. All jury members and those
involved in the case had permission slips from their parents.
Those students found guilty by the People’s Court jury—
those who were not chosen that week to be the prosecutor or
the defense attorney—were given sentences ranging from writing
essays to “doing time” with a “mean but strict” ﬁfth-grade teacher.
After a few successful years of the program, I was able to get
grant money for shirts for the jury members. They quickly
became identiﬁed as “winners” and role models.
The violent behavior of many in my South Bronx elemen-
tary school is, unfortunately, not unique. A project such as
the People’s Court can be implemented school-wide or in an
individual classroom. If courts are nearby, visits are useful in
introducing children to the criminal justice system. Teachers
can contact the district attorney’s ofﬁce in their area for infor-
mation and assistance.
Luis was in the People’s Court class of 2002. I hope he spoke
for many on the jury and in the school when he wrote, “Thank
you for teaching us what we know. I hope I carry it in my mind
144
School Violence

forever. And if there ever is a problem, I will try to solve it with
my mouth, not my hands.”
Evelyn Jackson is a retired teacher who helped develop a school-
based violence prevention program.
Creating and Sustaining Positive School Climates:
De Palazzo
Two students are texting one another. One is a middle school
student who identiﬁes as gay, the other a sympathetic though
unskilled middle school friend:
Middle-schooler
who is gay:
“I’m tired of all the harassment
taking place day in and day out
at this school. No one at this
place ever wants to stop the
bullying. I think it would just
be easier if I end it all.”
Friend: “Dude, life sucks. Hey, what did
u get on yr algebra qz?”
No text back.
After 5 minutes, Friend: “U there?”
Middle schooler
who is gay:
“Not 4 long.” (sad face icon).
Isn’t it time I just make myself
scarce. . .everyone I know will be
better off.”
Friend: “Hey, u there?”
Middle schooler who is gay: (no response)
How do we help school-based professionals become more
aware of and sensitive to the unique challenges lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) youth face
in today’s elementary, middle, and high schools?
When we take a sober look at harassment and bullying in
school communities, we know that antigay bullying is rampant
and, concerningly, often unchecked. A 2011 survey by the
Perspectives
145

Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) of
8,584 middle and high school students that identify as LGBT
from across the United States tells us that nearly 9 out of 10
LGBT students experienced harassment at school in the past
year, and nearly two-thirds felt unsafe because of their sexual
orientation. We also know that high levels of harassment and
bullying correlate with poorer educational outcomes, lower
future aspirations, frequent school absenteeism, and lower
grade point averages. This is only one of the many ﬁnding
about anti-LGBTQ language and bullying in schools.
Personally, I know that bullying and harassment do not
happen in a vacuum. As an elementary and high school educa-
tor for 20-plus years, and more recently a diversity specialist in
Broward County Public Schools, the sixth largest school district
in the nation, I have the well-timed opportunity to design pro-
grams that help to ensure the well-being of LGBTQ youth.
Broward County Schools is one district that exempliﬁes care,
forward thinking, and a safety-focused culture. That said, we
also know culture and climate begin in our hallways, class-
rooms, and cafeterias. Schools that exemplify a strong and
healthy culture and climate have a higher sense of connected-
ness among and between students and staff and a lower level
of mistreatment and violence. Connectedness is when youth
have their developmental needs for safety and belonging met.
What is a positive school climate? A positive climate means
that youth and adults feel valued and “connected” at the school.
It is the feelings and attitudes elicited by a school or organiza-
tion’s environment. They include but are not limited to a sense
of belonging that everyone feels or does not feel within a school
community and the physical and psychological aspects of a
school, which both inﬂuence us and are inﬂuenced by us.
It is our professional, ethical, and legal responsibility to value
the worth of every person from every background and identity
and to do our best to ensure their physical, mental, and emo-
tional safety. Our students who identify as LGBTQ are no
exception. We know this group of marginalized youth has
146
School Violence

many unique needs, issues, and challenges due to societal
stigma about their identity.
The challenges that students and people who identify as
LGBTQ face and the resiliency necessary to circumvent the
challenges are present and palpable in all of our nation’s
schools. The school district that is my home, Broward County
Public Schools in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, is not an exception.
Being an educator and social justice advocate for numerous
years, I know the population of students and adults in our
schools is simply yet powerfully a microcosm of our larger com-
munity, including South Florida, Florida, the United States,
and our world. We do not live in a vacuum, and we are aware
of that every day as we maneuver and negotiate our day-to-
day life happenings and responsibilities.
The “face” of Broward County Public Schools in the 2012–
2013 school year echoed South Florida’s diversity. In that
school year, our school population came from 171 countries,
spoke 53 languages, and represented 261,000 students, of
whom almost 10 percent were English language learners
(ELLs).
Gary Howard,1 the well-respected antibias educator, makes a
provocative comment when speaking about diversity in our
school systems. He shares, “Rather than experience the discom-
fort of interracial dialogue, people often put an emphasis on
how we are all alike instead of addressing our obvious
differences.”
Sexual orientation and gender identity and expression are
layers of diversity. For some of us, accepting that there are peo-
ple that identify as LGBTQ may be counter to our beliefs, val-
ues, or personal faith. Honoring one’s beliefs does not have to
run counter to accepting a person’s LGBT identity as one of
Perspectives
147
1Howard, G. (2006). We Can’t Teach What We Don’t Know: White Teachers,
Multiracial Schools. New York: Teachers College Press.

our human diversities. It does, however, align with caring about
the physical, mental, and emotional well-being and safety of
LGBTQ people and the importance of ensuring a safe school
environment for all.
Some educators have stated that it seems we are hearing
about LGBTQ youth violence more in the last decade, and
even more so recently. If LGBT people and students have
always been a part of society, why is there more interest in
LGBTQ support, well-being, and safety now than before?
There has been a long and slow curve of support for youth
who identify as LGBTQ in our school communities. If we take
a historical perspective, support for young people who identify
as LGBT ﬁrst began within the gay community. Diversity clubs
and gay–straight student alliance clubs then began to spring up
in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Internet made a strong
debut about that time as well, and more information, both
good and not so good, was accessed by people who wanted to
learn more about either themselves, if they identiﬁed as
LGBT or were questioning their sexual identity (Q), or if they
were someone who simply wanted to know more for whatever
reason.
Research points to why adolescents have not realized their
orientation in the past and are now doing so as being due to
“cognitive isolation”—meaning there simply was very little or
no means to aggregate support, role models, and dialogue in
the past. Add in the intersecting marginalities of race, ethnic-
ity, socioeconomics, language, and faith, and the challenges
become even more palpable. Now, with the emergence of
support programs for LGBT youth, the Internet, the change
in public perceptions, the increase in positive media images
and coverage, and the expansion of community support
groups, LGBTQ students are emerging, along with their
unique needs, issues, and challenges. As a society, perhaps
we may be behind the curve when acknowledging our diver-
sities and identities.
148
School Violence

In addition, here are some other reasons why there has been
a “call to action” to become more aware of and support our
schools’ youth who do not identity as straight:
• The U.S. government issuing an imperative regarding the
safety of LGBTQ youth in our schools
• An increase in biased language in our schools across the
nation and also in our district
• Sobering documentation about personal experiences of
harassment and assault
• The emergence of gender nonconforming youth and
LGBTQ youth
• A signiﬁcant increase in gay–straight alliance (GSA) clubs
across the country
From October 2010 to February 2011 there was a highly
disturbing spate of suicides in our nation by mostly middle
school students who took their lives because of antigay harass-
ment, bullying, or lack of acceptance of their identity.
Thirteen young people took their lives. Since then there have
been many more, locally in South Florida, in our state, and in
our nation. Following the 13 suicides, a national campaign
was initiated by Dan Savage entitled “It Gets Better.”
So what might it be like for a young person in our school
system who identiﬁes as LGBT or who is questioning their sex-
ual identity? Here is a quote from a South Florida student who
identiﬁes as gay: “Where I was brought up . . . there’s that
island culture that is strongly against homosexuality. I would
feel like I would want to kill myself. I felt like I was a mistake.
I wanted to be someone else.”
There are three primary places young people go either for
support, to socialize, or both—home, place of worship (church,
temple, mosque, etc.), or school. We know from research that
LGBTQ youth often feel disconnected from their places
Perspectives
149

of worship when faith communities believe that being LGBT is
wrong or a sin. In addition, a sobering reality is that many chil-
dren have had conﬂictual experiences with their parent(s) or
caretakers ranging from disbelief to nonacceptance or being
told to leave home. Students spend more than seven hours a
day in school, and if we consider before- and after-school pro-
grams, clubs, athletic events and practices, service work, and
other activities, many children spend much longer than that.
Recently, it was reported that only approximately 15 percent
of school districts nationally do any type of staff sensitivity
training about LGBTQ needs, issues, and resiliency.
In order to understand the day-to-day experiences of
LGBTQ students, it’s important to educate ourselves about
the facts pertaining to safe climate, personal safety, and physi-
cal, mental, and emotional health and life support systems that
are present or not present in an LGBTQ youth’s life.
We are beginning to become more aware that, due to societal
stigma, it can be a great challenge to identify as lesbian, gay,
bisexual, or transgender. It is important to note that as we learn
and understand more about how to ensure the health and safety
of LGBTQ students, we know that someone’s orientation does
not cause challenging situations and difﬁcult circumstances,
including bullying or rejection. Instead, it is the hurtful reac-
tion of society, based on people’s beliefs, assumptions, and mis-
perceptions, that can create great stigma and pain for the LGBT
population.
An analysis of the key ﬁndings from empirical research sheds
light on sobering realities and the clear and urgent need for
school environments that nurture and promote respect and dig-
nity for students of all identities. For instance:
• LGBT youth are at increased risk for suicidal ideation,
attempted suicide, and depression. This increased risk
appears to be consistent across age group, gender, race, and
self-identiﬁed orientation.
150
School Violence

• Compared with other students, LGBT youth are more likely
to report feeling unsafe at school.
• LGBT youth report experiencing elevated levels of harass-
ment, victimization, and violence. School-based victimiza-
tion due to known or perceived identity has been
documented.
• Rates of substance use, including smoking and alcohol con-
sumption, are higher among LGB youth than heterosexual
youth. Almost no research has examined substance abuse
among transgender youth.
• The homeless youth population comprises a disproportion-
ate number of LGBT youth.
• The few studies that have examined protective factors for
LGBT youth suggest that family connectedness and school
safety are two possible areas for intervention, and family
acceptance among LGBT youth is a protective factor against
depression, substance use, and suicidal ideation and
attempts.
• LGBT youth may lack access to health care professionals
who are able to provide appropriate care to LGBT patients.
• Youth who report high levels of family rejection in middle
and high school are 8.4 times more likely to report having
attempted suicide and 5.9 times more likely to report high
levels of depression.2
Disturbingly, a 2012 survey of 50 Broward County, Florida,
youth at an LGBTQ youth support group mirrored most of
the above ﬁndings, with 55 percent of the youth group report-
ing that they have engaged in self-harm.
Perspectives
151
2Ryan, C., Huebner, D., Diaz, R., & Sanchez, J. (2009). Family Rejection as a
Predictor of Negative Health Outcomes in White and Latino Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Young Adults. Pediatrics, 123(1), 346–352.

It is important that all students and staff look forward to
coming to school and to work. Yet, for youth who identify as
LGBT, environmental stressors, parental conﬂict, and in some
cases parental or caregiver rejection as well as social stigma can
have disturbing effects.
Being Out
Bring harmony to this world, one at a time. One at a time—
with a teacher, a parent, I know it will work, it has to. . .
—19 year old Haitian-American youth of gay identity
For a variety of social and societal reasons, LGBT people are
more comfortable being “out” to their peers, families, and com-
munities in 2013, even though it is still not always safe to be
out. Recent research tells us that LGBT people are anywhere
from 8 to 13 percent of our world’s population. Also, the pre-
ponderance of research about sexual formation and human
development supports the belief that sexual orientation is not
a choice. Even though many people are still not out for different
reasons, it is reasonable to say that more than likely each of us
knows an adult who identiﬁes as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or trans-
gender. It is also quite possible you know a student or students
who identiﬁes as LGBTQ or a young person who is not a stu-
dent at your school who is out. He or she may have even found
you a safe person to talk to and came out to you personally.
We know that adolescents and even younger students are
engaged in an ongoing process of sexual development, and
many young people may be unsure of their sexual orientation,
while others have been clear about it since childhood.
Interestingly, the development of sexual identity in lesbian,
gay, and bisexual people is a unique process that has been
widely reported in the scientiﬁc literature and popular culture
but has received surprisingly little empirical attention.
First, we should understand what “coming out” means. There
are varying deﬁnitions of coming out, but all deﬁnitions center
152
School Violence

around the fact that coming out is a means to publicly declare
one’s identity, whether to a person in private or a group of peo-
ple. In our society, most people are generally presumed to be
heterosexual or straight, so there is no need for a heterosexual per-
son to make a statement to others that discloses his or her sexual
orientation. A person who is LGBT must decide whether or not
to reveal to others her or his sexual orientation or gender identity.
“Outing” occurs when someone else tells others that a particu-
lar person is LGBT without that person’s permission. Even
though we often do not know what someone’s beliefs are or reac-
tions might be, outing someone may have large repercussions for
students. It is an unfortunate reality that LGBT students com-
monly experience parental rejection because of their sexual orien-
tation or gender identity or expression. Studies have shown that
approximately one-third of LGBTQ youth are victims of physi-
cal violence by a family member after the student comes out or
their sexual orientation is disclosed. Students have had their
emotional and physical safety jeopardized when school staff
outed them to other students and even family members.
A disturbing reality is that students who identify as LGBTQ
often face serious homophobia in their families, schools, and
communities and are widely understood to be at serious risk.
It is important that schools be a place where they can learn,
thrive, be safe, and graduate. That said, young people are com-
ing out in larger numbers and at younger ages, seemingly
becoming more active by empowering themselves through
clubs, interests, and activities; more vocal about their identity;
and more resilient, and they are often leading social change.
Research has also found that self-awareness, self-labeling, and
disclosing an LGBT identity to others is happening at younger
ages, and if we are employed at a middle or high school, we
have seen the increase and know this to be so.
If you have had or will have an LGBT student choose to
come out to you—congratulate yourself! More than likely this
person has noticed qualities and ways of being about you that
made her or him feel that you would be an appropriate and safe
Perspectives
153

person with whom to share an important and, before that day,
quiet or secret part of her or his identity.
Interestingly, a signiﬁcant number of LGBT youth share
their identity with teachers because they spend a good deal of
their waking hours in an educator’s or support staff’s presence
at school. Actually, friends are the ﬁrst sphere of support that
LGBT youth turn to in the coming-out process because they
often feel the most accepted or safest with their like-aged peers.
Next young people often come out to other people at school,
either adults or other youth. Third, it is often but not always
siblings or extended relatives, and often last are an LGBT stu-
dent’s parents because their acceptance is critical to the child.
When a student tells you he or she is lesbian, gay, bisexual,
or transgender, your initial response is important. The student
has likely spent time in advance thinking about whether or
not to tell you and when and how to tell you. The following
are some tips to help you support her or him:
• Recognize the importance of this process for the LGBT
student. Recognize the choice to tell YOU.
• Respect the risk the student is taking by coming out to you
and ensure conﬁdentiality.
• Show your appreciation for the student’s courage.
• Honor your religious beliefs if they are counter to the LGBT
identity, and at the same time show that you value, respect,
and support the student who has come out to you. Both
can be done with grace, compassion, and tolerance.
• Help to make it a happy occasion. (Smile and relax!)
• Listen, listen, listen—and listen some more.
Conﬁdentiality and LGBT Students: It’s the Law
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized that the federal consti-
tutional right to privacy protects not only an individual’s right
to bodily autonomy but also the right to control the nature
154
School Violence

and extent of highly personal information that may or may not
be released by that person. This right to privacy extends to
students in a school setting. They have the right to share or
withhold information about their sexual orientation or gender
identity from their parents, teachers, and other parties, and it
is against the law for school ofﬁcials to disclose or compel stu-
dents to disclose that information. This means that teachers,
school staff, and administrators cannot discourage a student
from being out at school, but they also cannot force a
student to be out at home. It is up to the student—and the stu-
dent alone—to decide where and when to be open about her or
his LGBTQ status.
It is important to note that—even when a student appears
open about his or her sexual orientation or gender identity
at school—it is that student’s right to limit the extent to
which, and with whom, the information is shared. Failure to
follow these guidelines and policies could place a student in
a hostile, dangerous, or even life-threatening environment or
circumstance.
School ofﬁcials or teachers may think they are doing the
right thing by revealing a student’s sexual orientation or gender
identity to his or her parents. However, doing so not only vio-
lates the student’s rights but can negatively impact a young per-
son’s life. Young people whose schools have outed them to their
families often report subsequent rejection or verbal, physical, or
emotional abuse at home. Experts on homelessness have deter-
mined that family conﬂict over a youth’s sexual orientation or
gender identity is a signiﬁcant factor leading to homelessness.
It is important to know that the Supreme Court has ruled
that students do not shed their constitutional rights at the
schoolhouse gate. Furthermore, the only time schools may
restrict an individual student’s free speech is when it causes sig-
niﬁcant disruption in the classroom, according to Tinker v. Des
Moines Independent School District of 1969.
The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guar-
antees all people protection under the law, and public school
Perspectives
155

ofﬁcials and employees may not single out a student for nega-
tive treatment based on prejudices against LGBTQ students.
Nor may they discriminate against students just because they
feel uncomfortable around those who do not conform to tradi-
tional gender stereotypes.
Our Gender-Nonconforming Youth and Transgender
Youth
Finally, transgender students, coming to the forefront more and
more in our schools and at younger ages, face extreme harass-
ment in schools and at home. In a nation-wide study3 of trans-
gender youth, almost all transgender students had been verbally
harassed at their school. More than half of transgender students
have been physically harassed (pushed or shoved) in school in
the past year because of their orientation or gender expression.
Deeply concerning is the ﬁnding that less than one-ﬁfth of
transgender students said that school staff intervened most of
the time or always when hearing homophobic remarks about
gender expression—and school staff also contributed to the
harassment, with the study noting that a third of transgender
students heard school staff make homophobic remarks, sexist
remarks, or comments about someone’s gender expression in
the past year.
Creating a Safe Space for All: Policies, Programs,
and Practices
There are many ways to be an ally to all students who may
need support or encouragement. As good educators, we know
156
School Violence
3Grant, J., Mottet L., Tanis, J., Harrison, J, Herman, J., & Keisling, M. (2011).
Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.
Washington, D.C: National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay
and Lesbian Task Force.

the myriad personal and professional ways to show a young
person that you care, value their identity, and will do your
best to ensure both your classroom, working environment,
and school community is a safe place to be who they are,
learn, and grow.
One key way to create a welcoming and afﬁrming place for
all students and staff is to stop any sort of bullying or harass-
ment in its tracks. Research points to the fact that as young
people watch everything we do and say because they desire to
see us as role models to them, they also pay deft attention to
how we as professional educators handle bullying and harass-
ment by students to one another, students to adults, adults to
students, and even adults to each other. Close to home, in a
2012 survey of 50 Broward County LGBTQ youth, 83 percent
said they heard homophobic remarks from other students in
school frequently or often. Disturbingly, 42 percent reported
that they heard homophobic remarks from teachers or schools
staff sometimes, often, or frequently. We know every student
and staff, regardless of their culture, their background, their
identity, or their race, deserves to feel valued, respected, and
safe in our school communities.
So just what is an ally? There are numerous deﬁnitions, but
each points to the same “spirit,” that of being someone who is
supportive, tries to understand, listens, expresses value, and
watches out for the well-being and safety of another person
who may be marginalized or at risk. Therefore, allyship is
“walking the talk” by being someone who generously supports,
values, and demonstrates genuine care about another’s well-
being. Allies are of all ages, backgrounds, life experiences, gen-
ders, orientations, personalities, races, and religions. We can
ﬁnd allies within a school community, a family, a neighbor-
hood, a place of worship, a circle of friends, or the broader com-
munity, state, or country, to name a few.
An ally for the needs, rights, and resiliency of LGBTQ
youth should be aware of the legal landscape and how it pro-
tects or does not protect students. Our founding fathers, state
Perspectives
157

legislators, and local school board members have given us the
tools and the resources to empower all students; now it is up
to us to use them.
Federal Law
The Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution
The U.S. Constitution guarantees all people equal protection
under the law. This means public school ofﬁcials and employ-
ees may not single out a student for negative treatment based
on prejudices against a certain culture or identity. The
Constitution’s equality also means that public school ofﬁcials
may not turn a blind eye to anti-LGBTQ harassment or treat
it less seriously than other forms of harassment.
Title IX of the Education Amendment Acts of 1972
Federal civil rights statutes reinforce antidiscrimination princi-
ples as well. Title IX of the Education Amendment Acts of
1972 prohibits discrimination based on sex in education pro-
grams and activities that received federal ﬁnancial assistance.
Although Title IX does not expressly apply to discrimination
based on sexual orientation, it does prohibit gender-based har-
assment, such as harassment on the basis of student’s failure
to conform to stereotyped notions of masculinity and
femininity.
In 2011, a key policy letter was sent to every school district
in the nation by Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, under-
scoring the serious problem in our schools pertaining to harass-
ment and bullying, with acknowledgement of LGBT students
as the disproportionate targets of bullying in schools.
The secretary of education also distributed to all school
superintendents a “Dear Colleague” letter and a “Guidance”
letter and speciﬁed that youth who identify or are perceived to
be LGBT are included under the antibullying policies stated
in the letters.
158
School Violence

State Law
Florida Statute 1006.147
The Jeffrey Johnston Stand Up for All Students Act was passed
in 2008. From this, Florida Statute 1006.147 was enacted, cre-
ating a statewide prohibition of the bullying and harassment of
any students or employee of a public K–12 educational institu-
tion, whether at a school, on a school bus, or via electronic
device. What bullying law has your state legislated on behalf
of all students?
Florida Department of Education Code of Ethics 6B-1.006
As a professional educator in the state of Florida it is our charge
to abide by the Florida Professional Code of Ethics, which
states that every educator will value the worth and dignity of
every person, and essential to the achievement of these stan-
dards are the freedom to learn and to teach and the guarantee
of equal opportunity for all. Does your state have a professional
code of educational ethics?
Local Policies and Acts
Pay attention to your school board’s policies and guidelines.
For example, the School Board of Broward County policies
and guidelines prohibit bullying and discrimination, which
includes sexual orientation and gender identity and expression,
under Anti-bullying Policy 5.9 and Nondiscrimination Policy
4001.1. Does yours?
Other Key Ways to Show Allyship to LGBTQ Youth
Establish Guidelines in Your School and Classroom or Ofﬁce from
Day One and Revisit Guidelines Regularly
From day one of the school year, establish clear guidelines
about respect for all types of diversity in your environment.
Youth know that levels of safety and inclusion can vary from
Perspectives
159

person to person, leader to leader, teacher to teacher—even
though every classroom and hallway should be safe. Ensure that
your space is one in which name-calling, mistreatment, or cru-
elty of any kind, whether jokingly stated or a clearly hurled epi-
thet, with not be tolerated. Be certain to review your guidelines
regularly throughout the school year for the betterment of the
entire school community.
Meet with Your Leadership
Professional educators know that classroom or ofﬁces must be
afﬁrming to all people. It is our ethical and legal obligation to
ensure that all students are emotionally and physically safe, val-
ued, and respected so that they may learn, thrive, and develop
their educational and personal aspirations. We also know that
leadership in our school community is an integral part of an
intact, expansive, and sustainable school climate and culture.
Ensure that school leadership is “on board” with understand-
ing the signiﬁcance of LGBTQ student and staff safety and
well-being. Plan to meet with leadership, and the following tips
may help you. Note: These are suggestions, and the context of
your school environment may lend itself to varying ways of ensur-
ing leadership is ahead of the curve regarding LGBTQ safety.
Markers
Markers or cues are ways in which at-risk youth can decipher if
one is supportive of their identity. One clear, simple, and very
telling method of allyship for LGBTQ students is markers.
A marker is a method of acknowledgement or display widely
recognized by LGBTQ youth and adults.
Both subtle and overt markers or cues that let lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, or questioning youth know that they
have someone who values them. They let youth and adults
know that you are an easily identiﬁable LGBTQ ally. It also lets
them know that they can presume your basic awareness of and
160
School Violence

concern for LGBTQ youth and that you have basic issue
knowledge and are willing to provide resources and support.
Be aware of and exhibit markers youth “read” that subtly say
“I am safe; you are safe with me!”
Visibility Markers
• Make yourself a visible marker as an ally
• Let other educators know you are an ally: speak up for
LGBTQ youth and adults
• Post safe-space stickers and posters
• Display LGBT supportive materials
Action Markers
• Make no assumptions: Remember that approximately
10 percent of our population identiﬁes as lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual, or transgender. In a school of 2,000, do the math and
you may be surprised about how many youth are LGBT,
are questioning their sexuality, or have an LGBT father,
mother, sibling, extended relative, or good friend.
• Use inclusive language: Be aware of using pronouns or
nouns that are always of the opposite sex when speaking
with youth and adults. LGBT students hear when an educa-
tor is being inclusive and appreciate the effort to be broad
minded when speaking about day-to-day happenings,
events, and other issue in a student’s life.
Respond to Anti-LGBT Behavior
Interrupt anti-LGBT behavior in the same manner you would
stop any negative comment related to appearance, race,
income, ability, language, and so on. Make certain that the
interruption is directly followed by why you stopped the mis-
treatment or negative comment.
Perspectives
161

Safe Space Items
Knowing that an adult is supportive of LGBT students is very
important to all students of varying identities, and safe-space
stickers or posters indicate that this is a safe place for all.
Curriculum
GLSEN’s National School Climate Survey consistently ﬁnds
that students with inclusive curricula have a greater sense of
belonging in their school community, hear fewer homophobic
remarks, and are less likely to be bullied, harassed, or feel unsafe
at school than those without inclusive curriculum. All school dis-
tricts should desire for all youth to stay in school and feel wel-
comed and valued, including this at-risk minority of students.
What does a diverse curriculum that includes LGBT persons
as active contributors to history, literature, and events look like?
Include positive representations of LGBT people, history, and
events. For example, when teaching about history include the
persecution, struggles, and resiliency of marginalized groups,
include the challenges that people who identify as LGBT have
experienced.
GSAs
Just the mere presence of the GSA at my school helped me feel
like I was not alone. I gotta say, it helped me to survive in
school and made being at home and closeted more tolerable.
Please let teachers and principals know how much my GSA
helped save me.
—Broward LGBT student, 2010
Research tells us that the presence of a GSA at a school is one of
the most powerful indicators for youth of varying identities that
the school is afﬁrming of diversity. Our student quote at the
beginning of this GSA section underscores this fact.
162
School Violence

Resources
Even though LGBT youth turn to their friends ﬁrst as allies for
support, it is to teachers that youth look next as models of
safety and connection. The next step to ensure youth support
and safety are connection to resources by allies. Many students
may inquire about where they can go for help, whether the help
be emotional, intellectual, physical, or social. Many may also
want to be educated about where in the community at large
there is support or assistance for a variety of concerns so that
they may be resilient when coming out or living as a lesbian,
gay, bisexual, or transgender student or where to go socially to
interact in a healthy environment with other LGBT youth or
youth allies. Youth may also want to know about national re-
sources that specialize in LGBT support, safety, GSA involve-
ment, and so on.
A ﬁnal and important note to remember is to be aware that
some students have LGBT parents and some educators identify
as LGBT in our schools. Be aware that some parents and educa-
tors are not visible. For some parents, only one may be regis-
tered with the school. It is important to provide opportunities
for LGBT parents and their children to get together (identify,
support, and network). Providing these opportunities for
LGBT teachers, support staff, and leadership is also important
to maintaining a healthy school culture where all people are val-
ued and feel safe and connected. Encourage teachers to check
with LGBT parents about how they want to handle class activ-
ities and projects around Mother’s Day, Father’s Day, and
other holidays, and ensure that LGBT issues are part of antibul-
lying training for teachers, staff, and students. Last, remember
the markers and cues discussed earlier that let LGBT students,
as well as educators or parents, know that they are welcomed
by you.
In conclusion, as an educator and ally to all at-risk or mar-
ginalized students in our school communities, I hope that you
will join me as I strive to work, live, and play by the words of
Perspectives
163

one of our great world leaders. He professed, as a hopeful man-
tra to us all,
“Be the change YOU wish to see in the world.”
—Mahatma Gandhi
De Palazzo is a conﬂict resolution educator and president of
Perspective Unlimited, which provides training and consultation
to schools and community groups. She also works with the
Broward County, Florida, school district to help train teachers
and students on issues faced by LGBT youth.
Is There More School Violence Today? A Veteran
Educator Says No: Sarah Raitter
Nineteen years ago, I graduated from Western Michigan
University and set out for Fort Myers, Florida, to begin my
career as a special education teacher. My ﬁrst teaching posi-
tion was in a classroom for kindergarten, ﬁrst, and second
graders with emotional impairments. While my teacher
preparation program gave me all of the tools to design cur-
riculum and meet the academic needs for my students, it
did not really prepare me for the biggest surprise I encoun-
tered that year—violence among the students. Granted, these
were students who had exhibited problem behaviors through-
out their young lives, or they would never have been placed
in my program, but the level of violence I witnessed that
year was something that continues to shock me to this day.
One student was suspended on multiple occasions for throw-
ing a pair of teacher scissors at another student. Another stu-
dent was expelled from the special education bus for
throwing rocks at the school bus as it approached the bus
stop in the morning. And almost all of my students that year
had no other strategy for dealing with their frustrations than
to use their ﬁsts to punch, legs to kick, or teeth to bite the
164
School Violence

perceived offender. Academic instruction that year became
less important. Teaching this young group of students how
to deal with frustration and disappointment without resorting
to violence quickly became the driving force in my classroom
instruction.
Fast-forward 19 years, and I am still teaching special edu-
cation, although now in a middle school setting in Reno,
Nevada. When asked to reﬂect on whether school violence
has increased in the years I’ve been in the education profes-
sion, my automatic response was “Of course it has!” After
all, school shootings have increased dramatically and unfortu-
nately seem almost like an everyday occurrence. There was
even a school shooting close to home, in the neighboring
town of Sparks, Nevada. In response, school districts have
been charged with using increased safety measures in their
school buildings and on school campuses. All schools in my
district are required to practice a “code red” drill twice a
year, which puts into place emergency safety procedures
should a violent act occur on campus. While I have not
taught in such a district personally, I know that some places
have instituted metal detectors to prevent students from
bringing potentially lethal weapons onto the school campus.
In addition, most schools have some level of surveillance
cameras so that potential violence can be prevented or halted
in a timely manner.
But upon further thought, I really do not believe that
school violence has increased. There is still a level of violence
that shocks me at the middle school where I currently teach.
There is still a group of students who seem not to have
learned how to use their words to prevent arguments that
lead to violent attacks. There are still students who lack
strategies for dealing with problems besides resorting to
some sort of violence. We still have ﬁghts in the hallways,
cafeteria, and outdoor areas. However, I truly believe that
this violence involves a very small percentage of the student
population.
Perspectives
165

So why does it seem as though school violence has increased?
I believe that the media has a great deal to do with this per-
ceived increase. A violent attack in a school is no longer dealt
with “in house” by school administrators and the students
involved. Instead, it is immediately broadcast all over local
media stations along with various social media sites. Parents,
community members, and other students are understandably
horriﬁed that violent acts are “allowed” in schools, so they con-
tinue to discuss the issue of school violence, which, in turn,
keeps the problem in the forefront of people’s thoughts. I
believe that social media sites, such as Facebook, inadvertently
lead to the perception of increased school violence. Whenever
a ﬁght occurs in my school, it is immediately posted about on
Facebook and not allowed to blow over quickly and quietly. I
believe that schools and school districts are doing all they can
do to prevent violence from happening. Many schools, includ-
ing most in the school district where I teach, have implemented
school-wide positive behavior supports to reinforce students for
doing the right thing and dealing with problems and conﬂicts
in appropriate ways. While school violence is never an okay
thing, I truly believe that there has not been an increase
throughout the past two decades. Rather, we all need to keep
this in perspective and continue to do our best to help all youth
succeed.
Sarah Raitter is a special education teacher at Swope Middle
School in Reno, Nevada. She has been teaching special needs stu-
dents for 19 years. In addition, Raitter is a highly competitive run-
ner, having been asked to compete with the elite runners at the
2014 Boston Marathon.
Reflections on PeaceJam and School Violence in the
United Kingdom: Larenda Twigg
Although in the rural and suburban schools I attended as an
adolescent we never spoke of school violence, from the ages of
166
School Violence

11 to 13, I faced bullying, teasing, and name-calling on a regu-
lar basis. I dealt with these issues at school, through ﬁghts with
my family, and through constant tardiness to school. I was
lucky to have inspiring teachers, and opportunities to partici-
pate in numerous activities helped me gain conﬁdence in
myself and develop different peer groups. By the time I turned
14, I was able to ignore the bullying and negativity with the
support of a new group of friends. My own personal experience
created a desire to work with young people on peace education
programs helping to address various types of violence in their
own lives. Of the various programs I have participated in,
one I discovered as a graduate student at the University of
Bradford, called PeaceJam, has provided some of the most
remarkable inspiration to address these issues by empowering
young people to take action in their own communities.
The idea for PeaceJam began in Denver, Colorado, in 1994
when Ivan Suvanjieff, a long-haired, leather-clad rock-and-roll
musician challenged some teenage gang members who were
hanging out on his street. To his astonishment, these young
men, who were clearly dealing drugs and toting handguns,
sang the praises of Archbishop Desmond Tutu when the
conversation veered to South Africa. Although they had no
interest in the president of the United States, who they did
not see as relevant to them, these gang members believed
Archbishop Desmond Tutu was “cool” for having stood up—
nonviolently—to apartheid. Seeing the potential power that
an inﬂuential nonviolent role model might have if brought
together with young people, Ivan recruited his friend Dawn
Engle, who had a contact in the Dalai Lama’s ofﬁce, to ﬁnd a
way to bring together young people and Nobel Peace Prize
recipients to inspire them to take positive action in their own
communities. After a trip to Dharamsala where they convinced
His Holiness that young people needed positive role models
such as himself and his fellow Nobel Peace laureates,
PeaceJam was born. A group of 13 participating laureates form
the board of the PeaceJam organization and decide its vision,
Perspectives
167

educational curriculum, and strategies built around three
core pillars of inspiration (the laureates), education (the cur-
riculum and classroom), and action (student-led service
projects).4
In 2006, the PeaceJam program was brought to the United
Kingdom based on the desire of the late Sir Joseph Rotblat,
one of the participating PeaceJam Nobel Peace laureates, with
the help of Sally Milne of the Pugwash Foundation and
Dr. Fiona Macaulay at the Peace Studies Department at the
University of Bradford. From 2006 to 2012 the University
of Bradford hosted one of the annual PeaceJam Youth
conferences—and the only PeaceJam conference located in
Europe. The history of the city of Bradford made it an ideal
location to introduce this innovative curriculum-based peace
education program in the United Kingdom. Bradford, in
West Yorkshire, England, is a city with an industrialized past
from wool mills and a diverse population due in large part to
the multiple waves of immigration to work in those mills from
Germany, Estonia, Poland, India, Pakistan, and the Caribbean
to name a few. More recently refugee groups from places such
as Somalia, Iraq, and Zimbabwe have joined the growing
minority ethnic groups in the city.
Long past are the days where poets like T. S. Eliot in The
Waste Land would make reference to “a silk hat on a Bradford
Millionaire.” When I was ﬁrst moving to Bradford many I
spoke with in other parts of England knew Bradford only for
its economic deprivations, social tensions, and issues of race
relations between the city’s large Asian community and white
working-class community. These tensions were highlighted in
168
School Violence
4More information on the story behind PeaceJam and some of the projects young
people around the world have started due to their involvement in the program can
be found in Ivan Suvanjieff and Dawn G. Engle (2008), PeaceJam: A Billion Simple
Acts of Peace, New York, Pufﬁn Books.

the nation’s consciousness by riots in the city in 1995 and
2001. But along with the rise and decline of the city’s wool
mills is also a proud history of philanthropists, social reformers,
and activists for social justice and peace—including Sir
Norman Angell, the 1933 Nobel Peace Prize recipient (who
was the member of Parliament for Bradford North).
“What better way to teach empathy, intercultural under-
standing and community cohesion to young people than by
using the inspiration of Aung San Suu Kyi?” the head of an
all-girls school in Yorkshire asks. “I would argue that by using
twelve Nobel Peace Laureates, of whom Aung San Suu Kyi is
one, in our curriculum, we can inspire a new generation of
pupils to look at the world around them, and help create criti-
cally conscious young women who are ready to make a differ-
ence in the world.” When I ﬁrst heard the story of the
founding of PeaceJam I agreed with this teacher and was
inspired to become part of the program, but why would teen-
agers respond to a president of an island nation like José
Ramos-Horta or a middle-aged Iranian lawyer such as Shirin
Ebadi, especially when facing difﬁculties and violence in their
own lives every day?
Within Bradford, PeaceJam is one of several programs that
have attempted to address issues around communication and
dialogue in a city where it was felt, pre-riots, that no-one was
talking. Forums that have provided space for sharing knowl-
edge and addressing the importance of community engagement
have had the most lasting impact across the city, and PeaceJam
has been one those. Young people participating in the program
never have the sense that they are not worthy because the teach-
ers, university staff and students, and the Nobel laureate give
them their full commitment—whether or not the student
may go on to attend a university. There is a huge impact on
young people to enter a lecture theater on the university cam-
pus and not be patronized. It raises aspirations and provides a
new sense that things are possible and a belief that students
and their voices will be taken seriously by people who know
Perspectives
169

what they are talking about—creating meaningful engagement
and allowing meaningful engagement with other young people
from different backgrounds. This neutral territory also provides
a freedom to express feelings with less fear and to begin to
question.
Jody Williams provided a great example of not underestimat-
ing young people at the 2007 PeaceJam UK conference hosted
in Bradford. Having just spent an exhausting and traumatizing
month interviewing refugees in Darfur for the United Nations,
Jody talked of the endless testimonies she had heard of the rape
of women refugees by the janjaweed militias. The response by
the youth at the conference was to engage and challenge her
with well-informed questions about the apparent inaction of
the United Nations and the Sudanese government, her capacity
to deal with stress and trauma in her work, and her views on
international justice issues. Jody Williams then discussed with
them and listened to the students’ own problems of bullying
and racism in their schools and communities.
This not only can help students speak about the idea of peace
or conﬂict resolution as a theory but provides real inspiration
for putting it into practice. John,5 who lived outside of
Bradford and attended the ﬁrst PeaceJam conference held in
the United Kingdom in 2006 with Máiread Corrigan
Maguire, provides an excellent example of this. The school
John attended had faced constant turbulence, especially in staff-
ing, with the majority being in their position for two years or
less. Almost every day after classes ended, John and his friends
used to go and ﬁght with the kids from another nearby school
which they considered “snobby.” These ﬁghts were what one
did to be part of the group, and none of them spent much time
thinking of the implications or consequences of this constant
ﬁghting. “But now that I’ve been to PeaceJam with some of
170
School Violence
5For anonymity the names of students and schools have been changed.

them, well, it seems really silly to do that now.” PeaceJam pro-
vided a space for the students to speak and work alongside each
other in small groups, changing the way the students saw each
other and themselves. By 2008, John, who had previously had
no expectation of attending university, had started to spend
his summer working as a counselor in youth camps, and in
2010 John enrolled in university with the plan to be a youth
worker.
This sharing of stories with the laureate, in their youth or
school group, and with their mentor groups is an empowering
feature which can bring together people from an incredibly
wide range of backgrounds: liberal middle class, white British
working class, Asian British Muslims, gang members, and
asylum-seekers and refugees. It can be surprising that whatever
their background, everyone can relate so passionately and
directly with the laureates. In 2012 a student commented, “I
was really surprised how everyone got on so well and I enjoyed
listening to Adolfo [Pérez Esquivel] talk about his life experien-
ces and how he overcame what he went through.” For another
student engagement with the stories of Betty Williams made
her realize “life doesn’t have to be like this” despite the abuse
she faced at home, which had led to bad behavior at school.
After listening to the laureate, she realized she had control over
her own behavior and became very active in multiple projects at
school. After another conference a participant related, “I real-
ized through hearing [Máiread Corrigan Maguire] speak [about
her response to the death of her sister’s children in the violence
in Northern Ireland] that I was hanging out with some mean
people. We were always looking for other girls to pick on and
bully. But I didn’t like them really. So I changed my group of
friends, they like me, and now I do my homework and don’t
get into trouble; my parents are much happier too.”
The diversity of the laureates themselves helps them as a
group appeal to the diverse audience of young people, but what
resonates is that all the laureates manage to communicate their
absolute conviction that when facing injustice everyone can,
Perspectives
171

and should, make their voices heard and make a difference.
This conviction is carried over by the university student men-
tors and by the teachers and youth workers who facilitate the
local PeaceJam groups. As one participant summarized,
“[PeaceJam] inspired and encouraged me to stand for what I
believed. It also taught me that staying silent and doing nothing
is not the answer. Doing something about an issue might not
solve it 100% but at least you can do something that makes it
a bit better than it was at ﬁrst.”
The program is also about having an ability to speak about
issues and life in a meaningful way, especially in one’s own
community. In 2011 Betty Williams’s engagement with a
group at a community in the center of Bradford inspired the
young people who had been previously been reluctant to par-
ticipate in PeaceJam, but Betty’s ability to talk with them about
gun and knife violence on a personal level gave them the
encouragement they needed to begin taking an active role in
some community projects. The group was then able to work
on two projects (painting at a community center and working
in a community garden) with young people from Armenia
and Azerbaijan. During the project the groups were able to
speak with each other about their experiences with war and vio-
lence. This inspiration from the laureate and the action of the
volunteering provided support and validation to both their
individual experiences of violence and their ability to make a
change in their own communities.
This encouragement that, as an individual, as a young per-
son, one can do something is empowering. Unfortunately,
many of our participants have voiced a feeling that they are
often seen as the problem rather than as a solution to issues in
their community or school. We need to ﬁnd ways to help
young people ﬁnd identity and status in what they actually do
or think rather than, for example, in the things they own or
wear. “Listen, shopping is not a human right,” Jody Williams
tells the youth. For some of our youth these issues of identity
and consumerism link directly to the bullying and other school
172
School Violence

violence they face. The celebrity nature and energy of someone
like Jody Williams telling them, “instead of hanging out in the
mall for hours every Saturday, go do some volunteer work, raise
money, do some campaigning,” helps to make peace and activ-
ism cool, allowing for the possibility for some of the young peo-
ple to begin to make new choices in the face of the violence
they face at school—or at home.
This personal transformation, in my anecdotal experience, is
a result not only of their encounters with the laureate but also
their interactions with each other. Shirin Ebadi stressed,
“Listen, I don’t want to be your role model. Your life will have
different challenges from mine. Look around and learn from
lots of different people that you admire and ﬁnd your own path
in life,” a path which will be different for all the participants.
Those from comfortable backgrounds gain the chance to share
life experiences with those far removed from their own. For
those struggling with their behavior, school work, or home life,
involvement in PeaceJam may provide an anchor in a chaotic
life. “I am sure that many of the young people I bring would
have been excluded from school by now, were it not for
PeaceJam,” one teacher explained, “And best of all, especially
as far as the boys are concerned, it’s made peace cool in
school.”
Depending on the way participants are selected for the
PeaceJam in schools, the effect of the PeaceJam program may
be a large factor in reducing overall violence in a school. As vio-
lence in a school is typically centered on a small group of stu-
dents with inﬂuence, if these students stop their behavior and
model a new pattern based on peace and empathy being “cool,”
then not only does the school violence decrease but the nonvio-
lent message spreads as well. This has been the case for one of
our participating schools from the Midlands. Over half the
school’s students are from a minority ethnic background, and
over a third speak English as a second language. A high propor-
tion of the students receive free school meals, and the school
has an above average rate of students who join or leave school
Perspectives
173

in the middle of the year. The teacher coordinating the
program has reported spending less time stopping conﬂicts
as a result of her choice to send certain young people to
PeaceJam.
The school ﬁrst became involved in PeaceJam in 2006 when
it was invited to bring students to Bradford to a conference at a
time when the school had several girls who were involved in a
school-wide maelstrom of conﬂict within their year group. It
was a miserable school environment with constant rows and
ﬁsticuffs over who was going through a door ﬁrst, countless
detentions, girls in isolation, and constant exclusions. A teacher
explained that when “Sally Milne invited me to bring students
to a conference I thought—OK—we’ve tried everything
else, let’s try this. So I took 8 girls who were heavily involved
in problems—ﬁve in danger of exclusion, to the ﬁrst UK
PeaceJam.”
There was a dramatic effect on those eight students who par-
ticipated, as Alice, who was 13 years old at the time, relates:
Going to PeaceJam totally changed my life. In March I
was excluded from school for ﬁghting and was constantly
falling out with my friends. A group of three of us was
going to attack another girl after school which I now sin-
cerely regret. What I learnt at the conference really
helped. I remember what Mairead said—that there is
no need for arguing. She changed her life and other peo-
ples’ lives by being peaceful. Life is too short to waste it
ﬁghting. Since then, instead of ﬁghting I stop ﬁghts! I
have stayed out of trouble and at home I get rewards
for being good in school instead of punishments for
being excluded! I just stopped going around with violent
people so much and chose to spend my time with peace-
ful people. I ﬁnd this easier because I don’t have to be
scared to say the wrong thing. I like myself more now
being a peaceful person.
174
School Violence

Of the eight students taken to the conference in 2006, only
one of the eight has since been excluded for violence. Of the
others, ﬁve were the ﬁrst in their family to make it through to a
ﬁnal assembly in year 11. Of these, four went on to further educa-
tion, and one has a job with training. And one of the students has
managed to keep her younger siblings out of violence and encour-
age them to go for further education as well. Although some staff
complain about rewarding the “villains,” due to the success of par-
ticipation in the PeaceJam program among students most in dan-
ger of exclusion for violence, the school continues to select young
people to participate because of need rather than solely as a reward
for good behavior. Strong interest in the PeaceJam program
within the school means there is a waiting list for students wanting
to attend any PeaceJam conference weekends.
Finally, transforming a violent school environment is not
only about personal transformation but also needs to be
linked to school and community transformation. PeaceJam
uses the stories of the laureates within the curriculum and at
conferences to provide the inspiration and a bit of the educa-
tion, but it is the action the students take through volunteer-
ing or service projects developed themselves that is a main
component of this transformation and may range from issues
of poverty to the environment to racism and human rights.
By basing the program within the community of the school,
PeaceJam aims to teach young people about wider issues in
society and root causes of problems, and then to introduce
skills to enable the students to tackle practical projects within
their own community to address the issue with which the stu-
dents are most concerned. One student summarized the
impact of PeaceJam: “It has taught me that we need to get
everybody together to work together to make things better
in
our
community.
Everybody
needs
to
support
each
other—like the ﬁngers of a hand working together like the
dude [Adolfo Pérez Esquivel] said—parents really need to
support their children to make things better.”
Perspectives
175

Larenda Twigg is a Ph.D. student at the University of Bradford in
the United Kingdom. She is an active member of the United
Kingdom’s PeaceJam team.
Preventing School Violence: Barbara J. Wien
Violence as a Continuum
Micro aggressions, from the playground to college campuses,
from battles in Congress to international relations, are part of
our acceptance of too much violence in our culture, how we
raise our children, and broader societal values. But how?
Why?
Violence is a continuum. The more we accept micro aggres-
sions at the interpersonal level, the more we accept and allow
violence at all levels of our lives. Bullying is violence, whether
it is on the playground or on the world stage when powerful
nations invade and occupy other countries. Such bullying on
the world stage causes tremendous values confusion among
youth. Why do adults lecture youth not to ﬁght yet support
war? Why do national leaders spend vast amounts of money
preparing for war if violence is not a valid method of resolving
conﬂicts? Who are the action ﬁgures and heroes children are
encouraged to adore? What types of values are the media
exalting and glorifying? Are military power, masculinity, and
material wealth celebrated? Who beneﬁts from this? Are sim-
plicity, basic human kindness, and humility rewarded in our
society today? Why? Why not? Who beneﬁts from this? Are
peaceful responses perceived as weak? Are nonviolent responses
applauded and gloriﬁed? What kind of messages are we sending
youth? How can we counterbalance unhealthy societal values?
What choices can we make in our lives? We have the power
to choose. What have we learned from the campus tragedies
at Virginia Tech, Howard, and Bowie State? What could have
been done differently by parents, national leaders, educators,
and teens?
176
School Violence

Youth violence is largely a reﬂection of adult society. When
youth commit violence, they are holding up a mirror to adult
conduct, showing us the values we embody and foster in our
own homes, neighborhoods, and society. When adults and
national leaders endorse war and violence to resolve conﬂicts,
children absorb such values, practices, and images into their
belief systems and psyches. Many children are also raised with
the premise that the human race is inherently violent and war
is inevitable. When combat and ﬁghting are the only solutions
shown in popular media and gloriﬁed in our textbooks, our
children learn this lesson only too well. TV violence inﬂuences
behavior. If it did not, big corporations would not invest bil-
lions of dollars in advertisements.
This premise is further reﬂected and embedded in U.S. eco-
nomic policies, with the highest level of war spending in the
world,
more
than
our
top
ﬁve
adversaries
combined.
“Children who are brought up to believe in the inevitability of
war are much less likely to work for peace” (UNESCO,
1986). Conversely, research studies show that children who
see adult role models actively working for peace and the rights
of others believe they will have a more extended, secure future;
learn greater social responsibility; and are more likely to
respond to violence with skills such as negotiation (Harvard
University Medical School, 1984).
Shifting U.S. Culture
According to leading psychologist and adolescent expert Dr.
Ofer Zur, Ph.D., an outstanding resource for parents, educa-
tors and citizens, numerous research studies “established the
undeniable relationships between militarism, sexism, racism
and violence within a culture.” He writes:
• Principally, there is no difference between the state of mind
that seeks to resolve international conﬂicts by force and the
Perspectives
177

state of mind that seeks to resolve interpersonal or familial
conﬂicts by force and the misuse of power.
• There is a direct link between the way in which we use
power with our children, our signiﬁcant others, our neigh-
bors, and our environment and what we teach our children
about violence.
• Cultures in which young children regularly receive loving
touch have lower incidents of violent crimes.
• Research done with psychiatrically hospitalized adolescents
demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction of violent and sexual
acting out when staff increased the use of nonsexual, affec-
tionate touch with the teens.
• Fear and violent behavior have a direct correlation. Monitor
media news presentations that capitalize on creating fear
through undue sensationalism and manipulative means.
Dr. Zur writes in summary: “The misuse of power through
violent action is taught through and supported by culture.
The United States is one of the most violent cultures in the
Western world with more crimes being committed with guns
and through violent force.”6
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. proclaimed this same thesis when
he said in his famous “Beyond Vietnam” speech in New York
City on April 4, 1967, that “A nation that continues year after
year to spend more money on military defense than on pro-
grams of social uplift is approaching spiritual death,” and the
“U.S. is the greatest purveyor of violence in the world.”
How can we expect our schools and children to be nonvio-
lent when the United States has militarily intervened 180 times
178
School Violence
6Zur, O. (2014). Teen Violence, School Shootings, Cyberbullying, Internet Addiction,
T.V. and Gaming Violence and Teen Suicide: Facts, Ideas, and Actions. Zur Institute.
Retrieved June 3, 2014, from http://zurinstitute.com/teenviolence.html.

since the 1890s, currently maintains 1,000 military installa-
tions and bases around the world, and has been a nation at
war for decades in Central America (1980s), the Middle East
(since the 1990s), Asia (1950s, 1960s, and 1970s) and Europe
(1940s)?
Couple these national military policies with the mass avail-
ability and lethality of guns in the United States thanks to the
National Riﬂe Association (NRA), and it is astonishing that
we do not have more school violence. Just imagine: On a daily
basis, teachers and school administrators must seek to counter
the full weight of warped values, parental apathy, television vio-
lence, the gun lobby, militarism, and national leaders resorting
to the use of force, all without the equivalent ﬁnancial re-
sources! Schools and educators are held to an impossible stan-
dard in this regard.
Ending War and Violence
The good news is that resistance to war is building worldwide
and may be reaching critical mass in the near future. This seems
like an outrageously insensitive and foolish claim when so many
people are dying in armed conﬂicts. Yet there is increasing evi-
dence. We can hasten the demise of war by spreading peace
education in every possible setting, by transforming the role of
soldiers and military institutions for a global environmental
recovery race, and by supporting nonviolent struggles unfolding
around the world for economic equality, human rights, and
democratic participation.
Thomas Kuhn ﬁrst suggested in 1962 that a set of ideas, the-
ories, or schools of thought (known as paradigms) can become
dominant, self-reinforcing, and self-perpetuating. In his book
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Kuhn posits that para-
digms are born out of a society’s structures, such as race, gen-
der, and class. These paradigms become a system of logic unto
themselves, although they may be fundamentally ﬂawed.
Research then stems from these paradigms and produces ﬂawed
Perspectives
179

outcomes. Such was the case when people thought the world
was ﬂat. People and societies come to believe in or depend
entirely on the ﬂawed paradigms, which serve only the interests
of a narrow few. This is true of today’s war system.
But what was once enshrined and celebrated can be reconsid-
ered. Contradictions or ﬂaws in the theory may emerge. A
group comes along and challenges the dominant views and
turns the whole notion on its head. A revolution in thought,
or a paradigm shift, occurs. Such people change forever the
way we view history, societies, and ourselves. This happened
with the institution of slavery, the divine right of kings, wom-
en’s roles in society, and many others.
We are in the midst of such a paradigm shift at this political
moment in history. Here are three of the promising trends that
are gaining traction and creating a paradigm shift:
1. Peace education is growing everywhere in formal and nonfor-
mal settings, in kindergarten through 12th grades, colleges,
universities, preschools, refugee settings, after-school pro-
grams, inner city gangs, summer campuses, church and
Bible study circles, labor unions, and thousands of other
contexts in many countries. (See the Global Campaign for
Peace Education website, http://www.peace-ed-campaign
.org/newsletter/archives/77.html).
2. Resistance to military intervention among soldiers and ofﬁcers
is growing, even inside the military academies. They have
been to Iraq and Afghanistan. They know war is not making
us safer and is creating greater and more lethal threats. Iraq
Veterans Against the War, Vietnam Veterans for Peace,
Captain Paul Chappell, Lt. Colonel David Grossman, Josh
Steiber, and countless other soldiers are speaking out and
teaching peace.
3. Nonviolent revolutions are increasing exponentially. Since
1974, over 60 countries have transitioned from dictator-
ships to democracies using Gandhi’s nonviolent principles
180
School Violence

and strategies.7 The spring of 2011 saw massive, tectonic
paradigm shifts in the Middle East. The outcome is unclear
in Yemen, Bahrain, Egypt, and of course Syria, but the peo-
ple have spoken and waged nonviolent struggle to change
their conditions.
The Seville Statement on Human Violence debunks the
myth that the human race is hard-wired for war and violence.
It is the work of hundreds of social scientists, archeologists,
anthropologists, primate specialists, political psychologists,
and peace researchers. Additional contributions from West
Point professor Lt. Colonel David Grossman or Captain Paul
Chappell concur. They posit that there is a greater preponder-
ance of evidence that the human race is naturally cooperative
or our species would not have survived this long, and war is a social
construct that serves the interests of war proﬁteers. War is not
ﬁxed in nature like gravity in the cosmos; otherwise why would
so many people go insane during war? Why have 500,000
soldiers come back with posttraumatic stress disorder if war is
normal?
The Seville Statement challenges us to evolve to a higher
stage of human development. Millions of young people are
graduating from peace and conﬂict resolution programs
rejecting racism, violence, and economic inequality. They do
not believe in war anymore. Start a peacemaking program in
your community or a peace education course in your local
school system today and start the paradigm shift!
Resistance to war is coming from surprising circles indeed.
Indeed, Andrew J. Bacevich, a former military colonel, now a
professor of history and international relations at Boston
Perspectives
181
7See “How Freedom Is Won,” a report by Freedom House, 2007, or “Why Civil
Resistance
Works:
The
Strategic
Logic
of
Nonviolent
Conﬂict”
(2008),
International Security, 33(1), 7–44.

University and author of Washington Rules: America’s Path to
Permanent War, wrote, in an article called “No Exit” (2010):
The impetus for weaning Americans away from their infatu-
ation with war, if it comes at all, will come from within the
ofﬁcer corps. It certainly won’t come from within the politi-
cal establishment, the Republican Party gripped by milita-
ristic fantasies and Democrats too fearful of being tagged
as weak on national security to exercise independent
judgment. Were there any lingering doubt on that score,
Barack Obama, the self-described agent of change, removed
it once and for all: by upping the ante in Afghanistan he has
put his personal imprimatur on the Long War.
Yet this generation of soldiers has learned what force
can and cannot accomplish. Its members understand the
folly of imagining that war provides a neat and tidy solu-
tion to vexing problems. They are unlikely to confuse
Churchillian calls to arms with competence or common
sense. . .8
For further inspiration and hope, Harry Targ writes in his
blog. . .
[Howard] Zinn demonstrated that participants in people’s
struggles were part of a “people’s chain,” that is the long
history of movements and campaigns throughout history
that have sought to bring about change. . . . [Zinn] wrote
in his autobiography, You Can’t Be Neutral on a Moving
Train: a Personal History of Our Times: “What we choose
to emphasize in this complex history will determine our
lives. If we see only the worst, it destroys our capacity to
182
School Violence
8Bacevich, A. (2010, February 1). No Exit. The American Conservative. Retrieved
May 28, 2014, from http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/no-exit/

do something. If we remember those times and places—
and there are so many—where people have behaved mag-
niﬁcently, this gives us the energy to act, and at least the
possibility of sending this spinning top of a world in a dif-
ferent direction.
And if we do act, in however small a way, we don’t have
to wait for some grand utopian future. The future is an
inﬁnite succession of presents, and to live now as we think
human beings should live, in deﬁance of all that is bad
around us, is itself a marvelous victory.9
Military force is an outdated paradigm. Young people are striving
and starving for peace. There may always be a greedy or fright-
ened few who push for violent solutions out of selﬁshness and fear
of the unknown, but they are the minority. Most of us are tired of
war draining our purses and treasuries, while vast human needs
remain unresolved. The world is rapidly moving beyond the old
model of violence and war as an instrument of foreign policy to
a richer, deeper sense of human security, to a higher humanity.
We are aching for cultures of human dignity and peace. The
day is near when a child will ask, “Mommy, what was war?”
Cultivating Caring Communities
Strong, caring communities can help prevent adolescent isola-
tion, teen suicides, bullying, shootings, and school violence
where young people lack a sense of belonging, acceptance,
respect, and love. A vast body of evidence across dozens of
disciplines based on 40 years of youth surveys, research, and
evaluations shows that strong communities are a highly effec-
tive deterrent to violence. Youth of color, in particular, feel that
Perspectives
183
9Rothschild, M. (2010, January 28). Thank You, Howard Zinn. The Progressive.
Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/
no-exit/

adults are waging war on them with surveillance, detention,
suspension, expulsions, and incarceration. In the name of disci-
pline or security, punitive policies in poor neighborhoods often
destroy young people’s futures, sending them from the school
into juvenile detention centers or, worse, adult prisons.
Instead, communities based on respect, civic engagement, lis-
tening to youth, connection, caring, responsiveness, positive
adult role models, peaceable relationships, peacemaking circles,
community conferences, and empathy are a key building block
for well-balanced, healthy, nonviolent adolescents and children
and a major indicator for an absence of school violence.
How do we reweave and strengthen the fabric of U.S. culture
and society to become more closely knit, just, fair, equitable,
loving, respectful, joyful, and kind? How do we redirect and
counterbalance all the violent consumerism and militaristic
inﬂuences bombarding our youth? One of the most important
methods is to listen to youth themselves. If we sit down with
young people most affected by violence, we will learn some sur-
prising insights and ﬁnd that youth hold some of the greatest
promise for resolving the crisis.
Unfortunately, media ask the wrong questions about youth
violence and harshly scapegoats and stereotypes young people.
The media avoid looking at the deeper questions of adult
responsibility, the role of the gun lobby in spreading lethal
weapons, and social structures and rampant inequality. Media
framing of violence leaves the public without a handle on what
to do and lacking a sense of agency or hope. According to the
famous nonviolence scholar Dr. Michael Nagler (2007), the
more a person watches the news, the more depressed she or he
becomes. This may be one reason so many young people opt
for independent media.
How to Build Community
We can foster respectful relationships with youth so that they
truly feel heard. We can create a sense of community where
184
School Violence

insults and violence are unacceptable, while mutual respect pre-
vails instead. But what are the signs of such healthy commun-
ities? What are the dynamics? Moreover, how can we ensure
that everyone stands up and speaks out when violence occurs,
both structural violence (poverty, hunger, and injustice) and
direct overt violence (school shootings, bullying, and so forth)?
How do we overcome the “bystander effect” where people feel
paralyzed and no one acts to de-escalate the situation?
Speciﬁc, practical, documented proof of what works to create
safe communities and childhoods can be found through the
Search Institute’s national surveys of over a million youth
during the last ﬁve decades. They analyzed the data and results
to understand why some kids struggled, while others grew up
with ease; why some were endangered and prone to violence,
while others contributed to society; why some are trapped in
humane conditions, while other “beat the odds.” While many
factors inﬂuence young people’s success in life—including eco-
nomic circumstances, genetics, and trauma—they are not the
only things that matter. They alone do not determine the out-
come of teens’ lives. Rather, healthy, productive youth are
affected by the presence of what are known as developmental
assets. The Search Institute has been able to identify 40 such
assets for 12- to 18-year-olds as the essential building blocks
for strong communities and young people. The assets are
cumulative, increasing in value over time, and provide a sense
of well-being and security. They are the best deterrent to vio-
lence in schools. Although a complete listing cannot be pro-
vided here, the following is a sample: Support, including from
family, other adults, caring neighbors, and a supportive school
climate; empowerment, such as being given useful community
roles, being valued by adults in the community, serving others,
and feeling safe at home, in school, and in the community;
appropriate boundaries and high expectations provided by fam-
ilies, other adults, peers, school ofﬁcials, and community mem-
bers; constructive use of time, or spending time in arts, music,
theater, sports, faith, family, and youth-driven programs;
Perspectives
185

commitment to and enjoyment of learning; positive values,
such as helping others, belief in equality, integrity, honesty,
responsibility; social competencies, such as help making posi-
tive choices, developing friendships, comfort with people from
different backgrounds, the ability to resist, and positive forms
of conﬂict resolution; and positive identity, or high self-
esteem, sense of purpose, and a positive view of the future.
Sadly, the Search Institute ﬁnds that most U.S. children
report having only 18 of the developmental assets in their lives.
When these indicators are present, I have personally witnessed
the effectiveness of the developmental assets model in turning
around the lives of endangered youth in Harlem, New York;
Washington, DC; and Arlington, Virginia, since 1981. The
teens I know who survived and thrived in tough situations were
those linked to community centers, neighborhood groups, Big
Brother and Big Sister mentors, congregations, and scouting.
We practiced respectful, inclusive, and humane treatment with
three key ingredients: (1) tackling the root causes of violence in
our area so people’s needs are met and grievances are addressed;
(2) listening to teen voices for creative solutions that gave every-
one a role in banding together; and (3) responding to violence
with skills of compassionate listening, advocacy, conﬂict resolu-
tion, and nonviolent action. Letting youth articulate their real-
ity and working for social justice as a whole community made a
huge difference. It was an important reality check for the chil-
dren to know they were not always at fault or to blame for the
conditions found in their schools and neighborhood. They
were able to step back and see the big picture of how conditions
were affecting them but also taking responsibility for their own
behavior and how they might be contributing to violence
through community accountability and peacemaking circles.
It took a communal approach to turn rage and anger about
the lack of resources, opportunities, and infrastructure and
unmet human needs into nonviolent, grassroots organizing
strategies for social change to nurture and safeguard our youth.
A holistic approach is required.
186
School Violence

Feeling isolated, many youth seek companionship and com-
munity on the Internet. This is not something adults should
automatically condemn. These youth are seeking a form of
community, after all, and frequently feel misunderstood, con-
demned or judged by adults, and neglected by their parents.
Parents may be distracted and emotionally or physically absent
due to work or the care of an elderly relative. Too few families
share a daily meal to talk about their lives. Families are scattered
and disconnected. According to Dr. Ofer Zur, Ph.D,, an expert
on bullying and school violence, “Youth are using the Internet
for a wide range of activities. These include: homework, com-
munication, fun, gaming, social connection and interaction,
information gathering, to view videos, listen to music, post
photos,
blog,
chat,
etc.”
(http://www.zurinstitute.com/
teenviolence.html). Parents, guardians, and adults, therefore,
should share, review, monitor, discuss, and enjoy together to
understand their children’s Internet usage, not just condemn
it. Internet use should not be excessive. It is no substitute for
authentic community and face-to-face relationships. Exposure
to violence on the Internet is rampant and desensitizes youth
to the real effects of killing. Spending countless hours a day,
every day, on gaming or perusing the Internet can interfere
with young people’s emotional, physical, intellectual, and spiri-
tual development (Young, 2014). So unplug and talk with
youth.
Best Practices in Reducing School Violence
Another big problem in youth violence is the bystander effect
when bullying occurs. Studies show that the most effective
intervention program to stop bullying and psychological vio-
lence is to transform the environment and shift the culture in
the school by activating everyone to play a role. A ground-
breaking study conducted by the University College London
(UCL) and U.S. researchers in 2009 with 1,345 third to ﬁfth
graders (8–11 year olds) in nine U.S. elementary schools found
Perspectives
187

the most effective method to end bullying focuses more on the
bystander, including the teacher, than on the bully or the vic-
tim. Creating a Peaceful School Learning Environment
(CAPSLE) is one of the few controlled trials of school antibully-
ing programs, and it exposed about 4,000 children to the pro-
tocols in the end. It assumes that everyone feeds into the
power dynamics of bullying. It addresses the co-created rela-
tionships among bully, victim, and bystander. Rather than just
targeting aggressive children, the CAPSLE program worked to
develop empathy, awareness, responsibility, and skills across
all populations in the school and gradually recruited bullies over
time into helping roles. And it demonstrates that everyone in the
school has a role in ending bullying and school violence. This
means having a genuine community where everyone is engaged
and paying attention.
The study published in the Journal of Child Psychology and
Science Daily (January 27, 2009) aims to improve the capacity
of all community members to counteract bullying, which has
an extensive impact on children’s mental health, leading to
depression, social withdrawal, substance abuse, anxiety, disrup-
tive and aggressive behavior, dropout, and academic failure.
The percentages of children victimized at CAPSLE schools
were substantially lower compared with schools receiving no
intervention and those using only school psychiatric consulta-
tion, particularly at a time when the school district had numer-
ous socioeconomic problems, making the results of the study
even more remarkable. The study shows that adults (from the
librarian to the janitor) and all the other children must model
solidarity, compassion, and leadership and interrupt unequal
power relationships.
Another highly effective model of violence prevention since
the 1980s can be found in the Parenting for Peace and Justice
Network, begun in 1981 at the Institute for Peace and Justice
as an interfaith, interracial, transnational association of families
of all descriptions who seek “Shalom”—well-being, wholeness,
188
School Violence

peace, justice—in their own living situations and in the broader
community. On their website, www.ipj-ppj.org, they state,
We recognize that the well-being of our families is tied to
the well-being of our global family and the earth itself.
Moreover, as both Elise Boulding, the famous peace scholar,
and Gloria Steinem, the famous feminist leader, have written,
peace and democracy must begin in the home with equitable
gender relations. If we do not model a just society in our house-
holds, we cannot expect our children to either. Gender equity is
a key ingredient in solving poverty, violence, illiteracy, and
overpopulation. It is a huge untapped solution across the world.
The solution is right under our noses if we would seek gender
equity.
A further model to help with school violence can be found in
Kindness Clubs, started by Kellie Guinan, a Nebraska peace
educator. Such clubs have spread to more than 60 countries
now. Teachers say that children are hungry for these kinds of
after-school activities in the face of so much television violence
and mean-spiritedness in U.S. society. Find a school that
adopted the model: http://teachersites.schoolworld.com/webpages/
ACummings1/kc_club.cfm.
As a result of the mass shooting at Columbine High School
in Colorado on April 20, 1999, parents of the ﬁrst victim,
Rachel Joy Scott, sent out a challenge to schools, families, and
communities across the country to stop the social isolation of
many youth, the widespread availability of guns, bullying,
violent video games, the excessive use of pharmaceutical anti-
depressant prescriptions for teens, and unmonitored Internet
use. The Scott family began a network to create more caring
communities in schools. From their website, they explain that
Rachel’s Challenge is designed to empower students and equip
them to combat bullying by working with adults to create
cultures of kindness and compassion.
Perspectives
189

Working for a Higher Purpose
I have supervised hundreds of interns at eight nonproﬁt organ-
izations since 1984 and taught hundreds of college students
since 2002. Too many expressed to me they felt “lost,” “adrift,”
or “morally confused.” Rarely had adults spoken to them of
ethics,
values
clariﬁcation,
and
character
development.
Finding wisdom, guidance, and meaning in peace and social
justice work led the youth I mentored to a larger ethical pur-
pose: to be part of something greater than themselves.
National statistics show increasing number of high school and
college students seeking such volunteer opportunities to serve
others and work for human rights and social justice. All adults
who know youth in their neighborhoods, area parks, schools, or
congregations thus have a role to play in showing concern for
them, getting involved in their lives, and offering them opportu-
nities to “get outside themselves,” which can to lead to a sense of
greater purpose, community, involvement, caring, trust, nurtur-
ance, and a ultimately a curb on media and school violence.
Further, research shows that visits to young people in juve-
nile correctional facilities can have a signiﬁcant positive impact
on their recidivism rates (Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2012).
Many of my Georgetown University students are now trained
in the Alternatives to Violence process and the Help Increase
the Peace curriculum. They travel to prisons to visit with
inmates. It has made them so appreciative of their lucky lives
being on the outside and has given them a whole new outlook
on working for social justice and change. Visiting and tutoring
juveniles in detention is not a pity party but rather a partner-
ship and two-way exchange of mutual respect for the condi-
tions inmates have confronted growing up and the support
my students provide.
The Circle Model
All of us have, within us, a tremendous capacity for empathy
and compassion. Early child development specialists have
190
School Violence

found these characteristics again and again in research studies.
Our earliest childhood impulses are to help others, animals,
and the disadvantaged. Tragically, the economic reward system
in our society discourages such qualities. Competition, rugged
individualism, and survival of the ﬁttest have been encouraged
much more than cooperation.
However, according to the economist, political theorist, and
social commentator Jeremy Rifkin, we are moving toward a
more global “empathetic civilization.” He predicts the new
global economy will be based upon renewable energy, such as
wind power, solar energy, and geothermal energy. New forms
of power, in turn, will create more human-scale, decentralized
communities because these energy sources are dispersed
rather than centralized. They are best controlled by smaller
communities. This will entail a very different power structure
from fossil fuels and ﬁnancial capitalism. This new structure
is networked and decentralized and an inherently much more
democratic form of globalization. There is increasing evi-
dence that a “sharing economy” is emerging in different parts
of the world as wealth becomes more and more concentrated
in the top 1 percent and the mortgage crisis, ﬁnancial melt-
down, and debt forced people to cooperate and pool resources.
We witnessed such a spirit of caring and cooperation at the
1,600 Occupy encampments. Such a sharing economy was also
on display during the Arab Spring in the number of nonviolent
struggles in city squares and roundabouts in Yemen, Egypt,
Tunisia, and Bahrain while people banded together nonvio-
lently to share medicine, food, music, and political debate.
This mass group spiritual collective uplift is known as the
effervescent affect, and it gives people great inner peace and
strength.
In my own neighborhood, we swap outgrown clothes among
the 28 children, organize block parties and yard sales, shop for
each other at area farmers markets, share veggies from our
gardens, offer our homes if someone needs extra housing, and
provide free childcare for one another during long work days,
Perspectives
191

school closings, and other events. We all help the elderly on the
block, shoveling their driveways and sidewalks. Teens rake
leaves for the seniors, mow their lawns, and help them clean
out their attics. The senior citizens support the youth in myriad
ways. The neighborhood operates almost like a commune.
Such models work in schools too. Talking circles, school
“speak outs,” and community conferences show kids respect,
hold youth accountable through formal agreements to make
amends, foster greater communication and active listening,
and keep students safer. Talking Circles demonstrate an egali-
tarian interaction that gives each person a place on a shared
footing with others in the circle.
As Native American leader Dr. Martin Brokenleg says,
“Youth of any status are not likely to be treated with respect
in North American. The legacy of youth as property and com-
modity has existed since the time of Charles Dickens. The talk-
ing Circle format advocated as peacemaking Circles provide a
new environment for youth of any ancestry to be understood
and treated with the innate dignity that is their birthright”
(Boyes-Watson, 2009). La Roca (The Rock) is a community
center that works for justice in one of the most broken and dan-
gerous neighborhoods in Boston, using the circle model as a
strategy to build positive connections among marginalized
youth and families. Using the circle model, La Roca has
decreased violence and transformed dozens of schools, neigh-
borhoods, and residential facilities, even the social service sys-
tems in the Boston area. In 2013, the Peace and Justice
Studies Association, a binational network of Canadian and
U.S. professors, gave La Roca their Outstanding Peace-
building Award.
Organizing for Peace in Your Community: Six Steps
for Success
A Curriculum Module for Parents, Community Animators,
and Educators by Barbara Wien
192
School Violence

(A) Learning objectives for this module:
1. To build trusting, respectful relationships in your
neighborhood or community
2. To explore alternatives to violence and war in an open,
friendly manner
3. To encourage positive action and move the world
toward a nonviolent future
(B) Skills you will gain in this module:
1. Active listening and appreciative inquiry
2. Grassroots
community
organizing
and
coalition-
building
3. Creative responses to de-escalating violence and
hostility
(C) Concepts and terms you will learn in this module:
1. Militarism and the war system
2. Nonviolence
3. The beloved community
(D) A few strategies and tools for building peace in your
community:
1. Living-room dialogues and study circles
2. Community peace fairs, art shows, and festivals
3. Peace toys and curricula in schools and stores
4. Candle light walks, vigils, and public “speak outs”
5. Door-to-door visits
6. Training workshops and summer peace camps for
kids
Background
My reﬂections are based on 30 years of organizing for peace in
my neighborhoods of Harlem, New York; Washington, DC;
and Arlington, Virginia, and introducing peace studies on over
Perspectives
193

200 college campuses around the world. Each community is
unique and diverse. You will ﬁnd your own style and comfort
level wherever you reach out. No one size ﬁts all situations,
and you know your own backyard best.
Things to Keep in Mind
• The ﬁrst lesson to remember is that you are a teacher of
peace. You must be patient, model respect, and not be dis-
mayed when people disagree with you. You are introducing
new ideas, and many people may be uncomfortable. Some
people are reluctant to talk about difﬁcult issues, and people
are afraid of change. They may not be accustomed to sharing
their views on topics like war and peace. That is OK. You
are simply opening up a dialogue. There is nothing to fear.
Be reassuring. If some people do not wish to share their
views, do not be pushy. Find others in your community
more open to fresh thinking and whom reluctant folks may
admire and trust. Build relationships from there. “Each
one, teach one,” as the Quakers always say.
• Second, you are a farmer planting new seeds of peace, kind-
ness, and compassion. You may never know how the seeds
you plant today will beneﬁt future generations. Most
importantly, we are trying to spread beauty in the world,
and this is much more positive and attractive than all the
destruction caused by war. Emphasize the aesthetic aspects
of peace through art, songs, imaginative activities, and
much more. Cultivate cultures of peace. Do not exhibit
anger and hostility.
• Third, most people are raised to believe that war makes us
safer, and they have not been exposed to the concept of non-
violence or how it works. They are accustomed to the idea
that we can only solve big, bad conﬂicts with force. You
are spreading new notions and strategies, so be prepared to
be labeled as a trouble-maker. Some folks may label you
are as unpatriotic, but dissent and contending points of view
194
School Violence

are valuable in a democracy. In the earliest years of the
United States, political dialogue and discourse were prac-
ticed all the time. Remember that people of good will can
disagree, and that does not make us enemies.
• Be bold. Never be apologetic or defensive about organizing
for peace. There is a great deal of evidence that people are
waking up to the fact that war does not make us safer.
More people agree with us then we realize. They see for
themselves in their villages and towns that 500,000 soldiers
have returned from Iraq and Afghanistan with severe post-
traumatic stress disorder. They know war is not working
and disadvantages the poor. We have a long and rich tradi-
tion in the United States dating back to the 1600s of non-
violent means of change. It is a proud history, too little
taught and shared. People have stood up time and time
again using peaceful means to challenge wrongdoing and
injustice. Our nation’s history is replete with such examples.
Own that history. Do not shrink from the challenge. Find
your voice.
Finally, keep in mind that you are not alone in your efforts.
There is a huge worldwide movement to end war, and it is
growing. Here is a list of fabulous websites to give you a sense
of the larger global movement to abolish war and connect you
with others:
• http://www.popularresistance.org/building-a-global-movement
-to-end-all-war/
• http://aboldpeace.com/. Spark your neighbors’ creativity
and imagination by showing people a different way to
organize society.
• https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIDe_uPe67I. Neva Shalom
—Wahat al-Salam.
• http://www.peaceoneday.org. A short video clip about a
global cease ﬁre (which the Taliban honored in 2009).
Perspectives
195

Click on the tags and be sure to review the curriculum Peace
Once Day is distributing to thousands of schools.
There are millions and millions of micro-level efforts going
on for peace every second of every day in almost every
community all around the world. It is just a matter of time
before we tip the scales and a child asks, “Mommy, what
was war?
Six Steps to Success
Step One Start small. We are not going to end war tomor-
row, but each step we take brings us closer to that goal.
Simply questioning violence and war has a cumulative
effect and impact. I once asked the manager of an amuse-
ment park to remove a mock electric chair which executed
customers with fake jolts and smoke. He laughed and told
me it was his biggest money maker. I then asked other
parents to complain and wrote a letter to the local news-
paper. The next year when I returned to the boardwalk,
the electric chair was gone. Countless kids will not be
exposed to the idea that it is funny to kill people, even if
only pretending. Ask the manager of your local toy store
to put violent toys up high on the shelves so small children
cannot see or reach them. Better yet, ask them not to sell
them at all! Open up a dialogue with others about the
issue. I have seen this work many times.
Step Two Stay local. Do not begin with distant issues of for-
eign affairs. Start with pocket-book concerns and meal-
ticket issues at the local level. Learn how much your com-
munity is being affected by excessive military spending.
Explore what arms industries may be operating in your
area and how many people they employ. Ask your neigh-
bors to identify how much they think they are contribut-
ing to the war budget. Research what they are actually
spending per capita using the website of the National
196
School Violence

Priorities
Project
in
Amherst,
Maryland:
www
.nationalpriorities.org. Work with others to calculate how
many
jobs
could
be
created
if
green,
peaceful
technologies to heal the planet were developed in your
region. Depending on the industry, 10 times more jobs
could be generated than for the same amount of money
spent on war. Spread the idea that we need a global
environmental recovery race rather than a world arms
race. Set up study circles on these issues at the local
library or in your living room.
Step Three Use the metaphor of addiction or a parasite to
explain militarism and war. War is actually a system of
interlocking institutions which reinforce and perpetuate
themselves. The war system has its own logic and takes
on a life of its own. Militarism is a disease or addiction that
saps our national strength. Somehow the logic goes that
the more weapons we build, the safer we will be. Just as
an addict needs more and more alcohol or drugs to satisfy
the craving, our country has built a vast infrastructure
for war, which requires more and more resources and
propels us to use force. War then becomes a self-fulﬁlling
prophecy.
Step Four Create lasting images of beauty and random acts
of kindness in your community. It is contagious. I prom-
ise! We cannot create a future we ﬁrst cannot conjure in
our mind. We must ﬁrst try to imagine a peaceful future
and how the world would work if we did not use violence
and weapons. How would we resolve our differences
and defend our rights? Use all kinds of tools to get people
to
think
creatively
about
this
question.
One
of
the most important visions for what our society and the
world would look like comes from Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. He called it the Beloved Community. Check
out
Martin
Luther
King’s
Vision
of
the
Beloved
Community at http://www.religion online.org/showarticle
Perspectives
197

.asp?title=1603. Organize ﬁlm festivals showing how
societies used nonviolent means to overthrow oppressive
rulers and dictators, such as A Force More Powerful.
Sponsor
festivals,
songs,
concerts,
dances,
sports,
nonviolent games, nature, playgrounds, food, displays, and
exhibits. Distribute 198 methods of nonviolent action,
which can be found at the following website: www
.aforcemorepowerful.org/resources/nonviolent/methods.php.
Step Five Study and learn about nonviolence as much as you
can. There is a rich and deep, yet hidden, history of non-
violence in the United States. Check out this very impor-
tant video online. It is free to the public and may be used
for any type of program: http://www.archive.org/details/
The American Tradition Of Nonviolence. It offers great
hope for the world. Today, more than ever before, people
are turning to methods of nonviolent action to ﬁght
for democracy and human rights. Around the world,
groups are discovering that they do not have to simply
submit to injustices and that nonviolent struggle is a more
effective
alternative
to
violence.
People
armed
with
“nonviolent weapons”—such as economic boycotts, mass
demonstrations, strikes, political noncooperation, and civil
disobedience—brought down racism and segregation in the
United States, defeated communist regimes in eastern
Europe,
undermined
the
legitimacy
of
the
Chinese
government, dismantled the system of apartheid in South
Africa, toppled Marcos in the Philippines, and much more.
“People power” is transforming the global political land-
scape in unprecedented ways. Share these inspiring trends
with your neighbors.
Step Six Find out who else in your community is working
for nonviolence. Take stock of any allies out there. Build
coalitions in your region. There may be men’s groups
against rape. There may be synagogues, churches, and
mosques working to stop torture and genocide such as in
198
School Violence

Darfur. Teachers in your schools and professors in nearby
universities may be teaching conﬂict resolution and alter-
natives to war. If they are not, ask them to start offering
classes! Do a survey of the public’s views about war and
military intervention. Ask survey research experts in the
private sector to help you design the survey pro bono or
local universities to help write the questions to ensure
objectivity and accuracy. College students under supervi-
sion from their professors often have to conduct such proj-
ects. What you learn from the survey will help frame your
organizing work and inform your messages so they reso-
nant with the public in your region. Issue a media release
and hold a press conference to publicize the results of your
survey. When people read about a poll conducted in their
own town questioning military force, maybe they will
think more deeply and get involved. You just never know
what it can lead to!
Last, have fun! Be joyful. Exude serenity and optimism. Do not
be negative. Engage others and their ideas in a thoughtful, atten-
tive manner with care and respect. Dare to dream! Encourage
children especially to dream of a world without bullying and war.
Good luck!
References
Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2012). “No Place like Home:
Reducing Juvenile Incarceration.”
Boyes-Watson, Carolyn. (2009). Peacemaking Circles and
Urban Youth: Bringing Justice Home. Minnesota: Living
Justice Press.
Harvard University Medical School. (1984). “Fear in the
Nuclear Age.”
Nagler, Michael. (2007). The Search for a Nonviolent Future.
California: Berkeley Hills Books.
Perspectives
199

United Nations Educational, Cultural, and Scientiﬁc
Organization (UNESCO). (1986). Seville Statement on
Human Violence. http://www.unesco.org/cpp/uk/declarations/
seville.pdf
Young, Kimberly. (2014). The Center for Internet Addiction.
Barbara J. Wien is a long-time peace educator. Since 1981, Wien
has worked to stop human rights abuses, violence, and war. She has
protected civilians from death squads in conﬂict zones, led eight
nonproﬁt organizations, taught alternatives to war and violence
at six universities, and delivered peace seminars in 58 countries.
She is the author of 19 articles, study guides, and books and the
winner of numerous awards for her activism.
Activism against Domestic and Dating Violence:
Stephanie Wong
Domestic violence continues to be the United States’ dirty little
secret. The media tends to deal with it as separate events rather
than as a dangerous trend. I believe that domestic violence is at
the heart of many societal ills. The emotional damage it causes
cannot be fully measured. I have volunteered at abuse shelters
and had face-to-face contact with victims. I attended a high
school that went through the traumatic experience of a school
shooting. I consider myself to be an activist. I participate in
community outreach projects such as the College Brides Walk
and Peace in Every Relationship (P.I.E.R.) mentoring. My
passion to raise awareness about dating and domestic violence
has come from different sources, and my overall perspective of
domestic violence has evolved over the years.
I was raised by a mother who has been an activist against
domestic violence. I ﬁrst became interested in activism while my
mother worked as the executive director of Safe Space
Foundation, a women’s shelter in Miami, Florida. I remember
spending Thanksgiving serving food to women and children
who were victims of violence. I also recall helping out with toy
200
School Violence

drives for kids and their mothers at Christmas, trying to support
those who were going through difﬁcult times. I learned that some-
thing as simple as a toy could brighten up their holiday season. I
must admit, at 10 or 1 years old I did not always understand
why I was a part of these charity events, nor could I clearly see
the difference between myself and the little girl to whom I was
passing a plate of food. Eventually, my work as a volunteer helped
me to understand that everyone has the right to live a life free from
physical and emotional violence. Although many abusers were
themselves abused, there is never any justiﬁcation for harming
another human being, especially those who we say we love.
During my sophomore year in high school, my friend
Amanda was killed in our school hallway by another student,
Tia. I had known both girls since the sixth grade. Although
we were never close, about a month before the incident
Amanda had asked me for dating advice, and I told her what I
could. According to reports, Tia was in love with Amanda,
but Amanda was not interested. It was reported that Tia then
stole her grandfather’s gun and shot Amanda at our school.
Just an hour before the shooting occurred I saw my friend
Nicole was sitting in our English class staring at her phone with
a dazed look on her face. I asked her if she was okay, and she
just brushed me off and said she was ﬁne. I later found out that
Tia had been texting Nicole saying that she wanted to hurt
someone and that she was very angry. Tia had a history of sex-
ual abuse, and though it may not be directly related to the inci-
dent, I believe it played a part in her unhealthy way of dealing
with rejection. Nicole never spoke up or did much to prevent
the violence from occurring. It is this type of situation that
makes raising awareness about dating violence even more
important to me. Too many people are still reluctant to take
action when they know that someone is in danger of abuse. I
have found that the lack of open discussion about abuse is what
perpetuates the silence and fear of speaking out.
Speaking out was not a problem for my mother. I was eight
years old when I was told she was donning her wedding gown
Perspectives
201

and walking along the East Coast of the United States to spread
awareness about the evils of domestic violence. My mother,
Josie Ashton, who was 28 years old, had been a victim of
domestic violence at the hands of her ﬁrst boyfriend when she
was 17. My mom committed to do the walk after learning
about the horriﬁc story of a woman named Gladys Ricart.
Like my mother, Ricart was of Dominican descent. Ricart had
been shot and killed on her wedding day by an abusive former
boyfriend named Augustin Garcia. Because of the lack of
understanding in many communities about dating and domes-
tic violence, many began to blame Ricart for her own victimiza-
tion. Outraged, my mother decided to wear her own wedding
gown while raising awareness about domestic violence. The
movement she began 12 years ago is still going strong. I have
organized events with my mother as educational tools for high
school and college students who are concerned about domestic
violence. What is known as the College Brides Walk is an
annual event held at Barry University in North Miami. Every
year I have the amazing opportunity to see how the College
Brides Walk allows the topics of dating and domestic violence
to be discussed openly with the goal of ﬁnding solutions. As
our annual event continues, more and more people I know dis-
close their experiences with dating violence and share how
happy they are that the walk takes place. To me, abuse in our
society has been the elephant in the room. It has become too
big to ignore. It is only when we ﬁnally confront this cancer
that will be able to work together to formulate practical and
effective strategies to decrease and, eventually, eliminate
domestic violence.
P.I.E.R. mentoring is a comprehensive program that has
been teaching students in North Miami how to address the
problem of domestic violence. I, along with other mentors
and students from Barry University, facilitate workshops for
students from 4th to 12th grade about dating violence. Not
only do we inform students about how to recognize signs of
abuse, we also promote and explain what healthy relationships
202
School Violence

should look like. As our ﬂyers state, “Our P.I.E.R. presenta-
tions are used to educate our youth using interactive projects
that are age appropriate such as, storytelling, video clips, and
class discussions.” In my experience teaching at various schools
in North Miami, I have seen how desperately children need to
receive the information we teach. I am often asked, “What
would be the way to solve this problem?” When hearing this
question, some children say something along the lines of, “well
I would just go take a gun and shoot them.” Many children
who hear this response laugh and agree. It is disappointing to
see how many children have become comfortable with the cul-
ture of violence. The idea that more violence is as a solution,
whether jokingly or not, is very alarming to me. If young peo-
ple are not taught that violence is never the answer the cycle of
abuse will continue. It is impossible for our P.I.E.R. mentoring
program to uncover everything that goes on in the personal
lives of each individual student, but by the way they interact
with me and other peers during the presentation, it is clear that
many are suffering in silence. I am excited to be a part of the
mentoring program, and I see the continuing need in these
schools for education regarding domestic violence. It is a satis-
fying feeling to provide assistance and see the results of hard
work. It is truly a labor of love.
The problem of dating and domestic violence must not be
ignored. In the last few years, I am proud to say that my skills
in addressing situations about abuse among friends and family
have improved. Being a budding activist has allowed me to be
more comfortable talking about domestic violence. I am happy
to be a voice that spreads positive alternatives to resolve any
issue. There will be no change if we do not teach the children
that everyone has the right to live in peace and safety.
Stephanie Wong is a junior psychology major at Florida
International University. She is also an organizer of the College
Brides Walk and a mentor for a dating violence prevention pro-
gram called P.I.E.R.
Perspectives
203

Turning the Personal into Progress: Robert Spencer
Knotts
As a child, I was bullied. As an adult, I work to stop bullying.
There is, believe me, a direct correlation between the two
experiences.
Though the 501c3 nonproﬁt organization I founded in
2005, the Humanity Project, now offers a variety of programs
with a common philosophical thread among them, our Anti-
bullying Through the Arts program was the group’s ﬁrst and
remains our signature effort. It is presented live by a two-
person team that includes myself, given to kids in grades K–5
at no cost to the schools.
So far more than 14,000 students have beneﬁted from Anti-
bullying Through the Arts. Pre/post testing conducted by the
schools suggests our program is highly effective in communicat-
ing one key idea: “Bullying hurts everyone in this school—and
it takes everyone to stop it.” We show children why bullying
affects them personally, helping to connect them with the
feelings of the bullying victims. Then we teach them how to
cooperate with the bullied kids to stop the aggression in a
constructive, nonviolent way.
I created the program in 2008 as the state of Florida struggled
to implement its new antibullying law. Anti-bullying Through
the Arts was vetted by a panel of psychologists, educators, and
social activists and has become an acclaimed program in the
nation’s sixth largest school system, a district made up of
Broward County, Florida. Program elements that can be trans-
ferred without our in-person participation have spread to school
districts from California to Vermont. These include our colorful
posters and our book, which was written by at-risk middle school
students for their younger peers. We called the book, I Was a
Bully . . . But I Stopped.
The title is not taken from my own experience. I was never a
very good bully. I tried it out a few times as a kid but always
ended up feeling bad. I can recall going home to cry hard after
204
School Violence

pushing one boy down for no reason during a baseball game,
for instance. It just was not me. And I think that’s part of the
reason I was such a good bullying victim. Kids knew I was not
aggressive by nature and possessed a distinctly sensitive side—
all the makings of a good target for other children.
I also was different from most of the others. I was smart, got
good grades, and had an active imagination—overactive, per-
haps. I did not just go outside to kick a football around. No, I
put on my football uniform to go outside and kick a football
around. I wanted to feel the part, imagine myself pounding
the winning ﬁeld goal through the uprights. One day as I was
doing this by myself, the usual neighborhood bullies could
not resist stopping by to harass me.
I will never forget one boy picking up a clump of clay as he
said, “Hey, Knotts! This is your head!” Then he threw it on
the pavement as hard as he could, splattering the clump into
small pieces of dirt. To me, this was like watching him smash
my head into the ground. It wounded because I felt that some-
one hated me so intensely. And I wondered, “What have I done
to cause this? What is wrong with me?”
My mother actually saw that incident and, for once, voiced
unqualiﬁed support for me. Usually when I complained about
being bullied by these same kids she offered her versions of
the questions I kept asking myself: “What have you done to
cause this? What is wrong with you?” I know now that she
meant well. And my father always provided unconditional love
and guidance for me—about bullying or anything else. That
was a huge help.
But being the sensitive and reﬂective sort I am, of course, I
have never forgotten how I felt as a bullied child. For many
years, long before bullying became a front-page topic, I made
the case to friends that bullying had to be viewed differently
so that it would seem uncool. Like cigarette smoking, bullying
had to become socially unacceptable.
I founded the Humanity Project with the goal this organiza-
tion still has at its core: To help society by improving the way
Perspectives
205

that individuals see themselves. I have believed for decades that
many of the planet’s worst problems are caused, at bottom, by a
struggle for individual value. As William James wrote long ago,
“The deepest principle in human nature is the craving to be
appreciated.” To me, this craving fuels personal, interpersonal,
and intergroup problems and even international conﬂicts.
As I wrote in a Humanity Project booklet for our members:
Society really is just a collection of individuals. You are
humanity. So am I. The conﬂicts and troubles in society
at large reﬂect the conﬂicts and troubles within our hearts
as individuals. . . . The only genuine solution is to change
the world by changing ourselves. That means we must
each help improve the world from the inside out by alter-
ing the way we view ourselves and other individuals. Then
we must learn to act according to this more realistic view.
Our programs include direct efforts to help accomplish that
goal, especially our website for socially isolated teens and
tweens. Our new website’s intended audience includes many
LGBT students. That site, www.thp4kids.com, is unique on
the Internet to our knowledge, developed by magnet school
teens from the Gay–Straight Alliance with a sophistication
that appeals to smart, lonely kids of about 12 to 17 years old.
Its three main sections are titled, “Bullying is SO not cool,”
“You’re NOT alone,” and “Being . . . YOU!”
But other programs, including Anti-bullying Through the
Arts, use positive peer pressure to stop a problem that poses
an immediate threat to emotional or physical well-being.
Realizing that all kids crave the appreciation cited by William
James, we designed Anti-bullying Through the Arts in a way
that encourages bystanders to deny social approval to bullies.
Our reasoning is that, just as with smoking, behavior can be
changed fairly quickly on a broad scale by making people feel
self-conscious about doing it.
206
School Violence

Even bullies are looking for appreciation. They may want the
other kids to laugh with them as they embarrass another stu-
dent. Or they may seek respect as the tough girl or tough guy
on campus. They may be looking for pats on the back from
parents who are bullies themselves.
That’s why Anti-bullying Through the Arts repeats its man-
tra to elementary school kids many times and in many forms:
“Bullying hurts everyone in this school—and it takes everyone
to stop it.” Once we get bystander students as well as their
teachers and administrators to show the aggressive few kids that
bullying is no longer cool, most bullying will stop. Everybody
wants to be seen as cool, after all, bullies included. Those bul-
lies will ﬁnd more socially acceptable outlets for their anger
when bullying is denied to them as a path to appreciation—
not the ultimate solution for the bullies, surely, but an immedi-
ate improvement for bullying victims, and for bystanders who
must endure schools troubled by bullying.
I have wished many times during idle moments that the anti-
bullying movement had been born before the middle school
years when I was tormented. I know that I would felt much
more supported and less isolated, even if I still had been bullied.
With society in general agreement that bullying is bad, I would
not have doubted myself in the same way. And I would not
have asked myself those two questions so often: “What have I
done to cause this? What is wrong with me?”
The scar tissue from those years still is with me, though I
continue to work on letting it all go at long last. I believe that
years of bullying by my schoolyard peers eventually combined
with other elements of my childhood to contribute to a sense
of insecurity around other people, especially those I see as peers.
I can have trouble trusting them and, worse, trusting myself
around them. It is a problem I work to overcome to this day.
I think that the Humanity Project’s antibullying program
has been helpful in this regard. Many times, the best commu-
nity reforms are driven by a combination of needs that are at
Perspectives
207

once very personal and very social. That is what attracted me to
bullying as one of the issues on which to focus the work of the
Humanity Project. I cared about it, I understood it at an inti-
mate level—and I knew that I could ﬁnd a way for this organi-
zation to help end it as a common form of violence against
children.
In the future, we hope to obtain the funding that would
allow us to take Anti-bullying Through the Arts to another
level, creating an interactive DVD with the full program that
could be used by any school anywhere. We already know how
to accomplish this goal and lack only the money to carry it
out just now.
But we are optimistic about our chances of making this hap-
pen in the coming years. Just as we are hopeful about the like-
lihood that school bullying soon will be viewed almost
universally in our culture as socially unacceptable.
There’s no reason any boy or girl of the future should ask
themselves those terrible questions as a consequence of bully-
ing: “What have I done to cause this? What is wrong with
me?” because the answer is obvious to us now: Nothing at
all is wrong with them. Once our society can convince most
people to agree with this idea, placing responsibility squarely
on the bullies, the era of widespread student bullying will be
over.
Robert Spencer Knotts is founder and president of the Humanity
Project, a South Florida nonproﬁt organization that seeks to build
a better humanity through innovative, arts-based, and youth-led
initiatives. Key programs include school-based antibullying efforts
and a teen-focused safe driving effort called iCare.
208
School Violence



4
Profiles
This chapter provides overviews of persons who have ﬁgured
prominently in the history of U.S. school violence. The ﬁrst half
of the chapter features proﬁles of some of the most notorious
offenders, including the Bath, Michigan, school bombing perpe-
trated by Andrew Kehoe in 1927; the 1999 Columbine massacre
in which Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold killed 12 people and
themselves; the school murders committed by Laurie Dann in
1988; Adam Lanza’s December 2012 deadly rampage at Sandy
Hook Elementary in Newtown, Connecticut; Kip Kinkel’s family
and school murders in May 1998; Barry Loukaitis’s murder of
two students and a teacher in 1996; Patrick Purdy’s rampage at
Cleveland Elementary School in 1989; Evan Ramsey’s massacre
of February 19, 1997; the hostage-taking and executions
perpetrated by Charles Carl Roberts at an Amish school in
October 2006; the Steubenville High School rape scandal of
August 2012; and Jeff Weise’s shootings in Red Lake,
Minnesota. Additionally, the ﬁrst half of the chapter includes pro-
ﬁles of two bullying victims who committed suicide (Phoebe
Prince and Amanda Todd) and whose cases generated national
and international attention.
211
Columbine High School conveys a message of hope after the deadly shootings
that occured on April 20, 1999. (Bambi L. Dingman/Dreamstime.com)

The second half of the chapter includes proﬁles of individ-
uals or organizations that have played important roles in help-
ing the nation understand, respond to, and prevent school
violence. Proﬁles include Harlem Children’s Zone innovator
Geoffrey Canada; historian, author, and peace activist Riane
Eisler; ﬁlmmaker and author Jackson Katz; scholar and social
justice educator Paul Kivel; and antihazing activist Hank
Nuwer. Organizations proﬁled include Break the Cycle, a
dating violence educational resource; the Gay, Lesbian &
Straight Education Network (GLSEN), which provides infor-
mation about and support for the rights of all people regardless
of
their
sexual
orientation;
Students
Against
Violence
Everywhere (SAVE), a student-driven initiative to end all forms
of violence; and StopBullying.gov, a program of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Part I
Bath, Michigan, School Bombing
Unknown to many, the deadliest incidence of school violence
in U.S. history did not occur at Columbine High School or at
Sandy Hook Elementary. Instead, it was the small community
of Bath, Michigan, that was the scene of the largest school
bombing in terms of loss of life. On May 18, 1927, school
board member Andrew Kehoe, 55, a resident of Bath, set
bombs that blew up the north wing of Bath Consolidated
School, leading to the deaths of 38 students plus ﬁve adults.
Kehoe also killed his wife before the bombing and then himself
afterwards, bringing the death toll to 45.
Bath Township was and is a small, largely agricultural town
located 10 miles northeast of Lansing. At the time, there were
no street lights in Bath and only one road, which ran through
the middle of town. The town consisted of a drug store, a gas
station, a small grocery store, and an auto repair and blacksmith
shop. The Bath Consolidated School, located in the town’s
212
School Violence

center, had recently been built, with an opening enrollment of
236 students in the ﬁrst through 12th grades.
Andrew Kehoe was born in Tecumseh, Michigan, on
February 1, 1872, not too far from Bath. His mother died
when Kehoe was very young, and his father soon remarried. It
appears that the relationship between Kehoe and his step-
mother was not good, and when Kehoe was 14 years of age,
his stepmother died in an accident. She was attempting to light
the family’s oil stove when it exploded. Kehoe was home at the
time of the explosion but reportedly did little to help his step-
mother, and some even believed that he was involved in the
accident, although this was never substantiated.
Kehoe was known in Bath to be intelligent, meticulous, and
good with machinery and electronics. He was also considered
an expert in the use of dynamite and explosives, as these were
common tools among local farmers, who used them for clearing
land and stump removal. Kehoe was also known for having a
short temper and for the cruel way he treated his farm animals.
When his wife, Nellie Kehoe, contracted tuberculosis and
required numerous hospitalizations, it placed a severe drain on
the family ﬁnances. Additionally, Kehoe had been vocally criti-
cal of the property tax rates assessed by the Bath Consolidated
School District, and he eventually stopped making his mort-
gage payments. Despite these criticisms, he was elected to the
school board in 1924, where he served as treasurer. His rela-
tionship with School Superintendent Emory Huyck was
antagonistic, and Kehoe consistently accused Huyck of ﬁnan-
cial mismanagement. While on the school board, Kehoe
blamed the school district for his personal ﬁnancial trouble
and lobbied for lower taxes.
The scene of the bombing was chaotic and horriﬁc. The
school building’s walls were blown outward, which caused the
roof to collapse, trapping children inside of classrooms.
According to witnesses, both living and dead children were vis-
ible in the rubble. Monty Ellsworth, Kehoe’s neighbor, and
Profiles
213

his wife had heard and even felt the explosion and raced to the
school to see what had happened. Concerned about their son,
who was in second grade (and was OK), the Ellsworths began
pulling people from the rubble. Realizing that their rescue
would require additional tools, Ellsworth and others went to
their homes to retrieve the necessary items, and in the process,
Ellsworth passed his neighbor Kehoe driving in the opposite
direction. Kehoe smiled and waved. No one realized at that
time that there had been an earlier explosion at the Kehoe farm
and that a third was yet to come.
While the community pulled children from the debris,
Kehoe collected any metal bits he could ﬁnd, including nails,
broken tools, and old farm machinery. He loaded a large
quantity of dynamite behind the front seat of his car and
put his loaded riﬂe in the passenger’s seat. He drove to
Bath Consolidated School, and, upon seeing Superintendent
Huyck, called him over to his car. Kehoe ﬁred the riﬂe into
the back seat, detonating the dynamite and sending the metal
bits of shrapnel everywhere. This explosion killed Huyck,
Postmaster Glenn O. Smith, Smith’s father-in-law, and Cleo
Clayton, a second-grade student. It also killed Kehoe. Many
others were injured.
Hundreds of volunteers, including Michigan governor Fred
Green, came to help. They found another 500 pounds of unex-
ploded dynamite in the school’s south wing. The Michigan
State Police disarmed the explosives.
Based on reports from Ellsworth, investigators went to the
Kehoe farm. They found Nelly Kehoe’s body, and the coroner
speculated that it was not ﬁre or explosions that killed her but
instead blunt force trauma to the head. They also found all of
Kehoe’s animals dead in their pens and stalls. Further, investi-
gators found a wooden sign on a fence which carried a message
from Kehoe: “Criminals are made, not born.” Interestingly,
investigators determined that the money Kehoe had spent on
explosives would have easily paid off his bills.
214
School Violence

Columbine Massacre
The date April 20, 1999, will forever go down in history as one
of the worst school shootings in history and as the ﬁrst to
receive extensive national and international media coverage.
That morning, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold entered
Columbine High School in Jefferson County, Colorado, dressed
in trench coats and armed with multiple weapons and ammuni-
tion. Klebold and Harris had bought a riﬂe and two shotguns
from a friend, who had bought them at a gun show. They also
collected two 12-gauge shotguns and two 9 mm ﬁrearms. After
researching on the Internet how to build bombs, they made
99 of them.
In a chilling rampage in which the two boys’ actions were
caught on video, they laughed and joked as they shot and
wounded 23 of their peers and killed 12 students and a teacher.
Before they could be apprehended, the boys shot themselves,
counting down to ensure they would do it together. It is the
most deadly shooting at a U.S. high school.
Before they entered the school, Klebold and Harris placed a
ﬁre bomb in a ﬁeld near the school, set to go off at 11:14 a.m.
(Mountain Daylight Time). Klebold and Harris then arrived at
the school at 11:10 a.m. and parked outside the cafeteria. They
had two propane bombs hidden in dufﬂe bags that they brought
into the cafeteria during the ﬁrst lunch shift, which were sup-
posed to detonate at 11:17 a.m. Klebold and Harris went to their
cars to wait for the bombs to explode, but the bombs did not det-
onate as planned, so they took their guns and started shooting
students who were outside the school eating lunch and on the
staircase outside. They then shot at students in the soccer ﬁelds
and threw pipe bombs, although none of the shots made their
mark and the bombs did not go off. A teacher, Patti Nielson,
went to see what was going on and was hit in the shoulder by
shrapnel from the boys’ gun shots. She ran to the library to warn
students to be careful and frantically called the police from that
location. At approximately 11:24 a.m. the sheriff arrived. He shot
Profiles
215

at the two school shooters. Harris shot back, and the sheriff called
for backup. At that point, Harris and Klebold began running
through the school, shooting at anyone who was there and throw-
ing more pipe bombs. The two shooters then made their way to
the library, which they entered at 11:29 a.m. They ﬁrst threw
two bombs into the cafeteria and one in the library hallway,
which this time all did explode. Two teachers, two librarians,
and 52 students were in the library. Harris and Klebold started
yelling at everyone to quit hiding, but no one obeyed the com-
mand. They killed one student, then saw police evacuating stu-
dents outside, so they shot at the police through the windows.
Again, the police shot back. However, their attention quickly
went back to the students inside the library, and Harris and
Klebold started shooting under computer desks, where students
were hiding, injuring and killing more students. They walked
around, knocking down shelves and shooting more students, as
well as throwing more bombs.
Witnesses have reported that Klebold and Harris starting
talking to each other about how the shooting was no longer
exciting to them. They thought of possibly attacking people
with knives, which they thought might be more fun. Instead,
they left the library at 11:42 a.m. As soon as they left, the stu-
dents ﬂed the library to get outside of the building, while others
hid in the staff break room until about 3:30 p.m., when police
ﬁnally found them.
Meanwhile, Klebold and Harris wandered through the school,
continuing to shoot and throw bombs as they went. At 12:02
p.m., they went back into the library, which was now empty
except for unconscious students on the ﬂoor. This is where, at
the end of it all, Harris and Klebold killed themselves. Eric
Harris, 18, shot himself in the mouth one time, and Dylan
Klebold, 17, died by a single shot to his head.
At 1:09 p.m., the SWAT team entered the school. They
were criticized for responding too slowly but, given that this
was the ﬁrst incidence of this scope, were likely not fully pre-
pared. Further, no one knew exactly what was happening and
216
School Violence

whether there might be additional shooters in the school.
At 4:30 p.m. the SWAT team declared the school to be safe,
although later they found more explosives, including in
Klebold’s car, and it was not ofﬁcially declared safe to enter
again until 10:00 a.m. the next day. Ofﬁcials believe the shoot-
ings lasted for 45 minutes before Klebold and Harris shot
themselves, and all together, they killed 12 students and one
teacher, injured 23 others, and another three were injured try-
ing to get out of the school. The casualties of the shooting that
day were Cassie Bernall, Matt Kechter, Corey DePooter, Isaiah
Schoels, Daniel Rohrbough, Steve Curnow, Lauren Townsend,
Kelly Fleming, Kyle Velasquez, Daniel Mauser, John Tomlin,
Rachel Scott, and Coach Dave Sanders.
On April 21 police began investigating the site. Thirteen
bodies remained at the school, and they were not removed to
be identiﬁed until late afternoon or early evening that day.
Throughout the investigation, ofﬁcials held a press conference
to say they believed other people had helped plan the shooting.
Many have questioned why two boys from seemingly stable
families would do such an awful thing. Initial reports stated
that the boys had been bullied and that they had targeted the
jocks who harassed them. There is evidence that neither
Klebold nor Harris ﬁt in well and that they had endured some
bullying. They were teased for being weird and accused of
being gay. Before the attack, the boys made a video in which
they claimed they were going to get back at all who had
mistreated them. But it also is clear that they were bullies
themselves. Further, they seem to have made no effort to spe-
ciﬁcally target jocks in their rampage. Other reports called
attention to their apparel and connected them with a group
called the Trenchcoat Maﬁa, a subculture of students who
dressed similarly and were marginalized from the mainstream
at the school. Later reports, however, showed that Harris and
Klebold were not really a part of that group and that it was
far from a “gang” but instead more of a loose connection of
friends.
Profiles
217

Another part of the explanation has centered on Klebold and
Harris’s use of violent video games. Both were avid players and
had even done some programming for the ultraviolent game
Doom. They were also fans of violent music and movies, and
thus the argument is that the two had become desensitized.
Yet, as many commentators have pointed out, violent music,
movies, and video games are and have been popular with youth
for decades, and very few who consume them act out violently.
The FBI’s main investigator into the Columbine massacre as
well as many psychiatrists have noted issues of mental illness.
Klebold was allegedly suffering from depression, and some have
speculated that Harris was a clinical psychopath and that he was
essentially the leader with Klebold his follower. Both boys had
previously been in trouble. On January 30, 1988, they were
arrested for stealing tools from a van. They entered into a diver-
sion program in which they had to take classes and meet with
parole ofﬁcers, and Harris was required to attend therapy for a
year. Harris had been prescribed Zoloft because he claimed to
have suicidal thoughts. Later, he switched to Luvox, which was
discovered in his system when he died. These drugs have been
found to increase aggression. Both were released from the pro-
gram early for good behavior and then later bragged about how
they had faked compliance with the program requirements.
After the attack, ofﬁcials found journals and videos of the
plans of Klebold and Harris. These records showed that
Klebold and Harris had originally planned to bomb the school.
They would then shoot any survivors and then start shooting
the people who came to investigate what was happening. An
investigator with the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Ofﬁce knew
about Harris’s website in which he discussed bomb-making
some two years before the attack. The investigator, Michael
Guerra, started looking into the website after he was informed
there were threats on it against another student, Brooks
Brown. Brown’s parents had complained about Harris and
Klebold’s threats. Guerra also found blogs, written by Harris,
218
School Violence

about his hatred of society in general as well as threats against
speciﬁc students at Columbine High School on the site.
Harris even had a hit list on the site and a detailed description
of the weapons he had. Despite these records, ofﬁcials deter-
mined there was no probable cause for Guerra to obtain a
search warrant to search Harris’s home.
Columbine was different than some school shootings in that
afterward there was no one to take to trial, since Harris and
Klebold both killed themselves.
The shooting at Columbine High School opened American
society’s eyes to many issues with youth and safety. People were
more closely scrutinizing youth violence, gun control laws, high
school subcultures, bullying, and the effect of media such as
video games after this shooting occurred.
Harris and Klebold also inﬂuenced many other school shoot-
ings or attempted school shootings, as other students wanted to
be like them or wanted to outdo them.
Laurie Dann
On May 20, 1988, Laurie Dann attempted to poison family,
friends, and acquaintances with arsenic before she entered
Ravinia Elementary School in Highland Park, Illinois, where
she shot and killed a boy and wounded ﬁve other children.
After ﬂeeing the scene, Dann took a family hostage, shooting
one man and then killing herself.
Laurie Wasserman appeared to have a normal childhood.
The daughter of an accountant and a home-maker, she grew
up in Glencoe, a middle-to-upper-class suburb of Chicago.
She was described as somewhat shy and withdrawn, with poor
school performance. Despite her grades, Wasserman was
accepted into Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, after her
high school graduation. After improving her grades, she trans-
ferred to the University of Arizona, began studying education,
and started to date a premed student. Growing tired of the
Profiles
219

controlling relationship, Laurie moved back to the Chicago area
and lived with her parents while she attended Northwestern
University. She never completed a degree, however.
Laurie met Russell Dann, an executive with an insurance
brokering ﬁrm, in the spring of 1982. They married that
September. Laurie seemed troubled from the start, however.
Her husband suspected she suffered from obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD), and for a short time she saw a psychiatrist.
After three years, Laurie and Russell separated. She claimed he
had been violent and abusive, and indeed, the police were called
to investigate ﬁghts between the two in the years after they
separated. Laurie accused Russell in April 1986 of breaking into
and vandalizing her parents’ home, where she had been living.
Shortly thereafter, Laurie purchased a gun. She continued to
behave oddly and make wild accusations against Russell and other
former boyfriends. In September 1986, Russell Dann accused
Laurie of breaking into his home and stabbing him with an ice
pick while he slept. She was not charged, as police believed
Russell inﬂicted the wounds himself. She then accused him of
raping her and of planting bombs at her home, but again no
charges were ever ﬁled.
Struggling from as yet undiagnosed mental problems, Laurie
again saw a psychiatrist for her obsessive-compulsive behavior.
He deemed her neither suicidal nor homicidal. She was pre-
scribed clomipramine, a new OCD drug. When she moved to
Madison, Wisconsin, in November 1987, her new psychiatrist
increased the dosage and also prescribed lithium to address
Laurie’s many phobias.
Just one month later, Laurie purchased another gun. In
March 1988, she stopped seeing her psychiatrist. She also
began to plan her attacks. Laurie went to the library and stole
books about poison, then stole arsenic from a lab. She was
arrested for theft after she shoplifted some clothes and wigs.
Concerned, her family and her former psychiatrist tried to con-
vince her to enter a mental health facility, but she would not.
220
School Violence

Because she made threatening phone calls that crossed state
lines, Laurie became known to the FBI.
In early May 1988, Laurie mixed the arsenic she had stolen
into prepared rice cereal snacks and juice boxes. She mailed
some of the poisons to Russell Dann and her psychiatrist and
then delivered her packages to other friends at Northwestern
University. Because she had diluted the arsenic and because
the smell had tipped off the recipients, no one became seriously
ill. Laurie then drove to the home of a family for whom she had
previously babysat, the Rushes. The kids thought she was tak-
ing them on an outing that she had promised, but instead she
drove them to Ravinia Elementary School, which her former
sister-in-law’s children attended. Leaving the two Rush chil-
dren in the car, Laurie entered the school and tried to detonate
a ﬁre bomb. No major damage was done. Laurie then drove to
a local daycare facility and was prohibited from entering
because she had a can of gasoline with her. Laurie then drove
the Rush children to their home and gave them some poisoned
milk, which they spat out. She coerced the children into the
basement, then set ﬁre to the house, trapping the two boys
and their mother. Laurie then left the home and drove to
Hubbard Woods Elementary. She took a boy hostage, pushing
him into a restroom, and shot him with one of her three guns.
She entered a classroom and demanded that all the children go
to a corner. The teacher managed to get Laurie’s Beretta, but
she pulled a .32 from her waistband and ﬁred several shots,
wounding four and killing eight-year-old Nicholas Corwin
before she ﬂed the school.
Laurie could not escape by car due to a funeral procession, so
she began running through the woods. She ran to the Andrews
home and lied to Mrs. Andrews and her 20-year-old son Phillip,
telling them she had been raped and was ﬂeeing her assailant,
who she had shot. Believing her, the Andrews contacted Laurie’s
mother. Mr. Andrews arrived home and convinced Laurie to give
up her weapons. Again, they called Mrs. Wasserman, and while
Profiles
221

Laurie spoke to her mother, Mrs. Andrews ﬂed the house and
called the police. When she saw the ofﬁcers pull up, Laurie shot
Phillip in the chest. He escaped and was rescued by the police
and EMTs. Knowing the house was surrounded, Laurie went
upstairs and shot herself.
After these tragic events, Phillip Andrew went on to become
executive director of the Illinois Council Against Handgun
Violence. Laurie’s family was criticized for not doing more to
help her and for initially refusing to allow investigators to see
her medical records. Although some of Laurie Dann’s victims
sustained serious injuries, all recovered.
Kip Kinkel
On May 21, 1998, Kip Kinkel, a 15-year-old high school stu-
dent, killed two students and wounded 25 others at Thurston
High School in Springﬁeld, Oregon. The murdered students
were Ben Walker, 16, and Mikael Nickolauson, 17. The day
prior, Kinkel had murdered his parents, Bill and Faith Kinkel,
in their home. Their bodies were found the day after the school
shooting, with a note that Kip wrote explaining that he heard
voices in his head telling him to kill. The note also said that
he regretted having to kill others.
On May 20, 1998, Kip bought a semi-automatic pistol from
a friend. The friend had stolen it from another friend’s father,
although it is not clear whether Kip knew the gun had been
stolen. The same day, the owner of the gun, Scott Keeney,
called the school to tell them it had been taken and that he
thought a student might have it. It happened that a detective
was at the school for an unrelated issue, and he talked to Kip
about the gun. Kip confessed that he had it. Kip Kinkel and
Korey Ewert, who had stolen the gun, were both arrested and
suspended from school.
Bill Kinkel was very upset and unsure of how to handle his
son. He had little time to ponder it, however, as Kip shot his
father in the back of the head with his riﬂe at about 3:00 p.m.
222
School Violence

He put his father’s body in the bathroom and put a sheet over
it. At about 3:30 p.m., Kip’s English teacher, Mr. Rowan,
called the house. Kip spoke to him, saying he had made a mis-
take but not disclosing what it was. Kip also told Mr. Rowan
that his father was not home. A half hour later, a friend called
asking for Bill, and Kip said he was at the store. At about 4:30
p.m., students from Bill’s community college class called, as Bill
was late for the class he was to teach. Kip told them he was not
going to make it because of family issues.
Kip then talked to his friends Tony McCown and Nick
Hiaason in a conference call and said that he had not known
the gun was Mr. Keeney’s, that his dad was at a bar, and that
he was worried what others would think about what had hap-
pened at school that day. Kip told Tony and Nick that he felt
sick, that he was upset and angry, and he kept wondering when
his mother would be home.
Faith Kinkel arrived home at about 6:30 p.m., and Kip
joined her in the garage. After telling her he loved her, he shot
her six times in the head, face, and chest. Then he covered her
with a sheet, as he had his father.
Even though he was suspended, Kip went to school the fol-
lowing day, bringing with him three guns and a knife. He shot
Ben Walker and Ryan Atteberry and then randomly shot at
people in the cafeteria. After he had killed the two and injured
25, ﬁve students forced him to the ground. When police
arrived, Kip told them he wanted to die. He then attacked
Detective Al Warthen (the same detective who had arrested
him the previous day) with a hunting knife he had strapped to
his leg, shouting that he wanted them to kill him. When he
calmed down, Kip confessed that he had killed his parents.
Police also discovered Kip had two bullets taped to his chest.
He said he intended to use those to kill himself.
These murders were not the ﬁrst time Kip Kinkel had been
in trouble. Even at an early age, he seemed to have difﬁculties
controlling his anger and acted out at school. His ﬁrst year in
school was in Spain, and the teacher only taught in Spanish.
Profiles
223

Kip’s sister, Kristin, said this was difﬁcult for him, and he got in
trouble frequently.
In second grade Kip was tested for a learning disability, but it
was not until he was retested the following year that he was
diagnosed with one. In middle school, Kip and his friends
started looking up how to make bombs on the Internet. His
mother found out and was worried about the kind of friends
he had. Kip had also started shoplifting. In eighth grade he
bought a sawed-off shotgun from one of his friends. That same
year he and a friend were arrested for throwing rocks of an
overpass and hitting a car below. Kip was sent to Skipworth
Juvenile Facility. There he saw a psychologist who felt that
Kip was genuinely remorseful for these incidents and thought
that Kip was improving. Kip also began seeing a therapist,
Dr. Hicks, who later testiﬁed at his trial. His mother was still
worried about his behavior, his depression, and his poor
relationship with his father, though.
Around the same time, however, Kip was suspended for two
days after he kicked another boy in the head. He said the boy
pushed him. Then he was suspended again for three days after
he threw a pencil at a student. Faith and Dr. Hicks felt the
school had overreacted with their punishments. Dr. Hicks pre-
scribed Prozac, an antidepressant, which seemed to help. That
same month, Kip’s father bought a 9 mm gun for Kip, with
an agreement that he would not use it without his father being
there and that Kip could not have full possession of it until he
turned 21 years old. Kip and his parents seemed to be getting
along better at this time, and his father was making more of
an effort to be with him. His ninth counseling session was his
last because both Dr. Hicks and his mother thought he was
doing well enough to stop going.
Soon after that, Kip bought a .22 pistol from a friend with-
out his parents’ knowledge. The same year, he started high
school at Thurston High. Because he seemed to be doing bet-
ter, after just three months Kip went off the Prozac. His father
224
School Violence

bought him another gun, a semi-automatic riﬂe, with the same
conditions as before.
Yet there were still signs of trouble. Kip gave a speech in class
about making a bomb, including detailed pictures. Students
reported that this did not seem strange, however, as other stu-
dents had out-of-the-ordinary topics as well, including one on
joining the Church of Satan. After this, the Pearl, Mississippi;
West Paducah, Kentucky; and Jonesboro school shootings all
occurred. Kip’s friend commented that Kip had said the
Jonesboro shooting was cool.
Kip was charged with four murders and 26 counts of
attempted aggravated murder. At his trial, prosecutors argued
that Kip was rational after killing his parents, pointing to the
next day’s newspaper read on the table, a freshly used bowl,
and evidence that Kip had cleaned blood from the house and
had calmly talked to his friends on the phone. They also intro-
duced Kip’s journal, in which he confessed to having thoughts
of killing others and of uncontrollable rage, as well as to owning
weapons including knives, chemicals, books on explosives, and
“a sawed off shotgun and a handgun.” Police also found a pic-
ture of the football team with one player’s head circled and
the word “kill” next to it. Some 50 witnesses to the shootings
and their relatives gave statements, and all asked for Kip to
receive the maximum sentence.
The defense tried to show that Kip was mentally ill, although
they did not use an insanity defense, instead trying to obtain a
plea bargain. More than one expert said Kip was mentally ill
after he was in custody, diagnosing him with a learning disabil-
ity, depression, low self-esteem, and early forms of schizophre-
nia. There was also a history of schizophrenia in Kip’s family.
Dr. Hicks, the only one who had helped Kip before the mur-
ders, said Kinkel was not psychotic but was deﬁnitely angry
and depressed.
The trial lasted six days, and on November 9, 1999, Kip
Kinkel was sentenced to 111 years in prison without parole.
Profiles
225

He was the ﬁrst juvenile in the state of Oregon to serve a life
sentence.
Adam Lanza
On December 14, 2012, 20-year-old Adam Lanza shot his
mother in the face, then drove to Sandy Hook Elementary in
Newtown, Connecticut, and killed 26 people, including 20
elementary school students. Four teachers, the school’s princi-
pal, and a school psychologist were among the victims. The vic-
tims were all hit multiple times, some as many as 11, with the
semi-automatic riﬂe Lanza used. Lanza committed suicide after
his rampage. Lanza used weapons he took from his mother,
Nancy Lanza, who legally owned them. The shooting was the
most deadly involving elementary school students in U.S. his-
tory and might have been worse if some of the Sandy Hook
teachers had not acted quickly to usher their students to safety.
Although Lanza’s precise motives cannot be discerned, many
theories have been circulated. Reports months later showed
that Lanza had been researching mass murders for several
months before the rampage. Newspaper articles and other
documents were found in Lanza’s bedroom, including material
about Anders Behring Breivik, the Norwegian who was con-
victed of killing 77 people with guns and bombs in July 2011.
Connecticut state police also found evidence that Lanza was
very interested in the 2006 shooting at an Amish schoolhouse
in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Based on these ﬁndings, some
believe Lanza was trying to outdo other school shooters.
Indeed, Lanza shot a bullet every two seconds, and the entire
incident lasted less than ﬁve minutes.
Lanza was a gun enthusiast, a hobby he shared with his
mother. Additionally, people close to the family say he played a
lot of violent video games like Call of Duty, and that he was very
introverted. Some have criticized Nancy Lanza for encouraging
her troubled son’s interest in guns. When police searched the
Lanza home, they found 1,600 rounds of unspent ammunition.
226
School Violence

They also found samurai swords and a book, published by the
National Riﬂe Association, titled Guide to the Basics of Pistol
Shooting. Additionally, police found a spreadsheet of mass
killings.
At ﬁrst, the police identiﬁed Lanza’s older brother Ryan as the
shooter because Lanza had some of his brother’s belongings at
the scene. Ryan Lanza had a solid work-related alibi, however.
Immediately after the shootings, it was revealed that Lanza
had been diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, a milder form
of autism. Experts caution not to read too much into the diag-
nosis, as persons with Asperger’s syndrome are rarely violent.
Perhaps more important is the fact that Lanza suffered from tre-
mendous anxiety, so bad that his mother had to rush him to the
emergency room when he was 13. Lanza is also said to have suf-
fered from a sensory disorder. He is also described as painfully
shy, with few friends. Yet experts are quick to point out that
these disorders are typically not associated with violent behav-
ior. It is reported that his parent’s divorce greatly affected
Adam, as did the separation from his older brother, who moved
from the home to attend college in 2006.
The tragedy prompted renewed debate about gun control in
the United States. Connecticut passed one of the country’s
most restrictive laws as a result of the shooting. President
Barack Obama stressed the need for legislation that would close
the loopholes regarding who has to undergo a background
check before they may purchase a ﬁrearm (current legislation
only requires background checks for sales at retail establish-
ments, so purchases made online, at gun shows, and from pri-
vate sellers are exempt from this requirement). Some groups,
including the NRA, suggested arming teachers and school ofﬁ-
cials, and bills to this effect were introduced into several state
legislatures.
Almost a year later, the demolition of 56-year-old Sandy
Hook Elementary School began. Everything was completely
destroyed so that no one was able to keep any souvenirs from
the infamous site.
Profiles
227

Barry Loukaitis
Armed with a high-powered hunting riﬂe and two pistols,
14-year-old honor student Barry Loukaitis entered Frontier
High School in Moses Lake, Washington, the school he attended,
on February 2, 1996. Loukaitis immediately went to his algebra
class, took the class hostage, and killed two students, Manual
Vela Jr. and Arnie Fritz, as well as his algebra teacher, Leona
Caires. Several others were seriously wounded before Loukaitis
was overpowered by physical education teacher Jon Lane.
Barry Loukaitis had been raised in a broken and abusive home
life. Before divorcing, his parents fought frequently. Reports sug-
gest his father was an alcoholic and a womanizer, and his mother,
bitter from the divorce, repeatedly conﬁded in her son that she
wished to kill his father, his father’s girlfriend, and then herself.
Both parents had a history of depression, and his grandmother
on his mother’s side seems to have suffered from depression as
well, as she had attempted suicide at least once.
Although Loukaitis seemed to enjoy elementary school and
had performed well academically, middle school was a different
experience. Loukaitis was bullied by other students. One of his
later victims, Manuel Vela Jr., was among the worst. He report-
edly called Loukaitis a “faggot,” spit at him, shoved him, and
kicked him so many times he had bruises all over his legs. Other
classmates also tormented Loukaitis, making fun of his gangly
stature and the clothes he wore. Before the shooting Loukaitis
had told several students that he hated everyone at the school
and that he intended to go on a shooting spree.
Loukaitis was reportedly obsessed with the ﬁlm Natural Born
Killers, and the shooting prompted many to consider the role that
violent media plays in desensitizing young people. Loukaitis had
seen the ﬁlm so many times that his classmates said he could
quote it in its entirety. He also loved the song and video Jeremy
by Pearl Jam, which featured a young man shooting his class-
mates after enduring their abuse. Additionally, Loukaitis was a
Stephen King fan and particularly loved the horror author’s book
228
School Violence

Rage. Rage tells the story of a high school student who is bullied
until he goes insane. He takes his class hostage and kills a teacher
for revenge, much as Loukaitis did. He allegedly quoted a line
from the book when he was holding the class hostage. King has
expressed regret for authoring the novel.
After the shooting, the school was temporarily closed. As a
result of the shooting, the district implemented a dress code,
increased security, and hired security guards.
Loukaitis was waived to adult criminal court after a hearing
in which it was determined that he was competent and that
the severity of the incident warranted a more serious penalty
than would be assigned by a juvenile court. He pleaded not
guilty by reason of insanity. Defense attorneys argued that
Loukaitis lived in a fantasy world. The prosecution prevailed,
however, by demonstrating how Loukaitis planned the attack
with great detail. He was convicted and sentenced to life without
the possibility of parole. Later, questions arose about the quality
of his defense, given that his primary attorney, Guillermo
Romero, was being investigated by the Washington State Bar
Association for providing inadequate counsel for several clients.
Patrick Purdy
On January 17, 1989, 24-year-old Patrick Purdy opened ﬁred
on students and teachers at Cleveland Elementary School in
Stockton, California. Purdy shot 106 rounds of ammunition
from an AK-47 riﬂe, killing ﬁve students and wounding
30 (29 students and one teacher) in only two minutes. The chil-
dren who Purdy murdered were all Southeast Asian refugees.
Three girls, Ram Chun, 8; Sokhim An, 6; and Oeun Lim, 8, were
Cambodian, as was one boy, Rathanan Or, 9. The other girl who
died, Thuy Tran, 6, was from Vietnam. At the time of the shoot-
ing, the neighborhood in which the school was located was
68.6 percent Asian. Although Purdy had a history of arrests,
mental illness, and alcohol-related problems, his rampage was
Profiles
229

a complete surprise on a school that was unprepared for this kind
of attack. Purdy had attended Cleveland Elementary School for
kindergarten through third grade.
Born November 10, 1964 to Patrick Benjamin Purdy, who
was stationed at Fort Lewis, Washington, and Kathleen
Toscano, Purdy was raised largely by his mother, who ﬁled for
divorce when Patrick was three and moved the family to
California. Kathleen alleged that her husband threatened her
with a weapon. She later married Albert Gulart Sr., although
the marriage lasted just six years.
Purdy’s home life was less than ideal. Twice in December
1973 Child Protective Services took him and his two siblings into
custody after a neighbor reported neglect. Patrick was described as
a very quiet child who lacked coping skills. Neighbors remember
him as weird and sometimes violent. One neighbor, Joan Capalla,
recalled Purdy chasing her sons with a wooden-handled butcher
knife. As a teenager he developed an alcohol problem, and his
mother kicked him out of her home for hitting her when he
was 13 or 14. Purdy lived with a foster parent, who told ofﬁcers
she feared him because he had knives and guns. Purdy also lived
on the streets for a while, attending high school only sporadically.
Purdy was arrested numerous times between 1980 and
1989. The ﬁrst arrest was for prostitution. He also was arrested
for selling drugs, possessing illegal weapons, receiving stolen
property, and being an accomplice to an armed robbery. In
1986, when his mother refused to give him money to purchase
drugs, he was arrested for vandalizing her car. When he was
almost 22, he told a mental health professional he had destruc-
tive thoughts. Purdy was diagnosed as having an antisocial per-
sonality, yet he never received any long-term mental health
intervention. Purdy’s friends described him as a nice guy,
although they said he was often frustrated and angry.
When he began taking welding classes at San Joaquin Delta
College in the fall of 1987, Purdy complained that there were
too many Southeast Asian students there. The following year
Purdy held a series of jobs, drifting among Oregon, Texas,
230
School Violence

Connecticut, and Tennessee before returning to Stockton and
renting a room at the El Rancho Motel on December 26. On
August 3, during his travels, Purdy purchased the AK-47 he
used in the shooting for $349.95.
Dressed in a camouﬂage shirt with the words “PLO,”
“Libya,” and the misspelled “Death to the Great Satin” written
on the front, Purdy lined up 100 green plastic soldiers and
small tanks, weapons, and jeeps in his hotel room, placing them
on shelves, on the refrigerator, and elsewhere before heading to
the school. He had carved the words “Freedom,” “Victory,”
and “Hezbollah” (a Shiite Muslim group) into his bayoneted
riﬂe.
Purdy parked his car behind Cleveland Elementary School at
approximately noon, then set it on ﬁre with a Molotov cocktail.
He entered the school and hid behind a group of portable class-
rooms, where he shot at the students. Purdy shot and killed
himself with a pistol when he had run out of ammunition.
Investigations by the California attorney general concluded
that Purdy hated minorities and blamed them for his horrible
life. He particularly disliked Southeast Asians simply because
he had the most contact with that group. Captain Dennis
Perry of the Stockton Police Department said that Purdy was
also obsessed with the military, as was evidenced by his dress
and behavior at the hotel. This may have had something to do
with his nonexistent relationship with his father.
The next day the school opened as workmen tried to scrub
bloodstains from the ﬂoor and patch the 60 bullet holes. The
school brought in psychologists and nurses, as well as inter-
preters, to assist the traumatized students, although only one-
quarter attended.
Purdy’s rampage prompted legislative efforts to restrict
assault weapons, both in California and through the federal
government. The California state legislature moved quickly to
enact the nation’s ﬁrst assault weapons legislation, which
banned the sale, production, and possession of certain types of
assault weapons. This incident, coupled with a deadly shooting
Profiles
231

at a San Francisco high rise ofﬁce building in 1993, prompted
Congress to pass the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, which
President Clinton signed in 1994. The ban was part of a larger
crime control bill called the Federal Violent Crime Control and
Law Enforcement Act of 1994. It prohibited 19 types of semi-
automatic weapons, including AK-47, Uzi, Colt AR-15, and
Street Sweeper, as well as copies or duplicates of these named
weapons and ammunition clips that hold more than 10 rounds.
Also banned were any weapons with two or more of a list of
military features, including grenade launchers and ﬂash sup-
pressors. A 1999 study by the U.S. Department of Justice
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) found that the ban helped
keep assault weapons away from criminals. According to a
2004 study commissioned by the Brady Center to Prevent
Gun Violence, the assault weapons ban was effective at reduc-
ing the number deaths from assault weapons by 66 percent.
Despite this research showing its effectiveness, Congress and
President Bush allowed the ban to expire in 2004.
Evan Ramsey
On February 19, 1997, Evan Ramsey, age 16, brought a
12-gauge shotgun to Bethel Regional High School in Bethel,
Alaska. He killed 15-year-old classmate Josh Palacios and prin-
cipal Ron Edwards, 50, and wounded several others. Ramsey
had taken the gun from the foster home where he lived and hid-
den it in his loose pants when he went to school. Sources differ
on the precise sequence of events; however, Ramsey himself
says that both Palacios and Edwards died in a common area in
the school and that he had not speciﬁcally targeted Palacios.
It is unclear whether he intended to kill the principal. Police
said part of the shooting was an intention to get back his CD
player, which the principal had taken away. He told his friends
he would take it back and then would start shooting.
It was reported that before he started shooting, Ramsey
asked everyone why they would not just leave him alone.
232
School Violence

According to reports, Palacios tried to stop Ramsey by getting
up and talking to him, which instigated Ramsey to shoot him.
The principal then came up behind him to see what was going
on, and Ramsey turned around and shot him. His wife was
nearby and cradled him as he died. Although he threatened to
shoot himself, Ramsey instead surrendered to the police.
Investigations into Ramsey’s motivation revealed an unstable
home life. His father was in prison and his mother an alcoholic
who had endured several abusive relationships. When he was in
third grade, the Division of Family and Youth Services removed
Evan and his two brothers from the home and placed them
in different foster homes. Over the next several years, Evan
lived in 11 different foster homes, enduring physical and sexual
abuse in several of them.
It was also noted after Evan Ramsey’s shooting that his
father, Don Ramsey, had been involved in a similar incident
in 1986, albeit not at school. Don Ramsey had brought
an AR 180-223 semi-automatic gun to the ofﬁce of the
Anchorage Times. He too surrendered to police. Just two weeks
before Evan’s shooting, Don Ramsey was released from prison.
Psychiatric assessments revealed Evan to be very troubled.
He had attempted suicide as a child and in high school was
doing poorly in school and smoking marijuana regularly.
Friends said he was often quiet and depressed and only really
spoke to those he knew well. Evan described being bullied by
other students, who would hang toilet paper on him, spit on
his head, and call him names. At ﬁrst he told teachers and the
principal, but when the principal told him just to ignore it,
Ramsey lashed out. Teachers and friends also said Ramsey suf-
fered from uncontrolled anger and said they had witnessed
him pushing people, punching holes in walls, and throwing
garbage cans.
Another factor, as was brought up in the Columbine attack
just over two years later as well as with numerous other school
shootings, was Ramsey’s love of violent video games. Like Eric
Harris and Dylan Klebold, Ramsey was a fan of the game
Profiles
233

Doom. He typically played with friends James Randall and
Matthew Charles, both 14, who encouraged Ramsey to learn
how to use a real gun. Both had warned other students about
Ramsey’s plans to shoot people at school, but no one took them
seriously. Yet at the same time, Randall and Charles egged
Ramsey on, suggesting who he should target and advising him
to take pictures. Ramsey had also wanted other students to stay
away, saying he was having an “evil day.” According to a study
by the Department of Education and the Secret Service, about
81 percent of school shooters do tell other people about their
intentions, but only 4 percent of those people tell ofﬁcials.
Ramsey was tried as an adult on two charges of ﬁrst-degree
murder. On December 2, 1998, he was sentenced to 210 years
in prison. James Randall and Matthew Charles were tried as
juveniles and will be out of prison at age 19.
In an interview more than 10 years later, Ramsey said he had
intended to scare his tormentors and kill himself but not any-
one else. He said it was his friends who convinced him to kill
other people. Ramsey also stated that he thought the entire
thing would be like a video game and that everyone he shot
would live through it. His intent, he said, was to ﬁx his imme-
diate problem, and thus he did not think through the long-
term consequences of his actions. Evan Ramsey now says he
regrets what he did and that prison is worse than being bullied.
He wishes that one of his friends would have told authorities
so he could have been stopped. Many teens have written to
Ramsey expressing that they feel as he did—bullied and alone.
Charles Carl Roberts IV
Charles Carl Roberts IV killed ﬁve Amish girls and himself in
an Amish school in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, on
October 2, 2006. A milk-truck driver, 32-year-old Roberts
lived near the Amish community in Lancaster but was not
Amish. Evidently, he had planned to sexually molest the girls
at the school, but when police arrived he changed his plan,
234
School Violence

killing ﬁve girls and wounding six others. Fatally shot in the
head were Marian Fisher, 13; Anna Mae Stoltzfus, 12; Mary
Liz Miller, 8; her sister Lena Miller, 7; and Naomi Rose
Ebersole, 7.
Roberts’s rampage occurred in a week of multiple school
shootings. Some thought he had mimicked a 53-year-old man,
Duane Morrison, who held six girls at Platte Canyon High
School hostage and sexually assaulted them before killing one
and then himself. Clearly the attack was planned, as Roberts
was found with a checklist of supplies, all checked off, that he
had purchased six days before the shooting. Roberts was found
with a riﬂe, a shotgun, and a semi-automatic pistol as well as
knives, a stun gun, and lots of ammunition. He also had a bag
of tools that looked as though he had intended on staying there,
with hostages, for some time. Disturbingly, Roberts also had a
large board with eyebolts spaced apart that was seemingly for
binding the girls to, as well as KY Jelly lubricant and other
restraints.
On the day before the attack. Roberts went to work until
about 3:00 a.m. He took his own children to their bus stop
before proceeding to the Amish school at about 10:00 a.m.,
where he locked himself in by blocking the door with pieces
of wood he had brought. He gathered all the students into
one classroom, let the boys leave, and bound the girls’ feet.
A pregnant teacher as well as three other adult females who
had infants with them were also allowed to leave. Two of these
people called the police from a nearby farmhouse, and they
arrived at 10:45 a.m. At some point, Roberts had spoken to
his wife, Marie, who had found his suicide notes when she
returned home from her morning prayer group. The notes
stated that Roberts was seeking revenge for something but did
not specify what. Roberts also called police, who by that time
had surrounded the school, and told them if they did not
leave he would start shooting. He did, and by the time the
police entered, Roberts was dead, along with the three girls
and the wounded.
Profiles
235

Roberts had told his wife that he had a problem with sexually
molesting children that started when he was 12. He also wrote a
suicide note in which he described how difﬁcult it was for him
when he and Marie lost their baby Elsie just 20 minutes after
she was born in 1997. Roberts said he hated God and himself.
Yet Marie said she did not believe her husband was acting dif-
ferently in the weeks before the shooting, although Roberts’
co-workers said his mood had changed. Still, he was viewed as
a peaceful man who did not have a criminal record. Marie
Roberts claims he was a wonderful husband and father.
The Amish community was completely surprised by and
unprepared for the attack. The Amish lifestyle is simple, and
thus there was no security apparatus or real plan for what to
do in a crisis situation like this. Police said that he had been
watching the school after his work shifts and selected this one
because it had no security. Investigators do not believe, how-
ever, that Roberts was speciﬁcally seeking an Amish school.
After the shootings, the Amish sought to forgive Charles Carl
Roberts. Many have reached out to his wife and children as
well. Eleven days after the attack, the community tore down
the school and has built a new one.
Steubenville High School Rape Case
In the early hours of the morning of August 12, 2012, a group
of boys from Steubenville High School in Steubenville, Ohio,
repeatedly sexually assaulted a 16-year-old female. She was
intoxicated at the time. Several of the boys took pictures and
documented their attack on social media, including Facebook
and Twitter. They also took video recordings of the sexual
assault and sent them to friends. The pictures and videos
showed the boys smiling and laughing.
During the trial, witnesses testiﬁed that, against the protests
of her friends, the victim left a party at about midnight with
four football players. All had been drinking. They went to a sec-
ond party where the victim continued drinking and vomited.
236
School Violence

Witnesses say she appeared “out of it.” The same group left
after about 20 minutes and went to the home of one of the wit-
nesses. No adults were around. During the ride, the witnesses
said that her shirt was removed and Trent Mays violated the
victim with his ﬁngers while others ﬁlmed and photographed
it and her exposed breasts. Once they arrived, Mays attempted
to make the girl perform oral sex on him, but she was com-
pletely unconscious. She was stripped completely naked, and
Ma’lik Richmond also violated her digitally, and again photo-
graphs were taken. After the attacks, the New York Times
reported that Mays tried to orchestrate a cover-up, telling a
friend to say that the girl was at his house and pleading with
the victim to drop any charges.
The victim testiﬁed that she has no memory of the rapes. She
has a hazy recollection of vomiting on the street at the second
party. She recalled waking up the next morning in a basement
living room, naked, with Mays, Richmond, and another boy. She
said she was missing her earrings, ﬂip-ﬂops, phone, and underwear.
On December 24, the hacker group Anonymous, dismayed
at the media coverage that focused on the victim’s actions,
threatened to reveal the names of other alleged but unindicted
assailants. The group also posted a demand that school ofﬁcials
and local authorities apologize for mishandling and attempting
to cover up the crime in order to protect the athletes who were
accused.
Other media activists took interest in the case. Blogger
Alexandria Goddard and other anonymous bloggers posted mes-
sages that implicated a Steubenville boy. His parents claimed that
the posts defamed their son and sought an injunction against
Goddard, a public apology stating that he was not involved
with the rape, and a $25,000 settlement. The case, Saltsman v.
Goddard, was dismissed in December 2012. Goddard agreed to
post that the boy was remorseful about his involvement in the
rape.
To date, two of the assailants, both football players for
Steubenville High School, have been convicted. Both were
Profiles
237

tried in juvenile court. On March 17, 2013, Ma’lik Richmond
and Trent Mays, both 16 at the time of the sexual assault, were
found guilty of rape of a minor in juvenile court. Mays was
found guilty of penetrating the girl while she was unconscious
and disseminating pictures of her. As she was a minor, this
was considered child pornography, so Mays received a two-
year sentence. Richmond received the minimum one-year sen-
tence, to the dismay of many. Hundreds of text messages and
cell-phone pictures taken by dozens of people at the parties
and by the assailants were introduced as evidence. One photo-
graph posted on Instagram by a Steubenville football player
showed the unresponsive victim being carried by her wrists
and ankles by two boys. Another student, former baseball
player Michael Nodianos, tweeted that “Some people deserve
to be peed on” and “Song of the night is deﬁnitely Rape Me
by Nirvana.” Several people reshared that tweet. Nodianos
and others ﬁlmed a 12-minute video they later uploaded to
YouTube in which Nodianos joked, “they raped her quicker
than Mike Tyson raped that one girl.” Mays texted someone
saying she looked “like a dead body” and claimed that the
semen visible on her body in other pictures was his.
The Steubenville rape case generated national attention on
the issues of athletes, rape, and use of social media. As so often
happens in cases of sexual assault, especially those in which
drinking is involved, some people blamed the victim for the
incident. Others were concerned about the negative image of
the community and its football team. Even reporters from
national news sources like CNN focused their coverage, to
a large extent, on the fact that the convictions would ruin these
boys’ lives rather than on the impact on the victim. Broadcasts
on CNN, Fox News, and MSNBC aired the ﬁrst name of the
victim on March 17, 2013, which is in violation of Associated
Press guidelines for coverage.
In June 2013, a judge ruled that Trent Mays must register as
a Tier II sex offender every six months for the next 20 years.
Unlike adult sex offenders, however, his name will not appear
238
School Violence

on the publicly searchable database, and once he is rehabili-
tated, he can request that his name be removed.
In October 2013, William Rhinaman, technology director
for the Steubenville City Schools, was the ﬁrst adult to be
indicted for crimes related to the incident. Rhinaman is charged
with tampering with evidence, obstructing justice, and lying
under oath. He plead not guilty and was freed on a $25,000
bond. Some have suggested that Steubenville football coach
Reno Saccoccia be ﬁred and investigated for knowing about
the assault and helping to protect his players.
Jeff Weiss
Six years after the infamous Columbine High School massacre,
16-year-old Jeff Weise killed two members of his family before
driving his grandfather’s police car to Red Lake High School in
Minnesota, where he shot and killed seven students and
wounded ﬁve others before killing himself. The entire incident
took less than 10 minutes. Located in northern Minnesota,
Red Lake High School is located in the Red Lake Indian
Reservation, home to Chippewas, with whom Weiss identiﬁed.
After murdering his sleeping grandfather and his grand-
father’s partner, Weise took a handgun and shotgun his grand-
father owned, and upon gaining entrance to the school, he shot
randomly at students and teachers. Red Lake police arrived and
exchanged gun shots with Weiss, who was wounded before
he escaped to a remote location within the school and shot
himself.
Explanations for why Weiss committed these mass murders
focused on his family history and the possibility of mental ill-
ness. Weiss’s father committed suicide when he was nine, and
his mother was incapacitated due to brain damage from a car
accident two years later, which prompted the relocation to live
with his grandparents in 1999, several hundreds of miles away.
Weiss himself had been prescribed Prozac, an antidepressant,
because he had twice tried to commit suicide. Additionally,
Profiles
239

Weiss had written about zombies, identiﬁed as a goth, dressed
in black, including a trench coat, and submitted numerous
web posts proclaiming the brilliance of Adolf Hitler and pledg-
ing his support for neo-Nazism. Further, Weiss wrote about his
enjoyment of violent video games, speciﬁcally Grand Theft
Auto, and his interest in the ﬁlm Elephant, which addresses
the Columbine massacre. Jeff Weiss had also been in trouble
at school. He was forced to repeat the eighth grade and had
previously been expelled and was at the time being home-
schooled. School ofﬁcials and peers recall that Weiss was bullied
because of his stature (he was 6 feet tall and weighed 250
pounds). Yet other students described Weiss as a good listener
and friend.
Red Lake High School had installed metal detectors before
the incident, which prompted national dialogue about how
effective this type of intervention could be. Most research sug-
gests that this type of technological intervention is, if anything,
minimally helpful.
One of Weiss’s cousins, Louis Jourdain, was arrested and
charged with conspiracy after the shooting. The charge was
eventually dropped, and Jourdain pled guilty to transmitting
threatening messages via the Internet.
In response, the Red Lake Chippewa provided grants to
Fifteen families who had been affected by the murders.
Phoebe Prince, Bullycide
A recent immigrant from Ireland, Phoebe Nora Mary Prince
hung herself at her family’s home on January 14, 2010.
Prince had been a victim of vicious “mean girl” bullying, both
in person and online. A group of girls who attended South
Hadley High School in Massachusetts disliked Prince and had
repeatedly harassed her verbally, in writing, and physically.
On the day she committed suicide, these girls had thrown a
can of Red Bull energy drink at her from a car window as
Prince walked home from school.
240
School Violence

Investigations of the incident found that the harassment had
been occurring for months. These girls, as well as other students,
often threw things and were referred to as “Mean Girls,” so
dubbed because of their resemblance to the characters in the
2004 movie. They called Prince “Irish slut” and “whore,” both
on social networking sites and in person. Students say the abuse
started when Prince brieﬂy dated a popular senior football player
during her freshman year. It continued after Prince’s suicide as
the girls posted hateful comments on her Facebook page.
On March 29, 2010, authorities announced they had indicted
nine teenagers, seven girls and two boys, for bullying Prince and
prompting her suicide. They were charged with a variety of
offenses, including statutory rape for the boys, violation of civil
rights with bodily injury, criminal harassment, and stalking.
Although some felt that school ofﬁcials also bore some blame,
given that it seemed as though they turned a blind eye even when
witnessing the bullying. Investigators found that while some
adults behaved in a troublesome manner, there was no criminal
responsibility. Three of the girls entered not-guilty pleas on
April 8, 2010. Three of the teens received probation and commu-
nity service, and two others were sentenced to probation only.
Prince’s case brought to the national discourse the issue of
bullycide. Prior to this incident, Tyler Lee Long, 17, commit-
ted suicide after enduring years of torment at school. On
October 7, 2003, Ryan Halligan killed himself after enduring
similar abuse. In October 2013, 12-year-old Rebecca Sedwick
of Florida committed suicide as a result of girl-on-girl harass-
ment. After Sedwick’s death, one of the bullies, a 14-year-old
girl, wrote the following post on Facebook: “Yes IK I bullied
REBECCA and she killed her self but IDGAF,” which means
“I don’t give a #@@&.”
Amanda Todd, Bullycide
Canadian teenager Amanda Todd committed suicide in
October 2012, just one week before her 16th birthday, after
Profiles
241

enduring years of bullying in school and online. It started when
Todd was in seventh grade and would go online to meet peo-
ple. A stranger talked her into ﬂashing the camera, which he
then used to exploit Todd over the next several years. Despite
changing schools, the bullying followed as the man continued
to harass and threaten her on Facebook and all her new peers
found out. They ridiculed her, calling her “porn star.” She suf-
fered from anxiety and depression, eventually turning to alco-
hol, drugs, and cutting to numb herself. When she transferred
to yet another school she endured the harassment of a group
of girls who were jealous when a boy ﬂirted with her. The girls
beat her up, and Todd attempted suicide by drinking bleach.
The hacktivist group Anonymous has allegedly tracked down
Todd’s blackmailer, identifying a 30-year-old man from British
Columbia.
Part II
Break the Cycle
Devoted to empowering young people to enjoy safe and healthy
relationships, Break the Cycle focuses on educating young
people, educators, and others about the warning signs of abu-
sive relationships and the characteristics of healthy ones. The
organization also advocates for legal and policy changes and
helps provide legal resources to teens, who are often ineligible
for existing legal assistance. Break the Cycle was founded in
Los Angeles in 1996 because advocates noticed the dearth of
resources devoted to dating violence. In 2004 the organization
expanded and now has a Washington, DC, ofﬁce through
which its programs reach a national audience. Break the
Cycle’s core values include (1) trusting that young people are
the experts of their own lives, (2) providing services in a manner
that respects culturally diverse populations, (3) collaborating
and evolving as needed, and (4) constantly seeking and imple-
menting new and creative ideas.
242
School Violence

Break the Cycle has developed a number of curricular pro-
grams that representatives present in schools and to community
groups. Safe Dates and Speak.Act.Change both teach youth
about healthy and unhealthy relationships and seek to inspire
them to take action in their schools and communities. The
organization has also developed a School Policy Kit that helps
administrators develop policies and practices to prevent and
respond to dating violence in schools.
In addition to its educational programs, Break the Cycle pro-
vides information about dating violence on its website as well as
legal services. Persons who need additional legal assistance are
able to contact a Break the Cycle representative through the
organization’s website.
Three broad political priorities shape the organization’s legis-
lative initiatives. These include (1) increasing youth access to
essential information and services, (2) ensuring conﬁdentiality,
and (3) providing a healthy environment for youth.
Finally, Break the Cycle provides information and ideas
related to Teen Dating Violence Awareness Month, com-
memorated each February. To date, Break the Cycle’s pro-
grams have reached more than 1 million teens.
Geoffrey Canada
Internationally known as a passionate advocate of education
reform and an activist for more peaceful schools, Geoffrey
Canada is founder of the Harlem Children’s Zone (HCZ).
Canada is president and chief executive ofﬁcer of that organiza-
tion, which has been called “one of the most ambitious social
experiments of our time” by the New York Times Magazine.
HCZ helps provide comprehensive services to a 100-block area
of Central Harlem, serving approximately 10,000 children.
Geoffrey Canada grew up in the South Bronx. His neighbor-
hood was generally poor and often violent. Canada was a shin-
ing star, earning a BA from Bowdoin College, then a master’s
Profiles
243

degree in education from Harvard. After graduating, Canada
was determined to give back to children who faced similar life
circumstances to his.
Canada joined Harlem Children’s Zone, Inc. (then called
the Rheedlen Foundation) in 1983 as education director.
Prior to that, he worked as director of the Robert White
School, a private day school for troubled inner-city youth in
Boston. In 1997, the agency launched the Harlem Children’s
Zone Project, which targets a speciﬁc geographic area in
Central Harlem with a comprehensive range of services. The
Zone Project today covers 100 blocks.
The New York Times Magazine said the Zone Project “com-
bines educational, social and medical services. It starts at birth
and follows children to college. It meshes those services into
an interlocking web, and then it drops that web over an entire
neighborhood. . . . The objective is to create a safety net woven
so tightly that children in the neighborhood just can’t slip
through.”
The work of Geoffrey Canada and HCZ has become a
national model and has received signiﬁcant media coverage.
Their work has been featured on 60 Minutes, The Oprah
Winfrey Show, The Today Show, Good Morning America,
Nightline, CBS This Morning, The Charlie Rose Show, and
National Public Radio’s On Point, as well in articles in the
New York Times, the New York Daily News, USA Today, and
Newsday. In October 2005, Geoffrey Canada was named one
of “America’s Best Leaders” by U.S. News and World Report.
The work of Canada and HCZ was also featured in the
documentary Waiting for Superman, which highlighted that
90 percent of public-school students who participate in HCZ
programs go to college.
Drawing upon his own experiences in childhood and at
HCZ, Geoffrey Canada has written two books: Fist Stick
Knife Gun: A Personal History of Violence in America, published
in 1995 by Beacon Press, and Reaching Up for Manhood:
Transforming the Lives of Boys in America, published in 1998
244
School Violence

by Beacon Press. Publisher’s Weekly said of Fist Stick Knife Gun
that a “powerful depiction of the tragic life of urban children
and a more compelling plea to end ‘America’s war against itself’
cannot be imagined.”
In 2006, New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg selected
Geoffrey Canada as co-chair of the Commission on Economic
Opportunity, which was asked to formulate a plan to signiﬁcantly
reduce poverty. In 2012, he was appointed by Governor Andrew
Cuomo to the New York Education Reform Commission.
Canada is also the East Coast regional coordinator for the Black
Community Crusade for Children. The Crusade is a nationwide
effort to make saving black children the top priority in the black
community. This initiative is coordinated by Marian Wright
Edelman and the Children’s Defense Fund.
For his years of work advocating for children and families in
some of the United States’ most devastated communities,
Geoffrey Canada has received numerous awards. He was a recipi-
ent of the ﬁrst Heinz Award in 1994 and the Harvard Graduate
School of Education Medal for Educational Impact in 2012.
In 2004, he was given the Harold W. McGraw Jr. Prize in
Education and Child magazine’s Children’s Champion Award.
In 2009, he received the Independent Sector’s John W.
Gardner Leadership Award. He was named to Time magazine’s
“Time 100” list of the world’s most inﬂuential people in 2011.
He has also received the Heroes of the Year Award from the
Robin Hood Foundation, the Jefferson Award for Public
Service, the Spirit of the City Award from the Cathedral of
St. John the Divine, the Brennan Legacy Award from New
York University, and the Common Good Award from
Bowdoin College. Canada also received the 2013 National
Freedom Award from the National Civil Rights Museum.
Canada has received honorary degrees from Harvard
University, Bowdoin College, the University of Pennsylvania,
Williams College, John Jay College, and Bank Street College.
The National Book Award–winning author Jonathan Kozol
called Canada, “One of the few authentic heroes of New York
Profiles
245

and one of the best friends children have, or ever will have, in
our nation.”
Riane Eisler, JD
Historian, educator, women’s rights advocate, and peace
activist Riane Eisler is founder and president of the Center for
Partnership Studies, which promotes research, education, and
public policy to create more peaceful institutions. Her books
include The Chalice and the Blade, which is now in 25 foreign
editions, The Power of Partnerships, Tomorrow’s Children,
Sacred Pleasure, Women, Men and the Global Quality of Life,
and The Real Wealth of Nations: Creating a Caring Economics,
which Archbishop Desmond Tutu called “a template for
the better world we have been so urgently seeking.” Gloria
Steinem referred to it as “revolutionary,” and Jane Goodall
described it as “a call for action.” Eisler’s book Dissolution and
the Equal Rights Handbook was widely used in the campaign
for the Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Born in Vienna, Austria, Riane Eisler is a refugee from Nazi
Europe who grew up in the slums of Havana, Cuba. She earned
degrees in sociology and law from the University of California
and taught at UCLA.
Eisler has lectured worldwide, offering keynotes to the U.S.
Department of State, commentary at congressional brieﬁngs,
and presentations to the UN General Assembly and has
given introductions to events featuring Rita Suessmuth, former
president of the German parliament, and Vaclav Havel, former
president of the Czech Republic. She often provides keynote
addresses at major conferences as well as at universities and
corporations internationally.
The Center for Partnership Studies works on issues related to
gender and economic justice, the promotion of peace education
in schools, and ending domestic violence. Its Caring Economy
Campaign is devoted to re-envisioning what an economy
can look like that invests in all its people. Eisler is also the
246
School Violence

co-founder, with Nobel Peace laureate Betty Williams, of the
Spiritual Alliance to Stop Intimate Violence (SAIV). As a histo-
rian, Eisler documented that there have been two paradigms or
models that have shaped human history. These she called the
dominator model and the partnership model. The dominator
model is one in which hierarchy, aggression, and power over
others are the essential values. These are qualities more often
associated with masculinity, and males are privileged in the
dominator model. In contrast, the partnership model values
shared power, collaboration, and nonviolent means of solving
conﬂict. In The Chalice and the Blade, Eisler documented the
various times and cultures in history that have been either
dominator-modeled or partnership-modeled. In Tomorrow’s
Children, Eisler described how these two models have inﬂu-
enced schooling in the United States, emphasizing how
dominator-modeled schools are unsafe and uninspiring while
partnership-modeled schools are schools that teach about and
for peace.
Eisler has written over 300 articles that have been pub-
lished in Behavioral Science, Futures, Political Psychology,
the Christian Science Monitor, Challenge, the UNESCO
Courier, Brain and Mind, the Human Rights Quarterly, the
International Journal of Women’s Studies, and the World
Encyclopedia of Peace.
Eisler has received many honors for her work, including
honorary Ph.D. degrees, the Alice Paul ERA Education Award,
and the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation’s 2009 Distinguished
Peace Leadership Award. She is included in the award-winning
book Great Peacemakers as one of 20 leaders for world peace,
along with Mahatma Gandhi, Mother Teresa, and Martin
Luther King.
Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education Network (GLSEN)
In 1990, a group of Massachusetts teachers, concerned that
schools frequently allow lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
Profiles
247

(LGBT) students to be bullied, be discriminated against, and
fall through the cracks, came together to form GLSEN.
Today, GLSEN is a national organization that advocates for
the fair treatment of LGBT students in schools and outside of
them. Noting that 8 out of 10 LGBT students are still harassed
at school each year, GLSEN works to ensure that every student
feels valued and is treated with respect regardless of her or
his sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.
GLSEN notes that homophobia and heterosexism undermine
a healthy school climate, and thus the organization works to
educate teachers, students, and the general public about the
damaging effects of daily harassment and an unwelcoming
environment.
The
organization’s
website
lists
several
focus
areas:
(1)
Conducting
and
disseminating
research
to
inform
evidence-based solutions for K–12 education; (2) creating age-
appropriate resources for teachers to use in classroom and other
settings; (3) partnering with decision-makers to make sure that
safe and inclusive policies are enacted in every school; (4) work-
ing with national education organizations to share resources
that will help LGBT students; and (5) empowering students
to help make change in their schools and communities.
GLSEN has developed several educational guides, including
a “Back to School Guide,” a guide for working with LGBT
youth of color, the “ThinkB4YouSpeak Guide” for educators,
an “LGBT Pride Month Guide,” a “Day of Silence Guide,”
and a “Transgender Day of Remembrance Guide,” as well as a
safe space kit for allies and an LGBT-inclusive curriculum. In
addition, the organization’s website offers a variety of lesson
plans related to bullying and to acceptance of LGBT youth.
Further, GLSEN helps support youth activism by providing
resources for students who want to start or enhance their gay–
straight alliance (GSA). It provides ideas for students to coordi-
nate activities for the Day of Silence on April 11, for hosting
an ally week, and much more. Additionally, GLSEN’s website
248
School Violence

provides references and links to crisis hotlines for youth in
immediate need of assistance.
Since 1999, GLSEN has conducted research on the experi-
ences of LGBT youth in schools. Its National School Climate
Survey gauges the frequency with which LGBT youth hear dis-
criminatory remarks and experience various forms of harass-
ment in schools. It also assesses how teachers and school
ofﬁcials respond as well as what preventative programs and pol-
icies are in place. Other reports available on GLSEN’s website
include “Experiences of LGBT Youth Online,” “LGBT Issues
in Elementary Schools,” “Students’ and Teachers’ Perceptions
on School,” “LGBT Students’ Experiences in School Sports
and PE,” “LGBT Students in Rural and Small Towns,”
“LGBT
Inclusive
Curriculum,”
“Experiences
of
LGBT
Students of Color,” “Transgender Students in US Schools,”
“LGBT Issues in Middle Schools,” “LGBT Parents and Their
Children,” “The Principal’s Perspective,” and “Impact of
Gay–Straight Alliances.”
GLSEN works with school districts as well as with Congress
and the Department of Education to improve school climate
and to enhance legislative protections for LGBT youth. It has
helped build support for two federal laws, the Safe Schools
Improvement Act and the Student Non-Discrimination Act.
Another recent success involved getting the Department
of Health and Human Services and the Department of
Education to include sexual orientation and gender identity in
national surveys they administer. It has also developed a policy
kit for states, districts, and schools featuring model antibullying
legislation and other policies to support transgendered and
gender-nonconforming youth.
Jackson Katz
Award-winning educator, ﬁlmmaker, scholar, and activist
Jackson Katz, Ph.D., specializes in the study of contemporary
Profiles
249

U.S. masculinity. His work focuses on the social construction
of gender and gender role norms that encourage male aggres-
sion and violence. Katz is an important ally in efforts against
domestic violence as his work is a call to men that abuse is
not a “woman’s issue” but rather one that must be addressed
by entire communities. Katz’s work highlights the role of popu-
lar culture in reinforcing stereotypical and dangerous notions of
gender. He also carefully and thoughtfully addresses other
dimensions of identity, privilege, and social power such as race,
social class, and sexuality.
Katz’s book The Macho Paradox: Why Men Hurt Women and
How All Men Can Help (2006) identiﬁes violent masculine
norms in the United States and provides strategies for creating
safer, more equitable relations between men and women. He
has also edited several scholarly collections and routinely pub-
lishes academic articles in journals and books. Katz is a regular
contributor to the Hufﬁngton Post and, in November 2012,
ﬁlmed a talk for TED (Technology, Education, Design) enti-
tled “Violence against Women—It’s a Men’s Issue.”
Katz is particularly well-known for the ﬁlm Tough Guise:
Violence, Media, and the Crisis in Masculinity (2000), which
he worked on with Sut Jhally. An updated version of the ﬁlm,
which highlights how popular culture promotes dangerous
gender-role norms, was released in 2013. Katz and Jhally have
also collaborated for the Dreamworlds series (1991, 1995,
2007), in which they document the portrayal of women as
sexualized objects in music and other cultural forms.
In Wrestling with Manhood: Boys, Bullying, and Battering
(2002), Katz and Jhally focus on professional wrestling culture,
which gloriﬁes homophobia and violence. Katz discusses why
professional wrestling is so popular with young men and docu-
ments the way it reinforces bullying behavior and abuse of
women.
Katz coupled with cultural critic Jean Kilbourne for Spin the
Bottle: Sex, Lies, and Alcohol (2004), which highlights U.S.
media portrayals of binge drinking and other risky behaviors.
250
School Violence

The ﬁlm shows the dangerous relationship between masculinity
and violence that is fueled by alcohol.
Katz is also co-founder, in 1993, of the multiracial
Mentors in Violence Prevention (MVP) training program at
Northeastern University’s Center for the Study of Sport in
Society. MVP is the most widely used gender violence preven-
tion program in college and professional athletics. He and his
staff implement training in the U.S. military, law enforcement
agencies, colleges, high schools, community organizations, and
small and large corporations. Katz speaks to national and
international audiences. As a former all-star football player,
Katz is able to draw on personal experience to address how
violent masculinity hurts not just women but men as well.
Research has shown MVP to be a successful means of reaching
young people, in particular empowering bystanders to take
action to interrupt dangerous behavior.
Paul Kivel
Known for his commitment to social justice, Paul Kivel is an
educator, activist, and author. He speaks regularly at colleges,
universities, and conferences about issues of race, social class,
and privilege. Kivel provides workshops and training on youth
violence, male violence, homophobia, and gender and class dis-
crimination, and most notably he calls on audiences and readers
to engage in their schools and neighborhoods to create stronger,
safer communities.
Kivel is co-founder of the Oakland Men’s Project, a commu-
nity education center and prevention organization devoted to
stopping male violence. In addition, Kivel has authored numer-
ous book and curricula, including Uprooting Racism: How
White People Can Work for Racial Justice, Men’s Work, Making
the Peace, Young Women’s Lives, Helping Teens Stop Violence,
Boys Will Be Men, I Can Make My World a Safer Place, and
You Call This a Democracy?: Who Beneﬁts, Who Pays, and Who
Really Decides. He also authors a free newsletter called Getting
Profiles
251

Together in which he shares additional thoughts and ideas. All
of Kivel’s curricula involve participatory, interactive methodol-
ogies for training youth and adults in a variety of settings. Kivel
incorporates the concept of being allies in community struggles
to end oppression and injustice to transform organizations and
institutions into each of his curricula.
Kivel recently expanded his work to focus on what he has
called Christian hegemony, or the everyday, pervasive, and sys-
tematic set of Christian values and beliefs, individuals, and
institutions that are dominant in Western societies. Christian
values and beliefs can be found in families and religious institu-
tions but also in the social, political, and economic realms.
Hank Nuwer
Hank Nuwer is perhaps the world’s leading authority on
hazing. He is the author of four books and numerous articles
about the topic. Nuwer’s books include Wrongs of Passage:
Fraternities, Sororities, Hazing and Binge Drinking, The Hazing
Reader, Broken Pledges: The Deadly Rite of Hazing, and High
School Hazing. Nuwer also operates a website to inform the
public about hazing. The site, www.stophazing.org, features
statistics, case studies, myths and facts, state laws, and
resources to stop hazing. Nuwer’s work has debunked myths
about hazing as being a harmless prank. Instead, Nuwer has
documented the dangers of hazing, including serious injury
and death. Although data about the incidence of hazing
is difﬁcult to obtain, an estimated 1.5 million high school
students are hazed. In 40 percent of cases in which athletes
are hazed, a coach or advisor is aware of what is happening. In
1995, Nuwer began attempting to track these incidents.
Nuwer’s ﬁrst article focused on a study conducted with pre-
eminent Groupthink theorist Irving Janus of Yale University.
Published in 1978 in Human Behavior Magazine, this study
propelled Nuwer’s more than 30-year career studying hazing
as a human rights abuse.
252
School Violence

Nuwer teaches journalism at Franklin College in Indiana.
He is frequently an invited speaker at schools and universities
in the United States and Canada. Nuwer also publishes a daily
blog and is an Advisory Board member of Security on Campus.
In 1999, Nuwer received a Distinguished Alumnus Award
from New York’s Buffalo State College and in 2006 an honor-
ary doctorate for his work on hazing. He was inducted into the
Ball State University Journalism Hall of Fame (where he once
served on faculty) in 2010.
StopBullying.gov
Run by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
StopBullying.gov is a website that offers comprehensive informa-
tion about the scope, extent, and forms of bullying, unique issues
faced by at-risk groups such as youth of color and LGBT youth,
tips for responding to and preventing bullying, and links to addi-
tional resources. The site is available in Spanish as well.
The site offers deﬁnitions of bullying and cyberbullying as
well as a section describing the many roles kids play in bullying
incidents. It highlights the importance of not labeling kids as
“bullies” or “bullied” but instead referring to them as “the child
who bullied” and “the child who was bullied.” It also empha-
sizes that youth may be involved in assisting bullying by
encouraging the behavior and occasionally joining in, or they
may be reinforcers who provide an audience for the bullying.
Outsiders are kids who are separate from the situation but
who often want to help, while kids who defend are those who
stand up to the bullying. These descriptions link users to
additional information about those topics and especially to
prevention efforts designed to help youth become defenders.
Additional information provides a review of literature about
bullying in elementary school and how it differs from bullying
in older grades.
Cyberbullying resources include a working deﬁnition, preven-
tion resources, and responding resources. Recommendations for
Profiles
253

prevention are targeted to both parents and educators and focus
on being aware of the technology youth are using and establishing
rules for its use. Model rules, policies, and procedures are pro-
vided for schools as well.
Additionally, StopBullying.gov features a tab with informa-
tion outlining risk factors, warning signs, and effects of bully-
ing. Both risk factors for students likely to be bullied and
likely to do the bullying are provided. Special attention is paid
to youth with disabilities and LGBT youth, as both are overre-
presented in victimization statistics. While recognizing that
anyone can be a victim, the site provides the following risk
factors:
• Are perceived as different from their peers, such as being
overweight or underweight, wearing glasses or different
clothing, being new to a school, or being unable to afford
what kids consider “cool”
• Are perceived as weak or unable to defend themselves
• Are depressed, anxious, or have low self-esteem
• Are less popular than others and have few friends
• Do not get along well with others, are seen as annoying or
provoking, or antagonize others for attention
Similarly, anyone can be a bully, but the site provides the fol-
lowing factors that increase the likelihood of this behavior:
• Some are well-connected to their peers, have social power,
are overly concerned about their popularity, and like to
dominate or be in charge of others
• Others are more isolated from their peers and may be
depressed or anxious, have low self-esteem, be less involved
in school, be easily pressured by peers, or not identify with
the emotions or feelings of others
• Are aggressive or easily frustrated
254
School Violence

• Have less parental involvement or having issues at home
• Think badly of others
• Have difﬁculty following rules
• View violence in a positive way
• Have friends who bully others
Prevention resources focus on how to talk to children and
adolescents about bullying, the role of schools in bullying pre-
vention, and community-level efforts. School-based initiatives
include assessing the scope and extent of bullying, the resources
currently available, and the overall school climate; engaging
parents and youth in creating programs and setting policies
and rules; and educating all about the issue. The segment on
community-level efforts discusses the importance of collabora-
tions, possible partnerships, and ideas for working together.
It also provides links to other community–school partnerships
for bullying prevention.
The material on responding to bullying emphasizes how to
spot bullying and how to empower all—from students to
educators—to disrupt the act. The “Get Help Now” tab pro-
vides recommended resources for speciﬁc types of crises.
Also featured on the site are images that groups can down-
load to use as posters or in other educational materials. Video
segments are also available.
Students Against Violence Everywhere (SAVE)
SAVE is a youth-driven and youth-focused organization with
chapters around the United States. Devoted to tapping into the
potential youth have to make social change, SAVE seeks to spread
the message of nonviolence as a means of preventing crime, solv-
ing conﬂict, and empowering communities. SAVE is run by a
National Youth Advisory Board, a Board of Directors, three staff
members, and many volunteers. SAVE’s goals include (1) engag-
ing youth in school and community violence prevention efforts;
Profiles
255

(2) educating youth so that they have the skills, knowledge, and
motivation to serve their communities and schools; (3) encourag-
ing positive peer inﬂuence and nonviolent means of solving con-
ﬂict; and (4) educating students about the effects of violence.
SAVE provides resources for its chapters, which exist all over
the United States, including the SAVE Essentials Manual,
which provides lesson plans on managing conﬂicts between
others, active listening skills, and bullying prevention, with
activities appropriate for elementary through high school ages.
SAVE materials also include ideas and encouragement for stu-
dents to engage in meaningful service in their schools and com-
munities. Ideas provided on the organization’s website include:
• Start a SAVE chapter in other schools.
• Sponsor a crime and violence prevention fair for your school
and community.
• Decorate a bulletin board at your school, local library, or
local business to spread the SAVE message.
• Have a nonviolence essay contest and send the winning
essay to possibly be published on SAVE’s website or in
SAVE’s newsletter.
• Support a local violence shelter by hosting a canned food,
coat, teddy bear, clothing, or cell phone drive.
• Adopt a grandparent or assist elderly person in your commu-
nity by running errands, cleaning the yard, or just providing
company.
• Create a pamphlet on community or school crime prevention.
• Sponsor a photo identiﬁcation booth for children at a local
crime prevention fair or mall expo.
• Assist your school’s safety team with coordinating a safe
school site assessment.
• Clean up and revitalize a deteriorated area of your school or
community.
256
School Violence

SAVE recognizes that juveniles are twice as likely to be crime
victims as any other age group. As such, the organization helps
promote gun safety awareness and civic education as a means of
activating youth to conform to prosocial norms. Crime preven-
tion initiatives also focus on gangs, Internet safety, back-to-
school safety, and safe driving.
In addition, SAVE operates a Speakers Bureau. Interested
chapters as well as schools and community groups can request
a speaker or workshop leader on virtually any facet of nonvio-
lent conﬂict resolution. SAVE also hosts events and provides re-
sources to groups who are hosting events for National Crime
Victims Week and Global Youth Service Day.
Further Reading
Abad-Santos, A. (2013, April 26). What Is Steubenville Still
Hiding? The Atlantic Wire. Retrieved October 24, 2013,
from http://www.theatlanticwire.com/national/2013/04/
steubenville-search-warrants-grand-jury/64627/
Armstrong, K., Davis, F., & Mayo, J. (2004, April 4). For
Some, Free Counsel Comes at a High Cost. Seattle Times.
Retrieved May 3, 2010, from http://seattletimes.nwsource
.com/news/local/unequaldefense/stories/one/
Avila, J., Holding, R., Whitcraft, T., & Tribolet, B. (2008).
School Shooter: ‘I Didn’t Realize’ They Would Die.” Retri-
eved May28, 2014, from http://abcnews.go.com/TheLaw/
story?id=5040342
Bernstein, A. (2009). Bath Massacre: America’s First School
Bombing. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Bleaney, T. (2012, October 15). Amanda Todd: Suicide Girl’s
Mum Reveals More Harrowing Details of Cyber Bullying
Campaign that Drove Her Daughter to Death. The Mirror.
Retrieved March 28, 2014, from http://www.mirror.co.uk/
news/world-news/amanda-todd-suicide-girls-mum-1379909
Profiles
257

Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence. (2004). On Target:
The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Act.
Retrieved May 27, 2014, from http://www.waveedfund
.org/sites/waveedfund.org/ﬁles/on_target.pdf
Canada, G. (2013, May 9). Our Failing Schools. Available at
http://www.ted.com/talks/geoffrey_canada_our_failing_schools
_enough_is_enough.html
Clark-Flory, T. (2010, April 8). Phoebe Prince’s Bullies Get
Bullied. Salon. Retrieved May 5, 2010, from http://www
.salon.com/life/broadsheet/2010/04/08/phoebe_prince_bullies
_get_bullied
CNN. (2006). Police: School Killer Told Wife He Molested
Family Members. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/amish-forgive-pray-and-mourn/
CNN. (2006). Fifth Girl Dies after Amish School Shooting.
Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www.cnn.com/2006/
US/10/02/amish.shooting/index.html?eref=sitesearch
CNN. (2000, May 16). Report: 12 Killed at Columbine in
First 16 Minutes. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://
archive.today/GptXZ
Collins, D. (2006, October 4). Amish Forgive, Pray and
Mourn. CBS News. Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/amish-forgive-pray-and-mourn/
Coloroso, B. (2004). The Bully, the Bullied, and the Bystander.
New York: HarperCollins.
Columbine High School Shootings. The Rocky Mountain News.
Retrieved December 14, 2008, from http://www.rocky
mountainnews.com/news/special-reports/columbine/
Eisler, R. (1988). The Chalice and the Blade: Our History, Our
Future. New York: HarperOne.
Eisler, R. (2000). Tomorrow’s Children. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Eisler, R. (n.d.). Riane Eisler Biography. Retrieved October 30,
2012, from http://www.rianeeisler.com/biography.htm
258
School Violence

Eggington, J. (1991). Day of Fury: The Story of the Tragic
Shootings that Forever Changed the Village of Winnetka. New
York: William Morrow and Co.
Fast, J. (2009). Ceremonial Violence: A Psychological Explanation
of School Shootings. Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press.
Fine, M., Weis, L., Pruitt, L., & and Burns, A. (2004). Off
White: Readings on Power, Privilege, and Resistance, 2nd ed.
New York: Routledge.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2007). Encyclopedia of Juvenile Violence.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Ford, B., & Siemaszko, C. (2013, October 25). Sandy Hook
Elementary School Razing Begins in Newtown, Conn. New
York Daily News. Retrieved October 28, 2013, from http://
www.nydailynews.com/news/national/sandy-hook-elementary
-school-destruction-begins-article-1.1496521
Gay, Lesbian & Straight Education Network (GLSEN). (n.d.).
http://www.glsen.org
Grenoble, R. (2012, October 10). Amanda Todd: Bullied
Canadian Teen Commits Suicide after Prolonged Battle
Online and in School. Hufﬁngton Post. Retrieved March 28,
2014, from http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2012/10/11/
amanda-todd-suicide-bullying_n_1959909.html
Gunderson, D. (2005, March 23). Who Was Jeff Weise?
Minnesota Public Radio. Retrieved October 22, 2013, from
http://news.minnesota.publicradio.org/features/2005/03/22
_ap_redlakesuspect/
Jhally, S. (Producer). (1999). Tough Guise: Violence, Media, and
the Crisis in Masculinity [Motion picture]. Media Education
Foundation.
Jhally, S. (Producer). (2003). Wrestling with Manhood: Boys,
Bullying, and Battering [Motion picture]. Media Education
Foundation.
Jhally, S. (Producer). (2007). Dreamworlds [Motion picture].
Media Education Foundation.
Profiles
259

Kaplan, J., Papajohn, G., & Zorn, E. (1991). Murder of
Innocence: The Tragic Life and Final Rampage of Laurie
Dann, the Schoolhouse Killer. New York: Warner Books.
Katz, J. (n.d.). http://www.jacksonkatz.com
Katz, J. (n.d.). Blog. Hufﬁngton Post. http://www.hufﬁngton
post.com/jackson-katz
Kennedy, H. (2010, March 29). Phoebe Prince, South Hadley
High School’s “New Girl,” Driven to Suicide by Teenage
Cyber Bullies. New York Daily News. Retrieved May 29,
2014 from http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/
phoebe-prince-south-hadley-high-school-new-girl-driven-suicide
-teenage-cyber-bullies-article-1.165911
Khadaroo, S. (2013, October 9). Adult Charged in
Steubenville Rape Case: Will Schools Get the Message?
Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved October 24, 2013, from
http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2013/1009/Adult
-charged-in-Steubenville-rape-case.-Will-schools-get-the-message
-video
The Killer at Thurston High [Documentary]. Frontline. Available
at http://video.pbs.org/video/2318711766/
Kivel, P. (n.d.). http://www.paulkivel.com
Kivel, P. (n.d.). Challenging Christian Hegemony Project.
http://www.christianhegemony.org
Kleinfeld, N., Rivera, R., & Kovaleski, S. (2013, March 28).
Newtown Killer’s Obsessions, in Chilling Detail. New York
Times. Retrieved October 25, 2013, from http://www
.nytimes.com/2013/03/29/nyregion/search-warrants-reveal
-items-seized-at-adam-lanzas-home.html?pagewanted%253
Dall&_r=0
Langman, P. (2008). Jefferson County Sheriff’s Ofﬁce Columbine
Documents Organized by Theme. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from
http://www.schoolshooters.info/jcso-columbine-documents.pdf
260
School Violence

Langman, P. (2009). Why Kids Hill: Inside the Minds of School
Shooters. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Leadership. (2014). Harlem Children’s Zone. Retrieved May 28,
2014, from http://hcz.org/about-us/leadership/geoffrey-canada/
Lieberman, J., & Sachs, B. (2008). School Shootings. New York:
Kensington Publishing Corp.
Magestro, S. (n.d.). The Warning Signs: Evan Ramsey—
Bethel, Alaska. Retrieved May 29, 2014, from http://www
.susanmagestro.com/susans-articles-of-interest/
McBride, R. (2007). After Shooting, Bethel Works to Prevent
Bullying, Peer Abuse. Retrieved January 2, 2009, from
http://www.ktuu.com.
Minnesota News Radio. (2005, March). What Happened at
Red Lake? Minnesota Public Radio. Retrieved October 22,
2013, from http://news.minnesota.publicradio.org/projects/
2005/03/redlake/
Muskal, M. (2013, June 14). Ohio Football Player, Convicted of
Rape, Gets Sex-Offender Status. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved
May 29, 2014, from http://articles.latimes.com/2013/jun/
14/nation/la-na-nn-steubenville-football-player-sex-offender
-20130614
National Public Radio. (2009, April 17). Survivors Recall 1927
Michigan School Massacre. http://www.npr.org/templates/
story/story.php?storyId=103186662
Nuwer, H. (2000). High School Hazing. New York: Franklin Watts.
Nuwer, H. (Ed.). (2004). The Hazing Reader. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Ollove, M. (2010, April 28). Bullying and Teen Suicide: How
Do We Adjust School Climate? Christian Science Monitor.
Retrieved May 28, 2014, from http://www.csmonitor.com/
USA/Society/2010/0428/Bullying-and-teen-suicide-How-do
-we-adjust-school-climate
Profiles
261

Parker-Pope, T. (2007, November 27). More Teens
Victimized by Cyber-Bullies. The New York Times. Retrieved
July 30. 2009, from http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/
11/27/more-teens-victimized-by-cyber-bullies/
Phillips, R. (2009, January 18). Purdy Recalled as Bigot and
“Sick, Sick Man.” Retrieved July 19, 2009, from http://
www.recordnet.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20090118/
A_NEWS/901170304/-1/A_SPECIAL0252
Raising Adam Lanza. (2013, February 19). PBS Frontline.
Available at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/raising
-adam-lanza/
Reinhold, R. (1989, January 19). After Shooting, Horror but
Few Answers. New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2009, from
http://www.nytimes.com/1989/01/19/us/after-shooting-horror
-but-few-answers.html?pagewanted=all
Reuters. (2009, January 15). Twenty Years since a Nightmare:
Stockton, CA Shooting of 35 Led to Strengthening of Gun
Laws. Retrieved July 19, 2009, from http://www.reuters
.com/article/pressRelease/idUS226787+15-Jan-2009
+PRN20090115
Ridberg, R. (Producer). (2004). Spin the Bottle: Sex, Lies, and
Alcohol [Motion picture]. Media Education Foundation.
Segal, K., Couwels, J., & Brumﬁeld, B. (2013, October 21).
Mother of Girl Accused of Bullying Florida Teen Arrested on
Unrelated Charges. CNN. Retrieved October 24, 2013, from
http://www.cnn.com/2013/10/17/justice/rebecca-sedwick
-bullying-death/index.html
Sieczkowski, C. (2012, October 16). Amanda Todd’s Alleged
Bully Named by Anonymous after Teen’s Tragic Suicide.
Hufﬁngton Post. Retrieved March 28, 2014, from http://
www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2012/10/16/amanda-todd-bully
-anonymous-suicide_n_1969792.html
StopBullying.gov. (n.d.). http://www.stopullying.gov
262
School Violence

Students Against Violence Everywhere (SAVE). (n.d.). http://
www.nationalsave.org
Webley, K. (2011, May 5). Teens Who Admitted to Bullying
Phoebe Prince Sentenced. Time. Retrieved October 24, 2013,
from http://newsfeed.time.com/2011/05/05/teens-who
-admitted-to-bullying-phoebe-prince-sentenced/
Profiles
263


5
Data and Documents
This chapter provides charts and graphs describing various ele-
ments of school violence. The ﬁrst chart shows trends in lethal
school violence, as measured by the School-Associated Violent
Deaths Survey. The remaining charts provide demographic
data regarding the scope and impact of school violence, as
measured by the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System
(YRBSS).
Additionally, the chapter provides primary source documents
relevant to proposed federal legislation. Items include the pro-
posed Sandy Hook Elementary School Violence Reduction Act
and the Safe Schools Improvement Act. Also included are the
texts of President Obama’s speech after the tragic massacre at
Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, and
Secretary of Education Arne Duncan’s 2010 speech at the
Bullying Prevention Summit.
Data
Figure 5.1 shows data from the School-Associated Violent Death
Study. As is clear from the chart, school-associated violent deaths
peaked in 2006 and have declined signiﬁcantly since.
265
Nicole Hockley, center, mother of Sandy Hook School shooting victim
Dylan Hockley, stands with thousands of others during a rally calling for
tougher gun laws at the Capitol in Hartford, Connecticut on February 14,
2013. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Figure 5.2 shows the percentage of high school students who
were threatened or injured with a weapon in the last year, as
measured by the YRBSS. These data show that ninth-grade
students continue to be at greatest risk for threats of or actual
weapon-related violence.
266
School Violence
Figure 5.1
Trends in school-associated violent deaths, 1992–2010.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, April). School-
Associated Violent Death Study, http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/youth
violence/schoolviolence/savd.html
Figure 5.2
Percentage of students in grades 9–12 who reported being threatened
or injured with a weapon on school property at least one time during the previous
12 months, by grade: Various years, 1993–2009.
Note: “On school property” was not deﬁned for survey respondents.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, YRBSS, various years, 1993–2009.

Figure 5.3, drawn from the Schools and Stafﬁng Survey,
shows teachers who work in city schools are more likely to be
threatened with injury or physically attacked by students.
Interestingly, the data show that elementary school teachers
are more likely to endure physical assaults than are teachers at
other levels.
The charts in Figure 5.4 document the percentage of 12- to
18 year-olds who were victimized in a variety of ways at school
between 1995 and 2009. The charts clearly show that all types
of school victimization decreased and that serious violent
victimization has always been rare.
Figure 5.5 describes the degree to which 12- to 18-year-old
students perceive gangs to be present at their schools. It is clear
from the data that gangs are far more present in urban schools.
Figure 5.6, derived from the School Crime Supplement to
the 2009 National Crime Victimization Survey, shows that
Data and Documents
267
Figure 5.3
Percentage of public and private school teachers who reported that
they were threatened with injury or that they were physically attacked by a student
from school during the previous 12 months, by locale and instructional level:
School year 2007–2008.
Note: Teachers who taught only prekindergarten students are excluded. Instructional
level divides teachers into elementary or secondary based on a combination of the
grades taught, main teaching assignment, and the structure of the teachers’ class(es).
Please see the glossary for a more detailed deﬁnition.
Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Schools and Stafﬁng Survey, “Public School Teacher Data File,” “Private School
Teacher Data File,” and “Bureau of Indian Affairs Teacher Data File,” 2007–2008.

268
School Violence
Figure 5.4
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported criminal victimization
at school during the previous six months, by type of victimization: Various years,
1995–2009.
1Serious violent victimization is also included in violent victimization.
Note: “Theft” includes attempted and completed purse-snatching, completed pickpock-
eting, and all attempted and completed thefts, excluding motor vehicle theft. Theft does
not include robbery, in which the threat or use of force is involved. “Serious violent
victimization” includes rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault. “Violent vic-
timization” includes serious violent crimes and simple assault. “Total victimizations”
includes violent crimes and theft. “At school” includes the school building, on school
property, on a school bus, and, from 2001 onward, going to and from school.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, various years, 1995–2009.

hate-related grafﬁti is more common than other bias-related
crime in both public and private schools.
Documenting what is likely the most common form of
school violence, Figure 5.7 shows the percentage of students
ages 12–18 who report being bullied in schools as well as the
forms of bullying they endured.
Interestingly, Figure 5.8 highlights the fact that girls are
more likely than boys to be victims of cyberbullying.
One of the most signiﬁcant effects of school-based violence is
that it deters youth from being involved in activities on school
grounds, as described in Figure 5.9.
According to Figure 5.10 codes of student conduct and visi-
tor sign-in procedures are the most common security measures
in schools.
Data and Documents
269
Figure 5.5
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported that gangs were
present at school during the school year, by urbanicity: 2007 and 2009.
1Refers to the Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) status of the respond-
ent’s household as deﬁned in 2000 by the U.S. Census Bureau. Categories include
“central city of an MSA (Urban),” “in MSA but not in central city (Suburban),”
and “not MSA (Rural).”
Note: All gangs, whether or not they are involved in violent or illegal activity, are
included. “At school” includes the school building, on school property, on a school
bus, or going to and from school.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2007 and 2009.

270
School Violence
Figure 5.6
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported being targets of hate-
related words and seeing hate-related grafﬁti at school during the school year, by
selected student and school characteristics: 2009.
Note: Race categories exclude persons of Hispanic ethnicity. “Other” includes
American Indian, Alaska Native, Paciﬁc Islander, and two or more races. “At school”
includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus, and going to and
from school. “Hate-related” refers to derogatory terms used by others in reference to
students’ personal characteristics.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2009.

Data and Documents
271
Figure 5.7
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported being bullied at
school during the school year, by selected bullying problems and sex: 2009.
Note: “At school” includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus,
or going to and from school. Bullying types do not sum to total because students
could have experienced more than one type of bullying.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2009.

272
School Violence
Figure 5.8
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported cyberbullying problems
anywhere during the school year, by selected bullying problems and sex: 2009.
‡Reporting standards not met. There are too few cases.
Note: “Cyberbullying” includes students who responded that another student posted hurt-
ful information about the respondent on the Internet; students who responded that
another student harassed the respondent via instant messaging; students who responded
that another student harassed the respondent via short message service (SMS) text messag-
ing; students who responded that another student harassed the respondent via e-mail; stu-
dents who responded that another student harassed the respondent while gaming; and
students who responded that they were excluded online. Cyberbullying types do not
sum to total because students could have experienced more than one type of cyberbullying.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2009.

Data and Documents
273
Figure 5.9
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported avoiding school activ-
ities or one or more places in school because of fear of attack or harm during the
school year: 2009.
Note: “Avoided school activities” includes avoiding any (extracurricular) activities,
skipping class, or staying home from school. Detail may not sum to totals due to
rounding and because students could report avoiding more than one school activity
and avoiding more than one place in school.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2009.

274
School Violence
Figure 5.10
Percentage of students ages 12–18 who reported selected security
measures at school: Various years, 1999–2009.
1Data for 1999 are not available.
Note: “At school” includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus,
and, from 2001 onward, going to and from school.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, various years, 1999–2009.

Documents
Sandy Hook Elementary School Violence Reduction Act
The proposed bill detailed below was ﬁled in direct response to the
school shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown,
Connecticut. The multifaceted proposal aims to address loopholes
in gun control legislation as well as to help train educational profes-
sionals to identify early warning signs of potential threats.
A BILL
To reduce violence and protect the citizens of the United States.
1.
Short title
This Act may be cited as the Sandy Hook Elementary School
Violence Reduction Act.
2.
Sense of the Senate
It is the sense of the Senate that Congress should—
(1)
support the efforts of the President of the United States to
reduce violence in the United States;
(2)
promote common-sense proposals for preventing gun violence;
(3)
provide law enforcement ofﬁcers with the tools necessary to
combat violent crime and protect communities, and protect
themselves;
(4)
ensure children can attend school free from the threat of
violence;
(5)
support States and local districts to ensure schools have the safe
and successful learning conditions in which all students can excel;
(6)
provide tools for identifying individuals that pose a threat to
themselves or others, so they can receive appropriate assistance;
Data and Documents
275

(7)
keep dangerous weapons out of the hands of criminals and
individuals who are not lawfully authorized to possess them;
(8)
promote information-sharing that will facilitate the early identi-
ﬁcation of threats to public safety;
(9)
mitigate the effects of violence by promoting preparedness;
(10)
provide training for educational professionals, health providers,
and others to recognize indicators of the potential for violent
behavior;
(11)
examine whether there is a connection between violent media
and violent behavior;
(12)
enable the collection, study, and publication of relevant
research; and
(13)
expand access to mental health services, with a focus on chil-
dren and young adults.
Source: S. 2: Sandy Hook Elementary School Violence
Reduction Act, 113th Congress, 2013–2015. January 22, 2013.
Safe Schools Improvement Act of 2013
The Safe Schools Improvement Act is intended to provide federal
guidance for states and districts in regards to keeping all youth,
regardless of gender, race, sexual orientation, and other factors, safe
in schools.
A BILL
To amend the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965 to address and take action to prevent bullying and harass-
ment of students.
276
School Violence

1.
Short title
This Act may be cited as the Safe Schools Improvement Act of
2013.
2.
Findings
Congress ﬁnds the following:
(1)
Bullying and harassment foster a climate of fear and disrespect
that can seriously impair the physical and psychological health
of its victims and create conditions that negatively affect learn-
ing, thereby undermining the ability of students to achieve
their full potential.
(2)
Bullying and harassment contribute to high dropout rates,
increased absenteeism, and academic underachievement.
(3)
Bullying and harassment include a range of behaviors that
negatively impact a student’s ability to learn and participate
in educational opportunities and activities that schools offer.
Such behaviors can include hitting or punching, name-
calling, intimidation through gestures or social exclusion,
and sending insulting or offensive messages through elec-
tronic communications, such as internet sites, e-mail, instant
messaging, mobile phones and messaging, telephone, or any
other means.
(4)
Schools with enumerated anti-bullying and harassment policies
have an increased level of reporting and teacher intervention in
incidents of bullying and harassment, thereby reducing the
overall frequency and number of such incidents.
(5)
Students have been particularly singled out for bullying and
harassment on the basis of their actual or perceived race, color,
national origin, sex, disability status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or religion, among other categories.
Data and Documents
277

(6)
Some young people experience a form of bullying called rela-
tional aggression or psychological bullying, which harms indi-
viduals by damaging, threatening, or manipulating their
relationships with their peers, or by injuring their feelings of
social acceptance.
(7)
Interventions to address bullying and harassment conduct to cre-
ate a positive and safe school climate, combined with evidence-
based discipline policies and practices, such as Positive Behavior
Interventions and Supports (PBIS) and restorative practices, can
minimize suspensions, expulsions, and other exclusionary disci-
pline policies to ensure that students are not pushed-out or
diverted to the juvenile justice system.
(8)
According to one poll, 85 percent of Americans strongly sup-
port or somewhat support a Federal law to require schools to
enforce speciﬁc rules to prevent bullying.
(9)
Students, parents, educators, and policymakers have come
together to call for leadership and action to address the national
crisis of bullying and harassment.
3.
Safe Schools improvement
(a)
In general
Title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965 (20 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.) is amended by adding at the
end the following:
D
Safe Schools improvement
4401.
Purpose
The purpose of this part is to address the problem of bullying
and harassment conduct of students in public elementary
schools and secondary schools.
278
School Violence

4402.
Anti-bullying policies
(a)
Bullying
In this part, the term bullying includes cyber-bullying through
electronic communications.
(b)
Policies
A State that receives a grant under this title shall require all local
educational agencies in the State to carry out the following:
(1)
Establish policies that prevent and prohibit conduct, including
bullying and harassment, that is sufﬁciently severe, persistent,
or pervasive—
(A)
to limit a student’s ability to participate in, or beneﬁt from, a pro-
gram or activity of a public school or local educational agency; or
(B)
to create a hostile or abusive educational environment, adversely
affecting a student’s education, at a program or activity of a public
school or local educational agency, including acts of verbal, non-
verbal, or physical aggression or intimidation.
(2)
The policies required under paragraph (1) shall include a
prohibition of bullying or harassment conduct based on—
(A)
a student’s actual or perceived race, color, national origin, sex,
disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, or religion;
(B)
the actual or perceived race, color, national origin, sex, disabil-
ity, sexual orientation, gender identity, or religion of a person
with whom a student associates or has associated; or
(C)
any other distinguishing characteristics that may be deﬁned by
the State or local educational agency, including being homeless
or the child or ward of a member of the Armed Forces.
Data and Documents
279

(3)
Provide—
(A)
annual notice to students, parents, and educational profes-
sionals describing the full range of prohibited conduct con-
tained in such local educational agency’s discipline policies; and
(B)
grievance procedures for students or parents to register com-
plaints regarding the prohibited conduct contained in such
local educational agency’s discipline policies, including—
(i)
the name of the local educational agency ofﬁcials who are desig-
nated as responsible for receiving such complaints; and
(ii)
timelines that the local educational agency will establish in the
resolution of such complaints.
(4)
Collect annual incidence and frequency of incidents data about
the conduct prohibited by the policies described in paragraph (1)
at the school building level that are accurate and complete and
publicly report such data at the school level and local educational
agency level. The local educational agency shall ensure that vic-
tims or persons responsible for such conduct are not identiﬁable.
(5)
Encourage positive and preventative approaches to school disci-
pline that minimize students’ removal from instruction and
ensure that students, including students described in paragraph
(2), are not subject to disproportionate punishment.
4403.
State reports
The chief executive ofﬁcer of a State that receives a grant under
this title, in cooperation with the State educational agency, shall
submit a biennial report to the Secretary—
(1)
on the information reported by local educational agencies in
the State pursuant to section 4402(b)(5); and
280
School Violence

(2)
describing the State’s plans for supporting local educational
agency efforts to address the conduct prohibited by the policies
described in section 4402(b)(1).
. . .
(b)
Free speech and expression laws
Nothing in this part shall be construed to alter legal standards
regarding, or affect the rights (including remedies and proce-
dures) available to individuals under, other Federal laws that
establish protections for freedom of speech or expression.
Source: H.R. 1199: Safe Schools Improvement Act of 2013,
113th Congress, 2013–2015.
Barack Obama’s Statement on the School Shooting
in Newtown, Connecticut
President Obama has been a vocal advocate of tightened gun
control legislation, as exempliﬁed in his emotional speech after the
Sandy Hook shooting.
THE PRESIDENT: This afternoon, I spoke with Governor
Malloy and FBI Director Mueller. I offered Governor Malloy
my condolences on behalf of the nation, and made it clear he
will have every single resource that he needs to investigate this
heinous crime, care for the victims, counsel their families.
We’ve endured too many of these tragedies in the past few
years. And each time I learn the news I react not as a President,
but as anybody else would—as a parent. And that was especially
true today. I know there’s not a parent in America who doesn’t
feel the same overwhelming grief that I do.
The majority of those who died today were children—
beautiful little kids between the ages of 5 and 10 years old.
They had their entire lives ahead of them—birthdays, gradua-
tions, weddings, kids of their own. Among the fallen were also
Data and Documents
281

teachers—men and women who devoted their lives to helping
our children fulﬁll their dreams.
So our hearts are broken today—for the parents and grand-
parents, sisters and brothers of these little children, and for
the families of the adults who were lost. Our hearts are broken
for the parents of the survivors as well, for as blessed as they are
to have their children home tonight, they know that their child-
ren’s innocence has been torn away from them too early, and
there are no words that will ease their pain.
As a country, we have been through this too many times.
Whether it’s an elementary school in Newtown, or a shopping
mall in Oregon, or a temple in Wisconsin, or a movie theater
in Aurora, or a street corner in Chicago—these neighborhoods
are our neighborhoods, and these children are our children.
And we’re going to have to come together and take meaningful
action to prevent more tragedies like this, regardless of the
politics.
This evening, Michelle and I will do what I know every
parent in America will do, which is hug our children a little
tighter and we’ll tell them that we love them, and we’ll remind
each other how deeply we love one another. But there are fam-
ilies in Connecticut who cannot do that tonight. And they need
all of us right now. In the hard days to come, that community
needs us to be at our best as Americans. And I will do every-
thing in my power as President to help.
Because while nothing can ﬁll the space of a lost child or
loved one, all of us can extend a hand to those in need—to
remind them that we are there for them, that we are praying
for them, that the love they felt for those they lost endures
not just in their memories but also in ours.
May God bless the memory of the victims and, in the words
of Scripture, heal the brokenhearted and bind up their wounds.
Source: The White House. Available at http://www.white
house.gov/the-press-ofﬁce/2012/12/14/statement-president
-school-shooting-newtown-ct
282
School Violence

The Myths about Bullying: Secretary Arne Duncan’s
Remarks at the Bullying Prevention Summit
The following is a speech presented by Secretary of Education Arne
Duncan at the 2010 Bullying Prevention Summit. In it, Duncan
aims to inspire educators, policy-makers, and service providers that
they play important roles in ending bullying. Duncan notes the
importance of school safety on students’ moral development as well
as on their academic success.
Thank you, Kevin, for that generous introduction.
This is an important day in so many respects. It is the very ﬁrst
federal summit on bullying. We have an extraordinary range of
NGOs, corporate leaders, state and local ofﬁcials on hand, as well
as the members of the Federal Partners in Bullying Prevention
Working Group.
This summit culminates months of unprecedented collabo-
ration and hard work across federal agencies.
We have not only joined forces but, more important, we are
committed to using this summit to launch a sustained commit-
ment to address and reduce bullying.
For all the promise of this summit, it is incumbent on every-
one in this room and every educator and school leader to ask:
What can we do to sustain that commitment to reduce bully-
ing? To answer that question, we should start with another
leading question that this summit itself raises. And that is:
Why have these agencies not come together for a federal sum-
mit on bullying before today?
The answers to that basic question are many. But they start,
and end, with the fact that the problem of bullying has been
shrouded in myth and misunderstanding for far too many years.
As educators, as state and local ofﬁcials—and yes, absolutely at
the federal level—we simply have not taken the problem of bully-
ing seriously enough. Too often, bullying gets shrugged off.
You have heard all the excuses. You have heard the lineup of
reasons to minimize the gravity of bullying and to dismiss the
potential of effective programs to reduce it. “What can you
Data and Documents
283

do,” people say, “bullying has been going on forever. Kids are
mean.” Or “she just made a bad joke.” “He didn’t mean to hurt
anyone.” “It was just a one-time thing.” “Bullying may be
wrong. But it really isn’t an educational issue.” At the heart of
this minimization of bullying, is a core belief that bullying is
an elusive concept that can’t really be deﬁned.
Every one of those myths and excuses I’ve just cited is ﬂat-
out wrong. Bullying is deﬁnable. It has a common deﬁnition,
and a legal deﬁnition in many states. Good prevention pro-
grams work to reduce bullying. And bullying is very much an
education priority that goes to the heart of school performance
and school culture.
The truth is that bullying is ultimately an issue of school
safety. Kevin Jennings often talks about the fact that school
safety is a much broader issue than the shootings and gang
violence that make the evening news.
Bullying is part of that continuum of school safety. It is trou-
bling in and of itself. But bullying is doubly dangerous because
if left unattended it can rapidly escalate into even more serious
violence and abuse. Just as you have gateway drugs, bullying is
gateway behavior. Too often it is the ﬁrst step down the road to
one of the tragic incidents of school violence we all have
watched in horror on the evening news.
As the CEO of the Chicago Public Schools for seven years,
I dealt every day with the issue of school safety—and it’s a sub-
ject that I am passionate about. We are simply not doing nearly
enough as a nation, or as school leaders, to keep children safe.
Keeping my students safe, not just in school, but in their com-
munities, was by far my toughest challenge. Our inability as
adults to secure the safety of innocent children was a failure that
haunts me every day.
For the record, let me state my basic, operating premise,
both in Chicago and Washington DC: No student should feel
unsafe in school. Take that as your starting point, and then it
becomes inescapable that school safety is both a moral issue,
and a practical one.
284
School Violence

The moral issue is plain. Every child is entitled to feel safe in
the classroom, in the hallways of school, and on the play-
ground. Children go to school to learn, and educational oppor-
tunity must be the great equalizer in America. No matter what
your race, sex, or zip code, every child is entitled to a quality
education and no child can get a quality education if they don’t
ﬁrst feel safe at school.
It is an absolute travesty of our educational system when stu-
dents fear for their safety at school, worry about being bullied,
or suffer discrimination and taunts because of their ethnicity, reli-
gion, sexual orientation, disability, or a host of other reasons.
The job of teachers and principals is to help students learn
and grow—and they can’t do that job in schools where safety
is not assured.
The practical import of school safety is just as plain as the moral
side of the equation. A school where children don’t feel safe is a
school where children struggle to learn. It is a school where kids
drop out, tune out, and get depressed. Not just violence but bully-
ing, verbal harassment, substance abuse, cyber-bullying, and dis-
ruptive classrooms all interfere with a student’s ability to learn.
I have to tell you—I have very little patience for the argu-
ments that “kids will be kids” and there is not much that
schools can do to make schools much safer. I hate the excuses,
and I hate the passivity.
I know that effective prevention programs have the power to
dramatically improve school environment and school safety.
The default position of schools, parents, and communities
should be that school violence, bullying, and harassment are
completely unacceptable.
The fact is that no school can be a great school until it is a
safe school ﬁrst. A positive school climate is foundational to
start academic achievement. That is one reason why in
Chicago we established school safety as a metric on our report
cards for every school, just as we did with academic metrics like
measuring the number of students who exceeded state stan-
dards in reading and math.
Data and Documents
285

What does a safe school look like? As all of you know, it is
obvious from the minute you walk in the door. A safe school
is one where students feel like they belong. The students feel
secure, valued, and are surrounded by adults that they trust.
Safe schools also cultivate a culture of respect and caring—
and have little tolerance for disruptiveness. At a safe school, stu-
dents don’t curse or threaten teachers. They don’t spend most
of their class time texting other students or tune out on their
iPods. Students don’t roam the hallways.
At safe schools, teachers are primarily engaged in helping stu-
dents learn and grow—and students, empowered by feeling
safe, are more likely to feel free to explore, and even fail as they
learn. At safe schools, all the building’s staff pitches in to create
a culture of respect—from the teachers and principals to the
receptionists, lunch room attendants and custodial staff.
Now, I’ve just talked about what a safe school feels like. But
I have to tell you that I have been in many schools that don’t
feel safe. And this is a tragedy we can avoid.
This isn’t just a big-city problem. Bullying is epidemic in
urban, suburban, and rural schools. The statistics are frankly
staggering. In 2007, nearly one out of three students in middle
school and high school reported that they had been bullied at
school during the school year. That means that 8.2 million
students a year are suffering at the hands of bullies in school.
The most common form of bullying is being made fun of or
being the subject of mean-spirited rumors. But more violent
forms of bullying are common, too.
One out of nine secondary school students, or 2.8 million
students, said they have been pushed, shoved, tripped, or spit
on during the last school year.
Another one-and-a-half million students said they were
threatened with harm, and one million students reported they
had their property destroyed during the school year.
Cyber-bullying, as you know, is a new and especially insidi-
ous form of bullying. In 2007, more than 900,000 secondary
students reported being cyber-bullied. Cyber-bullying allows
286
School Violence

bullies to do their work at a distance, outside of schools, in
front of a broad audience and sometimes under the protection
of anonymity. New technologies provide bullies with new tools
to hurt students in old ways.
We have all been told that bullying has been going on in
schools forever.
But the truth is that it doesn’t have to keep going on forever.
Bullying is not something that school leaders, teachers, or
parents can shrug off. Children are never born as bullies—it is
a learned behavior. And if they are learning to bully from their
peers, or parents, they can learn to behave differently, too.
Bullying is not the occasional bad joke or the child who gets
a bit too aggressive.
Bullying is deliberate. The bully wants to hurt someone.
Bullying is usually repeated, with the bully targeting the same
victim again and again—and the bully takes advantage of an
imbalance of power by picking victims that he or she perceives
are vulnerable.
Bullying can occur through physical, verbal, or relational
means where bullies try to destroy their victims’ relationships
through vicious rumors and social exclusion.
Bullying, in other words, is not just a “boy” behavior or a
“mean girl” behavior. It is a problem that often has an impact
on children who are neither bully nor victims.
It often occurs in groups. It shapes the way that everyone—
bullies,
victims,
and
bystanders
alike—view
a
school’s
environment.
Ultimately, bullying is really a form of physical and mental
abuse. If you don’t stop it when it starts, it usually spreads.
A powerful testament to the fact that bullying is not part of
the natural order of things is that most people can remember,
even decades later, the feeling of being bullied or bullying
another individual. Or they may feel haunted by the memory
of standing by while a friend or classmate was bullied.
The fact that those memories are seared into our brains
suggests that bullying leaves long-lasting scars on children.
Data and Documents
287

Why does bullying have such long-lasting effects? Why are
the victims of bullying more likely to drop out of school and
get depressed? Because bullying is insidious—it tends to get
enveloped in a code of silence and shame. It is underreported
because children are embarrassed or don’t recognize behavior
as bullying. Maybe they fear retaliation, don’t have an adult
they trust to talk to about what is going on, or they think noth-
ing can be done to stop the bullying.
The situation is much the same with cyber-bullying and “sext-
ing.” Adolescents suffer from what you might call the Las Vegas
syndrome—they feel that what happens online stays online.
Now, one of the antidotes to this culture of silence is
sunshine—teachers, parents, and the peers of students should
be encouraged to expose and confront bullying behavior. We
want children to learn to be assertive and stand up for them-
selves. But we do not want to encourage them to respond to
bullying with violence and force themselves.
Instead, schools should be cultivating a culture of trust and
accountability. A culture of trust empowers students to tell
teachers and other adults when bullying is occurring. It teaches
students that should have a sense of responsibility for the well-
being of other students. In schools that just say no to bullying,
students who report other students are not tattle-tales, but act-
ing responsibly, keeping students safe, and holding bullies
accountable for their mistreatment.
When 11-year old Ziainey Stokes got tired of being bullied,
she wrote President Obama a letter. And the president wrote
her back that her letter “demonstrates a desire to change the
culture of your classroom as well as your community.” I believe
Ziainey is here today. And I’d ask you all to give her a round of
applause.
Schools, in short, can have an enormous impact in reducing
bullying. Ideally, all schools should have a code of conduct that
sends a message to the students, staff, and community that it
has high expectations for them and little tolerance for cruelty
and disrespect.
288
School Violence

But a code of conduct can’t just be punitive. Schools must
teach and reward positive behavior as well.
Part of setting clear expectations is being consistent.
Principals, teachers, and parents send messages to children
about how they should behave all the time, even when they
are unaware of it. All the hallmarks of great schools—student
support, a sense of connection to caring adults, clarity of
mission, inclusiveness, parental involvement—are also the hall-
marks of safe schools.
Now I want to switch gears for a moment, to talk about a
related school safety concern, the problem of disruptive and
disorderly classrooms. For many parents and teachers, disrup-
tive and disorderly schools are a serious problem because so lit-
tle learning can take place in classrooms that are in a state of
perpetual chaos.
The department’s latest survey data indicate one in three
teachers nationwide think that student misbehavior interferes
with their teaching—and roughly the same proportion of
teachers think tardiness and class cutting is impeding learning
in their classrooms.
Interestingly, students themselves think disruptive class-
rooms are an even bigger problem. In one recent national sur-
vey of 10,000 tenth graders in more than 650 high schools,
three fourths of tenth graders said that other students often
disrupted their classes.
In urban schools, the problem is ever worse. Twelve
percent of secondary school teachers—nearly one of every eight
instructors—reports that they were threatened with physical
injury the previous year by a school student. Five percent of
urban teachers say they were actually attacked by a student
the previous year.
It is absolutely inexcusable that so many teachers are
attacked, threatened, or face persistently chaotic classrooms.
And just as you can usually tell a safe school when you walk
in the door, you can tell an unsafe one, too. Just as good prac-
tice echoes through a school, so does bad practice.
Data and Documents
289

The famous broken windows theory suggests that the root
problem in schools is not so much shootings on the playground
but the message that disorder and disruption sends to the
students—it’s the broken window that goes unﬁxed that signals
to students no one is really in control here and taking care of
things.
That’s just one more reason schools and districts need to do a
better job of setting clear expectations, minimizing classroom
disruption, and disciplining students who prevent other stu-
dents from learning.
School leadership matters tremendously in school safety.
That encouraging fact—that what we do in schools matters—
is still true even when violence occurs away from school. Does
anyone here know the most dangerous hour of the day for ado-
lescents in the United States, the time when violent teen crime
peaks? It is 3:00 p.m., not midnight.
That is one reason why I so strongly support an extended
school day. Keeping kids off the street and having them do
something productive, either at school or with community-
based organizations, is critical to adolescent safety. It doesn’t
have to be expensive. Community organizations have an
important role to play—to work with schools to provide stu-
dents with more opportunities. You don’t have to have teachers
staying to all hours at the school.
What we did in Chicago was open schools to great providers to
run after-school programs. We brought in the Boys Club and the
Girls Club, after-school tutoring programs, the YMCA, college-
readiness programs, counseling initiatives, adult education provid-
ers, and other non-proﬁts and community-based organizations.
We made the schools centers of the community where ado-
lescents could continue to participate after the school day was
over. To steal a phrase from Robert DeNiro, it’s all about creat-
ing a circle of trust. And if you build it they will come. Teens
are looking for structure and positive activities to engage in.
I encourage you to take away three messages when you leave
here today.
290
School Violence

First, our department has a renewed commitment to enforc-
ing the law, including civil rights law that applies to racial, sex-
ual, or disability harassment.
Second, we are committed to collecting better data to docu-
ment the contours of bullying more fully, and to formulate
solutions.
And ﬁnally, we will be providing more dollars to places with
the biggest problems.
Outside of this room, I am not sure that many educators and
parents realize that bullying can constitute racial, sexual, or dis-
ability harassment prohibited by the civil rights laws enforced
by our department’s Ofﬁce for Civil Rights.
OCR will be issuing policy guidance to schools explaining the
relationship between bullying and discriminatory harassment,
and it will be outlining schools’ civil rights responsibilities to
protect students from discriminatory harassment. As part of the
enhanced civil rights data collection that OCR has instituted,
we will also be gathering new and better data on harassment.
We understand that stopping the plague of bullying will take
time. It takes sustained commitment. It takes resources. And,
I promise you, we are in this ﬁght for the long haul.
The department has stepped up its support for HHS’s Stop
Bullying Now campaign, managed by Captain Stephanie
Bryn, helping fund the expansion of the campaign to include
a focus on elementary school children.
Bullying starts young—and we need to reach students when
they are young with the message that bullying is not OK.
Within our department, we’re backing that stepped-up com-
mitment with increased resources.
Both our budget and our blueprint for reforming the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act calls for a 12 percent
increase in funding for programs that ensure students feel safe,
healthy, and supported in school.
The Successful, Safe, and Healthy Students program in our
Blueprint will enable states and districts to measure school
safety, including bullying, at the building level. It will provide
Data and Documents
291

federal funds for interventions in those schools with the greatest
needs.
And just as important, we will be getting information about
school safety not just from incident data but also from survey-
ing the real experts on school climate—our students them-
selves. For the ﬁrst time, students will be given a formal role
in shaping our efforts to make schools safer. Even before reau-
thorization, we’re piloting this program through our new Safe
and Supportive School program. Historically, why have we
been so reluctant to ask students how they felt about their
schools.
As important as all of these steps are, the department cannot
do this alone. We have gathered so many partners here today
because it will take sustained commitment and resources from
all of us to meet this challenge.
The Department of Education stands ready to assume a role
of leadership. But we need your help. This challenge requires all
the assets of the federal government. I am so pleased to have so
many partner agencies here today, and to have great leaders
such as Surgeon General Benjamin and Associate Attorney
General Perrelli speaking later in the program.
Preventing bullying will take leadership from state and local
authorities, like the ofﬁcials you will hear tomorrow from the
state of Iowa and the district of Sullivan County, Tennessee.
The Sullivan County school system is a beautiful illustration
of how a district used a school climate survey to empower
students by giving them a voice, formulate solutions, and
help develop buy-in from all members of the community for re-
form. Not surprisingly, academic achievement is up in Sullivan
County and disciplinary issues are down.
To keep making progress in the battle to reduce bullying, we
need the support and involvement of corporate, civic, and non-
proﬁt leadership. And this will take action by individual stu-
dents, teachers, school staff, parents, and concerned citizens.
We all have to play a part.
292
School Violence

Let me close by saying that as part of your leadership, we
need your ideas. This summit seeks to collect the most knowl-
edgeable experts on the issue of bullying in America in one
place, at one time, to get the best thinking about what needs
to be done to bring this plague to an end.
We will never have all the answers in the U.S. Department of
Education. But I believe that, with the collective knowledge
and wisdom of those assembled here today, we can identify,
and highlight, the most effective solutions.
I ask you to be daring, to think imaginatively, to challenge us
and yourselves, and to listen carefully over the next day and a
half. To break the cycle of bullying, we must be bold. The sta-
tus quo cannot stand. With your courage, with your imagina-
tion, with your leadership, let this summit be a turning point
where America ﬁnally tackles the problem of bullying with
tenacity—and leaves the myths of bullying behind, once and
for all.
Thank you.
Source: U.S. Department of Education. Available at http://
www.ed.gov/news/speeches/myths-about-bullying-secretary-arne
-duncans-remarks-bullying-prevention-summit
Data and Documents
293


6
Resources for Further
Research
The resources in this chapter are recommended for educators,
policy-makers, and parents seeking to learn more about school
violence. The list of books has been categorized for easy search-
ing. Also included is a list of scholarly journals that often
feature articles about various facets of school violence as well
as speciﬁc citations for recent (2010 to 2014) peer-reviewed
articles. Further, the chapter includes a description of recom-
mended websites as well as ﬁlms and documentaries about
school violence.
Books
School Violence
Balfour, S. (Ed.) (2005). How Can School Violence Be
Prevented? Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven.
Bellini, J. (2001). Child’s Prey. New York: Pinnacle.
Benbenishty, R., & Astor, R. (2005). School Violence in
Context: Culture, Neighborhood, Family, School, and Gender.
New York: Oxford University Press.
295
Derek Brown, right, a former Vice Lords gang chief, speaks to a student
who had a problem during the school day at William Penn Elementary
School in Chicago. Brown donates his time for an after-school boxing pro-
gram that gives young kids an option to being on the streets and getting in
trouble. (AP Photo/Hadi Mizban)

Blanchard, K. (2003). How to Talk to Your Kids about School
Violence. New York: Onomatopoeia.
Brezina, C. (2000). Deadly School and Campus Violence. New
York: Rosen Publishing.
Carr, P., & Porﬁlio, B. (Eds.). (2012). Educating for Peace in a
Time of “Permanent War.” New York: Routledge.
Casella, R. (2001). At Zero Tolerance: Punishment, Prevention,
and School Violence. New York: Peter Lang.
Casella, R. (2001). “Being Down”: Challenging Violence in
Urban Schools. New York: Teachers College.
Chalmers, P. (2009). Inside the Mind of a Teen Killer.
Nashville, TX: Thomas Nelson.
Cornell, D. (2006). School Violence: Fears versus Facts. Lawrence
Erlbaum & Associates.
DiGuilio, R. (2001). Educate, Medicate, or Litigate? What
Teachers, Parents, and Administrators Must Do about Student
Behavior. New York: Corwin Books.
Fearnley, F. (2004). I Wrote on All Four Walls: Teens Speak Out
on Violence. Toronto, Canada: Annick.
Finley, L. (2012). Building a Better World: Creative Peace
Education for the 21st Century. Charlotte, NC: Information
Age.
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2011). Encyclopedia of School Crime and
Violence. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Fisher, B., & Sloan, J. (2007). Campus Crime: Legal, Social, and
Policy Perspectives. Charles C. Thomas.
Gerler, E. (2004). Handbook of School Violence. Binghamton,
NY: Haworth.
Hunnicutt, S. (Ed.). (2006). School Shootings. Farmington
Hills, MI: Greenhaven.
King, M. (2014). School Violence: Crisis and Opportunity.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
296
School Violence

Kohn, A. (2005). Shooters: Myths and Realities of America’s Gun
Cultures. New York: Oxford University Press.
Langman, P. (2009). Why Kids Kill: Inside the Minds of School
Shooters. Palgrave MacMillan.
Lawrence, R. (2006). School Crime and Juvenile Justice, 2nd ed.
New York: Oxford.
Lieberman, J. (2006). The Shooting Game: The Making of
School Shooters. Santa Ana, CA: Seven Locks Press.
Moore, M., Petrie, C., Braga, A., & McLaughlin, B. (Eds.).
(2003).
Deadly
Lessons:
Understanding
Lethal
School
Violence. Atlanta, GA: National Academies Press.
Newman, K., Fox, C., Roth, W., & Mehta, J. (2005). Rampage:
The Social Roots of School Shootings. New York: Basic
Orr, T. (2001). Violence in Our Schools: Halls of Hope, Halls of
Fear. New York: Franklin Watts.
Paludi, M. (2008). Understanding and Preventing Campus
Violence. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Sexton-Radek,
K.
(2005).
Violence
in
Schools:
Issues,
Consequences, and Expressions. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Stevenson, L. (2003). From the Inside Out: A look into Teen
Violence and Rebellion. Authorhouse.
Thomas,
R.
(2006).
Violence
in
America’s
Schools:
Understanding, Prevention, and Responses. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Turk, W. (Ed.). (2004). School Crime and Policing. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Webber, J. (2003). Failure to Hold: The Politics of School
Violence. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Weill, S. (2002). We’re Not Monsters: Teens Speak Out about
Teens in Trouble. New York: HarperTempest.
Winslade, J., & Williams, M. (2011). Safe and Peaceful Schools:
Addressing Conﬂict and Eliminating Violence. New York: Corwin.
Resources for Further Research
297

Bullying
Bazelon, E. (2013). Sticks and Stones: Defeating the Culture of
Bullying and Rediscovering the Power of Empathy. New York:
Random House.
Cianciotti, J., & Cahill, S. (2012). LGBT Youth in America’s
Schools. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Coloroso, B. (2003). The Bully, the Bullied, and the Bystander:
From Preschool to High School—How Parents and Teachers
Can
Help
Break
the
Cycle
of
Violence.
New
York:
HarperCollins.
DeWitt, P. (2012). Dignity for All: Safeguarding LGBT
Students. New York: Corwin.
Englander, E. (2013). Bullying and CyberBullying: What Every
Educator Needs to Know. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Fried, S. (2003). Bullies, Targets, and Witnesses: Helping
Children Break the Pain Chain. New York: M. Evans.
Goodstein, A. (2007). Totally Wired: What Teens Are Really
Doing Online. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Hinduja, S. (2008). Bullying beyond the Schoolyard: Preventing
and Responding to CyberBullying. New York: Corwin.
Katz, A. (2012). Cyberbullying and E-Safety: What Educators
and Other Professionals Need to Know. Philadelphia, PA:
Jessica Kingsley Publications.
Kelsey, C. (2007). MySpace: Helping Your Teen Survive Online
Adolescence. New York: Marlowe.
Klein, J. (2013). Bully Society: School Shootings and the Crisis
of Bullying in America’s Schools. Albany, NY: New York
University Press.
Kowalski, R., Limber, S., & Agatston, P. (2007). Cyber
Bullying: Bullying in the Digital Age. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell.
298
School Violence

Olweus, D. (2004). Bullying at School: What We Know and
What We Can Do. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Patchin, J., & Hinduja. S. (2013). Words that Wound: Delete
Cyberbullying and Make Kindness Go Viral. Minneapolis,
MS: Free Spirit Publishing.
Phillips, R., Linney, J., & Pack, C. (2008). Safe School
Ambassadors: Harnessing Student Power to Stop Bullying and
Violence. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Porter, S. (2013). Bully Nation: Why America’s Approach to
Childhood Aggression Is Bad for Everyone. St. Paul, MN:
Paragon House.
Savage, D,, & Miller, T. (2012). It Gets Better: Coming Out,
Overcoming Bullying, and Creating a Life Worth Living.
New York: Plume Press.
Simmons, R. (2002). Odd Girl Out: The Hidden Culture of
Aggression in Girls. New York: Harcourt.
Twemlow, S., & Sacco, C. (2011). Preventing Bullying and School
Violence. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publications.
Weisman, R. (2002). Queen Bees and Wannabees: Helping Your
Daughter Survive Cliques, Gossip, Boyfriends, and Other
Realities of Adolescence. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Willard, N. (2007). Cyberbullying and Cyberthreats: Responding
to the Challenge of Online Social Aggression. Champaign, IL:
Research Press.
Speciﬁc Cases
Bellini, J. (2001). Child’s Prey. New York: Pinnacle.
Bernstein, A. (2009). Bath Massacre: America’s First School
Bombing. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Berry, H. (2013). Massacre in Newtown: Adam Lanza’s Dark
Passage to Madness. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform.
Resources for Further Research
299

Cullen, D. (2009). Columbine. New York: Twelve.
Eggington, J. (1991). Day of Fury: The Story of the Tragic
Shootings that Forever Changed the Village of Winnetka. New
York: William Morrow and Co.
Gibson, G. (1999). Gone Boy: A Walkabout. New York: Anchor.
Greenhill, J. (2006). Someone Has to Die Tonight. New York:
Pinnacle.
Kaplan, J., G. Papajohn, & E. Zorn. (1991). Murder of
Innocence: The Tragic Life and Final Rampage of Laurie
Dann, the Schoolhouse Killer. New York: Warner Books.
Merritt, R., & Brown, B. (2002). No Easy Answers: The Truth
behind Death at Columbine. Lantern.
Hazing
Guynn, K. L., & Aquila, F. D. (2005). Hazing in High Schools:
Causes and Consequences. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa
Educational Foundation.
Holmes, R. (2013). How to Eradicate Hazing. Authorhouse
Self-Publishing.
Johnson, J., & Holman, M. (Eds.). (2004). Making the Team:
The Inside World of Sport Initiations and Hazing. Toronto:
Canadian Scholar’s Press.
Lipkins, S. (2006). Preventing Hazing: How Parents, Teachers,
and Coaches Can Stop the Violence, Harassment, and
Humiliation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nuwer, H. (2000). High School Hazing: When Rites Become
Wrongs. London: Franklin Watts.
Nuwer, H. (Ed.). (2004). The Hazing Reader. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Civil Liberties
Dupre, A. (2009). Speaking Up: The Unintended Costs of Free
Speech in Schools. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
300
School Violence

Finley, L., & Finley, P. (2005). Piss Off! How Drug Testing and
Other Privacy Violations Are Alienating America’s Youth.
Monroe, ME: Common Courage.
Gender
Brown, L. M. (2003). Girlﬁghting: Betrayal and Rejection among
Girls. New York: New York University Press.
Chesney-Lind, M. (2007). Beyond Bad Girls: Gender, Violence,
and Hype. London: Routledge.
Duncan, N. (1999). Sexual Bullying: Gender Conﬂict and Pupil
Culture in Secondary Schools. London: Routledge.
Ferguson, A. (2001). Bad Boys: Public Schools in the Making of Black
Masculinity. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Garbarino, J. (2007). See Jane Hit: Why Girls Are Growing More
Violent and What We Can Do about It. New York: Penguin.
Hinshaw, S. (2009). The Triple Bind: Saving Our Teenage Girls
from Today’s Pressures. New York; Random House.
Jones, N. (2009). Between Good and Ghetto: African American
Girls and Inner City Violence. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Katz, J. (2006). The Macho Paradox: Why Some Men Hurt Women
and How All Men Can Help. Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks.
Kellner, D. (2008). Guys and Guns Amok: Domestic Terrorism
and School Shootings from the Oklahoma City Bombing to the
Virginia Tech Massacre. New York: Paradigm.
Kimmel, M. (2009). Guyland: The Perilous World Where Boys
Become Men. New York: Parker.
Kindlon, D. (2007). Alpha Girls: Understanding the New
American Girl and How She Is Changing the World. New
York: Rodale.
Meyer, E. (2009). Gender, Bullying, and Harassment: Strategies
to End Sexism and Homophobia in Schools. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Resources for Further Research
301

Prothrow-Stith, D., & Spivak, H. (2007). Sugar and Spice and
No Longer Nice: How We Can Stop Girls’ Violence. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dating and Sexual Violence
Finley, L. (Ed.). (2013). Encyclopedia of Domestic Violence and
Abuse. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Mignon, S., Larson, C., & Holmes, W. (2002). Family Abuse:
Consequences, Theories, and Responses. Boston, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.
Miles, A. (2005). Ending Violence in Teen Dating Relationships.
Minneapolis, MN: Augsburg Books.
Murray, J. (2007). But He Never Hit me. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse.
Suicide, Eating Disorders, and Self-Harm
Bornstein, K., & Quin, S. (2006). Hello Cruel World: 1010
Alternatives to Suicide for Teens, Freaks and Other Outlaws.
New York: Seven Stories Press.
Martin, C. (2007). Perfect Girls, Starving Daughters: The
Frightening New Normalcy of Hating Your Body. Glencoe,
IL: Free Press.
Mendelsohn, S. (2007). It’s Not about the Weight: Attacking
Eating Disorders from the Inside Out. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse.
Turner, V. (2002). Secret Scars: Uncovering and Understanding
the Addiction of Self-Injury. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
Theories and Explanations
Fast, J. (2008). Ceremonial Violence: A Psychological Explanation
of School Shootings. New York: Overlook Press.
Garbarino, J. (2000). Lost Boys: Why Our Sons Turn Violent and
How We Can Save Them. New York: Anchor.
302
School Violence

Katch, J. (2001). Under Dead Man’s Skin: Discovering the
Meaning of Children’s Violent Play. Boston: Beacon.
Kohn, A. (2005). Shooters: Myths and Realities of America’s Gun
Culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Langman, P. (2009). Why Kids Kill: Inside the Minds of School
Shooters. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Schier, H. (2008). The Causes of School Violence. Minneapolis,
MN: Abdo Publishing.
Responses
Aronson, E. (2000). Nobody Left to Hate: Teaching Compassion
after Columbine. New York: W. H. Freeman & Co.
Bodine, R., Crawford, D., & Schrumpf, F. (2003). Creating the
Peaceable School: A Comprehensive Program for Teaching
Conﬂict Resolution. Champaign, IL: Research Press Publishers.
Cohen, R. (2005). Students Resolving Conﬂict. New York: Good
Year Books.
Cornell, D., & Sheras, P. (2006). Guidelines for Responding to
Student Threats of Violence. New York: Sopris West.
Cremin, H. (2007). Peer Mediation: Citizenship and Social
Inclusion in Action. Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press.
DiGuilio, R. (2000). Educate, Medicate, or Litigate? What
Teachers, Parents, and Administrators Must Do about Student
Behavior. New York: Corwin.
Eisler, R., & Miller, R. (Eds.). (2004). Educating for a Culture
of Peace. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Fox, J., & Burstein, H. (2010). Violence and Security on
Campus: From Preschool to College. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Galtung, J., & Udayakumar, S. (Eds.). (2011). More Than a
Curriculum: Education for Peace and Development. Charlotte,
NC: Information Age.
Resources for Further Research
303

Harber, C. (2004). Schooling as Violence: How Schools Harm
Pupils and Societies. New York: RoutledgeFarmer.
Harris, I., & Morrison, M. (2003). Peace Education, 2nd ed.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Hemphill, B., & LeBanc, B. (Eds.). (2010). Enough Is Enough:
A Student Affairs Perspective on Preparedness and Response to a
Campus Shooting. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Hiber, M. (2008). Should Juveniles Be Tried as Adults? New
York: Greenhaven.
Hinduja, S., & Patchin, J. (2012). School Climate 2.0:
Preventing Cyberbullying and Sexting One Classroom at a
Time. New York: Corwin.
Holtham, J. (2009). Taking Restorative Justice to Schools: A
Doorway to Discipline. Tulsa, OK: Homestead Press.
Lin, J., Brantmeier, E., & Bruhn, C. (2008). Transforming
Education for Peace. Charlotte, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
Monaghan, T., & Torres, R. (Eds.). (2009). Schools under
Surveillance: Cultures
of Control
in
Public
Education.
Rutgers, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Muschert, G., Henry, S., Bracy, N., & Pequero, A. (2013).
Responding to School Violence: Confronting the Columbine
Effect. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Reardon, B. (1988). Comprehensive Peace Education: Educating
for Global Responsibility. New York: Teachers College Press.
Saltman, K., & Gabbard, D. (Eds.). (2011). Education as
Enforcement: The Militarization and Corporatization of
Schools. New York: Routledge.
Shapiro, S. (2010). Educating Youth for a World beyond
Violence: A Pedagogy for Peace. New York: Palgrave.
Smith, M., Monteverde, M., & Lily, H. (2012). School Violence
and Conﬂict Resolution. New York: Rosen Publishing Group.
304
School Violence

Thornton, T., Craft, C., Dahlberg, L., Lynch, B., & Baer, K.
(2002). Best Practices of Youth Violence Prevention: A
Sourcebook for Community Action. Atlanta, GA: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control.
Trump, K. (2000). Classroom Killers? Hallway Hostages? How
Schools Can Prevent and Manage School Crises. New York:
Corwin.
Winslade, J., & Williams, M. (2011). Safe and Peaceful Schools:
Addressing Conﬂict and Eliminating Violence. New York, NY:
Corwin.
Media
Coleman, L. (2004). The Copycat Effect: How the Media and
Popular
Culture
Trigger
the
Mayhem
in
Tomorrow’s
Headlines. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Jones, G. (2003). Killing Monsters: Why Children Need Fantasy,
Super Heroes, and Make-Believe Violence. New York: Basic.
Potter, W. (2002). The 11 Myths of Media Violence. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rafter, N. (2000). Shots in the Mirror. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ravitch, D., & Vilerette, J. (2003). Kid Stuff: Marketing Sex
and Violence to America’s Children. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Strasburger, V. (2002). Children, Adolescents and the Media.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Recommended Journals
Contemporary Issues in Criminology & Criminal Justice
Contemporary Justice Review
Resources for Further Research
305

Crime, Law, and Social Change
Criminal Justice Policy Review
Criminal Justice Studies: A Critical Journal of Crime, Law and
Society
Criminology & Public Policy
Critical Criminology
Critical Issues in Justice and Politics
Educational Researcher
International Journal of Violence in Schools
Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice
Journal for Crime, Conﬂict and the Media
Journal of Educational Administration and Policy Studies
Journal of Gang Research
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Journal of Knowledge and Best Practices in Juvenile Justice and
Psychology
Journal of Law and Conﬂict Resolution
Journal of Peace Education
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
Journal of School Safety
Journal of School Violence
Journal of Youth and Adolescence
Juvenile Justice Journal
Social Problems
Victims and Offenders
Violence and Victims
Youth & Society
Youth Violence & Juvenile Justice
306
School Violence

Journal Articles, 2010–Present
Ackers, M. (2012). Cyberbullying: Through the Eyes of
Children and Young People. Educational Psychology in
Practice, 28(2), 141–57.
Agnich, L., & Miyazaki, Y. (2013). A Multi-level Cross-
National Analysis of Direct and Indirect Forms of School
Violence. Journal of School Violence, 12(4), 319–339.
Avor, R., Guerra, N., and Van Acker, R. (2010). How Can We
Improve School Safety Research? Educational Researcher, 39
(1), 69–78.
Biag, M. (2014). Perceived School Safety: Visual Narratives
from the Middle Schools. Journal of School Violence, 13(2),
165–87.
Borum, R., Cornell, D., Modzeleski, W., & Jimerson, S. (2010).
What Can Be Done about School Shootings? A Review of the
Evidence. Educational Researcher, 39(1), 27–37.
Brady, N. (2011). Student Perceptions of High-Security
School Environments. Youth & Society, 43(1), 365–95.
Chin, J., Dowdy, E., Jimerson, S., & Rime, J. (2012).
Alternatives
to
Suspensions:
Rationale
and
Recom-
mendations. Journal of School Violence, 11(2), 156–73.
Daniels, J., Volungis, A., Pshenshny, E., Gandhi, P., Winkler,
A., Cramer, D., & Bradley, M. (2010). A Qualitative
Investigation of Averted School Shooting Rampages. The
Counseling Psychologist, 38(1), 69–95.
De Venanzi, A. (2012). School Shootings in the USA: Popular
Culture as Risk, Teen Marginality, and Violence against
Peers. Crime, Media, Culture, 8(3), 261–78.
Dishman, A., Lewis, J., & Pepper, M. (2011). “A Student
[Came] Down and Said ‘There’s a . . . Guy in the . . .
English Classroom with a Gun’ ”: Recovering from Violent
Resources for Further Research
307

Invasion. Journal of Cases in Educational Leadership, 14(1),
48–58.
Dittirch, C., Beran, T., Mishna, F., Hetherington, R., &
Sharif, S. (2013). Do Children Who Bully Their Peers Also
Play Violent Video Games? A Canadian National Study.
Journal of School Violence, 12(4), 297–318.
Estrada, J., Gilreath, T., Astor, R., & Benbenishty, R. (2014).
Gang Membership, School Violence, and the Mediating
Effects of Risk and Protective Behaviors in California
Schools. Journal of School Violence, 13(2), 228–51.
Lund, E., Blake, J., Ewing, H., & Banks, C. (2012). School
Counselors’ and School Psychologists’ Bullying Prevention
and Intervention Strategies: A Look into Real-World
Practices. Journal of School Violence, 11(3), 246–65.
Mark, L., & Ratliffe, K. (2011). Cyber Worlds: New
Playgrounds
for
Bullying.
Computers
in
the
Schools:
Interdisciplinary Journal of Practice, Theory, and Applied
Research, 28(2), 92–116.
Maume, M., Kim-Godwin, Y., & Clements, C. (2010). Racial
Tensions and School Crime. Journal of Contemporary
Criminal Justice, 26(3), 339–58.
Menard, S., & Grotpeter, J. (2014). Evaluation of Bully-
Prooﬁng Your School Antibullying Prevention. Journal of
School Violence, 13(2), 188–209.
Nurmi, J. (2013). Expressions and Projections of Evil in Mass
Violence. Deviant Behavior, 34(11), 859–874.
Obermann,
M.
(2011).
Moral
Disengagement
among
Bystanders to School Bullying. Journal of School Violence,
10(3), 239–57.
Raby, R. (2010). “Tank tops Are OK but I Don’t Want to See
Her Thong”: Girls’ Engagements with Secondary School
Dress Codes. Youth and Society, 41, 333–56.
308
School Violence

Rose, C., Monda-Amaya, L., & Espelage, D. (2011). Bullying
Perpetration and Victimization in Special Education: A
Review of the Literature. Remedial and Special Education,
32(2), 114–30.
Sanchez, J., Yoxsimer, A., & Hill, G. (2012). Uniforms in the
Middle School: Student Opinions, Discipline Data, and
School Police Data. Journal of School Violence, 11(4), 343–56.
Waasdorp, T., Pas, E., O’Brennan, L., & Bradshaw, C. (2011).
A Multilevel Perspective on the Climate of Bullying:
Discrepancies among Students, School Staff, and Parents.
Journal of School Violence, 10(2), 115–32.
Welch, K., & Payne, A. (2010). Racial Threat and Punitive
School Discipline. Social Problems, 57(1), 25–48.
Wilken, I., & Van Aardt, A. (2012). School Uniforms:
Tradition, Beneﬁt or Predicament? Education as Change, 16
(9), 159–84.
Wylie, L., Gibson, C., Brank, E., Findacaro, M., Smith, S.,
Brown, V., & Miller, S. (2010). Assessing School and
Student Predictors of Weapons Reporting. Youth Violence
and Juvenile Justice, 8(4), 351–72.
Zaykoswki, H., & Gunter. W. (2012). Youth Victimization:
School
Climate
or
Deviant
Lifestyles?
Journal
of
Interpersonal Violence, 27(3), 431–52.
Websites and Organizations
Advocates for Youth (www.advocatesforyouth.org):
Helps youth make good choice regarding reproductive
and sexual health.
American Academy of Pediatrics (www.aap.org):
Recommendations for safe and healthy children and
youth.
Resources for Further Research
309

American Civil Liberties Union (www.aclu.org):
Civil rights watchdog, often involved in cases related to
students’ rights.
Amnesty International (www.amnesty.org):
Human rights watchdog with information relevant to
school violence, youth activism, and teaching human rights.
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence (www.bradycenter
.org):
Devoted to informing the public and lobbying for greater
control of handguns.
Break the Cycle (www.breakthecycle.org):
National organization devoted to providing information
and resources related to dating violence and healthy
relationships.
Bully Free (www.bullyfree.com):
Resources for ending bullying.
Bully Police USA (www.bullypolice.org/):
Provides details about school violence and a detailed
description of state laws to address bullying.
Center for Effective Discipline (www.stophitting.com):
Advocates for an end of corporal punishment. Provides
statistics and reports.
Center for Media Literacy (www.medialit.org):
Research and information related to critical analysis of
media.
Center for Partnership Studies (www.partnershipway.org):
Sociological and historical information about creating
partnership-based schools.
310
School Violence

Center for the Prevention of School Violence (http://test
.ncdjjdp.org/cpsv/resource_room.html):
Provides information, statistics, and links related to school
violence.
Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence (www
.colorado.edu/cspv):
Disseminates research and reports on school violence.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention School Violence
Resources (www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/youthviolence/school
violence/index.html):
Resources for preventing and responding to school
violence.
Coalition for Safe and Effective Schools (http://safeand
effectiveschools.com/welcome.asp):
Nonproﬁt organization devoted to promoting safe,
supportive, and exemplary learning climates in schools.
Conﬂict Resolution Education Center (http://creducation.org):
Offers extensive resources related to teaching conﬂict
resolution skills, including lesson plans, videos, articles,
role plays, and more.
The Cool Spot (www.thecoolspot.gov/):
The Young Teen’s Place for Info on Alcohol and Resisting
Peer Pressure.
Defending Childhood (www.justice.gov/defendingchildhood/):
Initiative started by Attorney General Eric Holder to pro-
vide supports for early education and families in need as a
means of preventing violence.
Do Something (www.dosomething.org):
Information, project ideas, and grant money for young
people seeking to make their world better.
Resources for Further Research
311

Free Child (www.freechild.org):
Provides tools and training to young people and adults so
that youth can help make social change.
Gay, Lesbian, & Straight Education Network (GLSEN) (www
.glsen.org):
Advocacy group for LGBT students with a particular
focus on bullying.
Hamilton Fish Institute (www.hamﬁsh.org/):
Rigorous academic work devoted to safe and healthy
children.
The Humanity Project (www.thehumanityproject.com):
This nonproﬁt “passionately believes society can improve
—if individuals understand why they beneﬁt from mov-
ing beyond a purely self-centered life. We offer practical,
psychology based ways for both kids and grownups to
act not for ‘me’ alone but rather for ‘us.’ ”
Ignitus Worldwide (http://www.ignitusworldwide.org/) Student
-led groups help prevent crime and bullying.
Inside Hazing (www.insidehazing.com/):
Statistics, stories, and resources about hazing at all levels.
iSafe (www.isafe.org):
Provider of Internet safety education.
It Gets Better Project (www.itgetsbetter.org):
Emphasizes how to support LGBT youth.
Mentors in Violence Prevention (www.mvpstrategies.net/):
Programs designed to help athletes and others as bystand-
ers to crime and violence.
312
School Violence

National Center for Victims of Crime Dating Violence
Resource
Center
(www.victimsofcrime.org/help-for-crime
-victims/get-help-bulletins-for-crime-victims/bulletins-for-teens/
dating-violence):
Statistics, warning signs, and additional resources related
to dating violence.
National Crime Prevention Council (www.ncpc.org):
Addresses the prevention of all forms of crime
National Peace Academy Peace, Peacebuilding and Peace-
Learning Guides (http://nationalpeaceacademy.us):
Peace education curricula for use with children and youth.
National School Safety Center (www.schoolsafety.us):
Provides resources to schools on how to stay safe and how
to respond to crises.
National Youth Violence Prevention Resource Center (http://
vetoviolence.cdc.gov/basics-overview.html):
Information on a variety of types of school and campus
violence.
Ophelia Project (www.opheliaproject.org/):
Resources and ideas for addressing girl-on-girl bullying
and other issues relevant to girls.
The Oregon Social Learning Center (www.oslc.org):
Multidisciplinary center that promotes the scientiﬁc
understanding of children’s health and well-being.
Pacer Center Kids Against Bullying (www.pacerkidsagainst
bullying.org/#/home):
Features videos, games, and kid-friendly information
about bullying.
Resources for Further Research
313

PBS Frontline: “The Killer at Thurston High” (www.pbs.org/
wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/kinkel/):
Informative video and resources on Kip Kinkel.
Peace and Justice Studies Association (www.peacejusticestudies
.org):
Provides resources, training, and consultation on peace-
making, peacebuilding, and peace education.
Prevention Institute (www.preventioninstitute.org):
Provides online workshops related to a number of topics.
Rethinking Schools (www.rethinkingschools.org):
Critically examines how and what is taught and offers lesson
ideas for teaching peace, social justice, and human rights.
Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program, U.S. Department of
Education (www.ed.gov/ofﬁces/OESE/SDFS):
This government organization provides resources, statistics,
support, and funding to many of the other publicly run
organizations that are focusing on ending school violence.
Stomp Out Bullying (www.stompoutbullying.org):
Antibullying and anticyberbullying organization for kids
and teens.
Stop Bullying (www.stopbullying.gov):
Managed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, this website provides deﬁnitions and information
about risk and protective factors, as well as ideas and best
practices for responding to and preventing bullying.
Stop Bullying Now! (www.stopbullyingnow.com):
Information, resources, and links related to preventing
and responding to bullying.
314
School Violence

Stop Cyberbullying (www.stopcyberbullying.org):
Devoted to providing information about cyberbullying
and its effects.
Stop Hazing (www.stophazing.org):
Statistics, stories, and resources about hazing at all levels.
Street Law (www.streetlaw.org):
Resource for materials on crime and violence, especially
for classroom educators.
Students Against Violence Everywhere (www.nationalsave
.org):
The emphasis is on students as key to preventing school
violence. Their goals are crime prevention, conﬂict man-
agement, and service projects.
Teachers Without Borders Peace Education (www.teachers
withoutborders.org):
Detailed peace education curriculum and professional
development resources for educators.
Teaching Tolerance (www.tolerance.org):
Articles and lesson plans on a variety of topics related to
civil liberties, human rights, and social justice.
TED Talks (www.ted.com and http://ed.ted.com):
Amazing compilation of short videos by experts in all
ﬁelds. TED Ed shows educators how to use these tools
and offers ways to contribute lessons.
Teens Against Bullying (www.pacerteensagainstbullying.org/#/
home):
Information and personal stories directed at inspiring
teens to get involved to stop bullying.
Resources for Further Research
315

United States Institute of Peace (www.buildingpeace.org):
Toolkits and training manuals for peace educators at all
levels.
Violence Policy Center (www.vpc.org):
Performs research, investigation, analysis, and advocacy
related to making the United States safer.
Working Against Violence Everywhere (www.waveamerica.com):
Implements awareness campaigns based on the principles
of leadership, resolve, respect, and responsibility.
Yes Magazine (www.yesmagazine.org):
Teacher materials include lesson plans, ideas, student
competitions, visual aids and more.
Zinn Education Project (www.zinnedproject.org):
In honor of historian and educator Howard Zinn, site
features a compilation of lesson plans and teaching ideas
related to civil rights and equality.
Films
American Yearbook (2004):
Should bullying victims take revenge? This ﬁlm grapples
with the choices faced by victims of school bullying.
April Showers (2009):
Writer/director Andrew Robinson, a Columbine sur-
vivor, shows how students coped with the aftermath of
Columbine and the loss of their friends.
Bang Bang, You’re Dead (2002):
Students bully Trevor, that is, until he calls in a phony
bomb threat with a working bomb. After that, everyone
but a group of outcasts is afraid of him, and Trevor takes
316
School Violence

the blame for anything that goes wrong at the school. One
caring drama teacher is Trevor’s only salvation.
Basketball Diaries (1995):
The ﬁlm adaptation of Jim Carroll’s descent into drug
addiction. Jim is a great basketball player, but little else
in his life is great. It is only through drugs that he manages
to escape the harsh reality of his life. Depicts a dream
sequence in which Jim (played by Leonardo DiCaprio)
goes on a shooting rampage in his school.
Blackboard Jungle (1955):
Classic ﬁlm starring Sidney Poitier that shows an urban
school rife with verbal and physical violence. Spawned
numerous remakes.
Bowling for Columbine (2002):
Award-winning documentary by ﬁlmmaker Michael
Moore addresses the culture of violence in the United
States. Attempts to more deeply understand what moti-
vated the Columbine shooters by looking at gun control,
media, governmental violence, welfare policy, and many
other factors. Includes interviews with the creators of
South Park, Charlton Heston, and Marilyn Manson.
Bully (2001):
Not overtly about schools, Bully depicts what happens
when a victim tires of being bullied and seeks revenge.
He and a group of friends suffer the repercussions of their
naive actions.
Cry for Help (2009):
PBS documentary examining teenage mental illness, sui-
cide, and how to help. Can be viewed online at http://
www.pbs.org/wnet/cryforhelp/
Resources for Further Research
317

CyberBully (2011):
ABC Family dramatic portrayal of cyberbullying and its
consequences.
Dangerous Minds (1995):
Award-winning ﬁlm documenting the lives of urban
youth and how one teacher, an ex-marine, can help.
Starring Michellle Pfeiffer.
Dead Poets Society (1989):
Set in an elite boarding school, the ﬁlm depicts the ten-
sion students face to succeed and how one dedicated and
creative teacher can help them explore their true passions.
Detention: The Siege at Johnson High (1997):
Starring Rick Schroeder, Freddy Prince Jr., Rodney
Dangerﬁeld, and Henry Winkler; largely depicts the
school hostage situation perpetrated by Eric Houston at
Lindhurst High School in 1992.
Duck! The Carbine High Massacre (2000):
First ﬁlm released after Columbine massacre, a black com-
edy showing the problems with moral panics and con-
spiracy theories.
Elephant (2003):
Award-winning ﬁlm from writer/director Gus Van Sant
based on the Columbine shootings. Documents the lead-
up to a school massacre by seemingly “normal” students.
Freedom Writers (2007):
Starring Hilary Swank; tells the true story of a Long
Beach, California, high school teacher who helps her at-
risk students develop skills and empathy.
318
School Violence

Hidden Rage (2008):
Documents the traumatic effects of school bullying. The
website www.hiddenrage.com provides resources for
discussing school violence.
High School High (1996):
A satire that mixes parts of Dangerous Minds and parts of
Stand and Deliver. Shows how a caring teacher can change
a student’s life.
The Interruptors (2011):
PBS Frontline documentary focusing on community and
youth-led efforts to stop gang activity.
The Killer at Thurston High:
PBS Frontline episode that tells the story of school shooter
Kip Kinkel.
The website http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/
pages/frontline/shows/kinkel/ provides more information
about the case and other school shooters.
Lean on Me (1989):
Morgan Freeman stars as Joe Clark, the principal of a dan-
gerous urban school in which test scores are so bad it is close
to being shut down. Shows the power of expectations.
Light It Up (1999):
Starring musician Usher and actress Rosario Dawson, Light
it Up tells the story of a group of urban students who stand
up for their right to be educated and treated fairly. After a
school police ofﬁcer mistreats one of them, the students take
over the school and demand a quality education.
Mean Creek (2004):
A bullied teen and his friends lure the bully into a boat
trip and seek revenge. Shows what can happen when stu-
dents believe revenge is the answer.
Resources for Further Research
319

O (2001):
A modern-day retelling of Shakespeare’s Othello, the ﬁlm
is set in a high school. “O,” played by Mekhi Phifer, is
the star of the team and the only African American stu-
dent at the school. He is love with Desi (Julia Stiles), the
dean’s daughter. Jealous teammate Hugo (Josh Hartnett)
is addicted to steroids. He initiates the problems that
explode into major atrocities.
One Eight Seven (1997):
Starring Samuel L. Jackson, the ﬁlm shows how high
school teachers deal with gang violence.
The Path to Violence (2013):
Tells the story of schools that thwarted attacks and high-
lights how schools can prevent violence.
School Ties (1992):
A cast of stars (Brendan Fraser, Matt Damon, Chris
O’Donnell) shows the problems with elite schools, includ-
ing elitism, privilege, cheating, and anti-Semitism. When
working-class newcomer David Greene takes over the
quarterback position at an exclusive prep school, the
animosity hits a boiling point.
Stand and Deliver (1988):
True story of tough and demanding teacher Jaime
Escalante, who shows urban high school students in a vio-
lence and gang-infested school that it is OK to succeed.
Teachers (1984):
A
so-called
“day-in-the-life”
ﬁlm,
Teachers
depicts
troubled students and how their teachers deal with them,
both good and bad.
320
School Violence

Tomorrow’s Children (2001):
Documentary featuring the work of historian Riane Eisler.
Shows how schools have been modeled on domination
and hierarchy and the promise of a different model.
Tough Guise (1999):
Documentary by Media Education Foundation that
discusses how gender roles contribute to many forms of
violent behavior today.
Tough Guise, II (2013):
Updated documentary about the problems with stereo-
typical gender roles.
Varsity Blues (1999):
Shows how football in small-town Texas is king. The
team is everything and can get away with anything.
Athletes drink illegally, use performance-enhancing drugs,
and cheat.
Wrestling with Manhood (2003):
Media Education Foundation documentary showing how
big-time wrestling reinforces bullying behavior.
Zero Day (2003):
A ﬁctional depiction of the Columbine massacre. Shows
the planning stages, including how the student acquired
the weapons. Acclaimed by journalist and author Dave
Cullen as a realistic depiction.
Resources for Further Research
321


7
Chronology
Starting with the ﬁrst widely discussed incident of school vio-
lence in 1927, this timeline includes high-proﬁle school shoot-
ings and bullycides as well as the dates for important speeches,
legislation, and court decisions.
• May 18, 1927: School board member Andrew Kehoe, 55,
kills his wife and sets ﬁre to his farm buildings. Bombs he
had planted over the course of months explode at Bath
Consolidated School, killing 45 and injuring 58.
• August 1, 1966: Charles Whitman, 25, shoots and kills 14
and wounds 32 others, mostly from an observation tower
at the University of Texas at Austin.
• February 8, 1968: Policemen kill three and wound 27
unarmed South Carolina State University students who were
protesting the segregation of a local bowling alley.
• May 4, 1970: Ohio National Guard ﬁres 67 rounds in just
13 seconds, killing four unarmed Kent State University
students who were protesting the expansion of the Vietnam
War into Cambodia.
323
Children from the Boys and Girls Club raise their hands to show their com-
mitment to the Team Up to Stop Bullying campaign run by Sears stores in
2013. (John Konstantaras/AP Images for Sears)

• May 14/15, 1970: Police shoot and kill two Jackson State
College students who were protesting the Vietnam War.
Twelve others were wounded.
• May 15, 1974: Three members of the Democratic Front for
the Liberation of Palestine shoot and kill 22 Israeli high
school students in Ma’alot, Israel.
• December 30, 1974: Anthony Barbaro, 18, sets off home-
made bombs and ﬁrearms at school in Olean, New York.
He ﬁres at janitors and responding ﬁreﬁghters, then com-
mits suicide while awaiting trial.
• January 22, 1975: Supreme Court determines in Goss v.
Lopez that students have due process rights in school disci-
plinary hearings.
• May 28, 1975: Michael Slobodian, 16, kills a classmate and
an English teacher and wounds 13 at Brampton Centennial
Secondary School in Ontario, Canada. Slobodian commits
suicide in a school bathroom.
• October 21, 1975: Robert Poulin, 18, shoots and kills one
and wounds ﬁve others, then commits suicide at St. Pius X
High School in Ottawa, Canada.
• July 12, 1976: Custodian Edward Charles Allaway, 37,
kills two and wounds seven in the library basement at
California State University–Fullerton. He is committed to
the California state mental hospital system.
• May 19, 1978: Honors student John Christian, 13, shoots
and kills his teacher in Austin, Texas.
• October 15, 1978: Robin Robinson, 13, was paddled by
school administrators after a disagreement with another
student. He returns to the school and shoots the principal
in Lanett, Alabama.
• January 29, 1979: Brenda Spencer, 16, shoots and kills one
principal and one janitor and wounds nine students and
adults in San Carlos, California. She uses a sniper riﬂe she
had received for Christmas.
324
School Violence

• March 19, 1982: Patrick Lazotte kills one and wounds two
at Valley High School in Las Vegas, Nevada. Lazotte had
been bullied for 12 years.
• January 20, 1983: David F. Lawler, a freshman, kills one
student when he opens ﬁre in a study hall classroom at
Parkway South Junior High School in St. Louis. Lawler
committed suicide.
• January 15, 1985: Supreme Court determines in New Jersey
v. T.L.O that school ofﬁcials can search students based on
reasonable suspicion.
• January 21, 1985: James Alan Kearby, 14, kills his principal
and three other students who were bullying him at his junior
high in Goddard, Kansas.
• March 2, 1987: Twelve-year-old Nathan Ferris kills the boy
who had picked on him and then kills himself at a Missouri
school.
• February 11, 1988: Jason Harless and Jason McCoy use
stolen guns to kill Principal Richard Allen and wound two
others at Pinellas Park High School in Pinellas Park, Florida.
• May 20, 1988: Laurie Dann, 30, attempts to poison family
and friends and then kills one boy and wounds ﬁve other
students at an elementary school in Winnetka, Illinois. She
then takes a family hostage and shoots another man before
killing herself.
• September 30, 1988: James William Wilson Jr., 19, shoots
and kills one student and wounds 14 elementary school
students and a teacher with a .22 caliber pistol in Greenwood,
South Carolina.
• December 16, 1988: Nicholas Elliott, 16, kills one teacher
and wounds another in Virginia Beach, Virginia.
• December 6, 1989: Marc Lepine, 25, orders all the men to
leave a classroom at the University of Montreal School of
Engineering, then kills nine women. Lepine kills ﬁve more
outside the classroom, then himself.
Chronology
325

• September 27, 1990: Curtis Collins shoots one student at El
Dorado High School in Las Vegas, Nevada.
• November 1, 1991: Gang Lu, 28, shoots and kills four fac-
ulty members and one student at the University of Iowa.
Another student is wounded before Lu commits suicide.
• May 1, 1992: Eric Houston, 20, shoots and kills four
students and wounds 10 at his former high school in
Olivehurst, California.
• August 24, 1992: Dr. Valery I. Frabricant kills four col-
leagues
and
wounds
a
staff
member
at
Concordia
University in Montreal, Quebec.
• November 20, 1992: Joseph White, 15, shoots another stu-
dent at Tilden High School in Chicago, Illinois. The shoot-
ing is gang-related.
• December 14, 1992: Wayne Lo, 18, kills one student and
one professor and wounds four others at Simon’s Rock
College of Bard in Massachusetts before surrendering to
the police.
• January 18, 1993: Gary Scott Pennington, 19, holds a
teacher and a custodian hostage at his high school in
Grayson, Kentucky.
• February 22, 1993: Robert Heard, 15, shoots a student who
had transferred to Reseda High School in California to ﬂee
gang violence.
• March 18, 1993: Edward Gillom, 15, kills one and wounds
another student at Harlem High School in Harlem, Georgia.
He claims to have been bullied.
• March 25, 1993: Lawanda Jackson, 19, shoots and kills her
ex-boyfriend at Sumner High School in St. Louis, Missouri.
• March 26, 1993: Five students get into a ﬁght over the pre-
vious night’s track meet at Lamar High School in Bryan,
Texas. One student is stabbed to death.
326
School Violence

• April 12, 1993: Karter Reed, 16, stabs and kills one student
who he thought was someone else at Dartmouth High
School in Dartmouth, Massachusetts.
• April 14, 1993: Max Martinez, 17, kills one student who had
insulted his girlfriend at Nimitz High School in Irving, Texas.
• May 15, 1993: Eric Schmitt, 42, takes 21 students and their
teacher hostage at Commandant Charcto Nursery School in
Neuilly-sur-Seine, France.
• December 1, 1993: Leonard McDowell, 21, shoots and kills
an associate principal who had suspended him from school at
Wauwatosa West High School in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
McDowell had entered the building in violation of a restraining
order sought by a teacher with whom he was obsessed.
• April 4, 1994: Flemming Nielsen, 35, shoots and kills two
and wounds two others at Aarhus University in Denmark.
• April 12, 1994: James Osmanson, 10, shoots and kills a
classmate on the playground at Margaret Leary Elementary
School in Butte, Montana. Osmanson was aiming at
another boy who had been bullying him for years.
• May 26, 1994: Clay Shrout, 17, kills his parents and two
younger sisters, then takes a class hostage at his high school.
Assistant Principal Steve Sorrell convinces Shrout to give up
his gun before anyone else is hurt.
• November 7, 1994: Keith Ledeger, 37, a former student,
kills a custodian and wounds three others at Wickliffe
Middle School in Wickliffe, Ohio.
• January 26, 1995: Supreme Court rules in Vernonia School
District v. Acton that drug testing students who seek to par-
ticipate in extracurricular sports is constitutional.
• October 12, 1995: Suspended student Toby Sincino, 16,
kills three people with a .32 caliber revolver in Blackville,
South Carolina.
Chronology
327

• November 15, 1995: Jamie Rouse, 17, kills a teacher and
student and wounds another teacher at Richland High
School in Lynnville, Tennessee.
• February 2, 1996: Barry Loukaitis, 14, opens ﬁre on a junior
high school algebra class, killing two students and one
teacher and wounding another student in Moses Lake,
Washington.
• March 13, 1996: Thomas Hamilton kills 16 children and
one teacher and wounds 10 others at Dunblane Primary
School in Scotland.
• March 25, 1996: Anthony Gene Rutherford, 18; Jonathon
Dean Moore, 15; and Joseph Stanley Burris, 15, kill a stu-
dent they believe planned to tell about their plot to attack
the school in Patterson, Missouri.
• August 15, 1996: Frederick Martin Davidson, a 36-year-old
graduate student, shoots and kills three professors at San
Diego State University.
• September 17, 1996: Jillian Robbins, 19, kills one student
and wounds another at Pennsylvania State University.
• February 19, 1997: Evan Ramsey, 16, kills one student and
the school principal and wounds two others with a shotgun
he uses in the high school commons room in Bethel, Alaska.
• March 30, 1997: Mohammad Ahman al-Nazari, 48, shoots
and kills six and wounds 12 with an illegally obtained assault
riﬂe at Tala’I Private School in Sanaa, Yemen.
• October 1, 1997: Luke Woodham, 16, kills his own
mother, then shoots two students and wounds seven at his
high school in Pearl, Mississippi.
• December 1, 1997: Michael Carneal, 14, kills three students
and wounds ﬁve who were involved in a prayer circle at his
high school in West Paducah, Kentucky.
• December 15, 1997: Joseph “Colt” Todd, 14, shoots two
students he said humiliated him in Stamps, Arkansas.
328
School Violence

• March 9, 1998: Jeffrey Lance Pennick II, 18, kills one stu-
dent and wounds two at Central Avenue Elementary
School in Summit, Washington.
• March 24, 1998: Mitchell Johnson, 13, and Andrew
Golden, 11, kill one teacher and four students and wound
10 others when they shoot at their school from the nearby
woods in Jonesboro, Arkansas.
• April 24, 1998: Andrew Wurst, 14, kills one teacher and
wounds one teacher and two students at a school dance for
Parker Middle School in Edinboro, Pennsylvania.
• May 21, 1998: Kip Kinkel, 15, kills both his parents, then
two students, and wounds 23 when he opens ﬁre on his high
school cafeteria in Springﬁeld, Oregon.
• June 15, 1998: Quinshawn Booker, 14, shoots one teacher
and wounds a guidance counselor in the hallway of his high
school in Richmond, Virginia.
• April 20, 1999: Eric Harris, 18, and Dylan Klebold, 17,
shoot and kill 14 students, one teacher, and themselves at
Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado. Twenty-
three students and teachers are wounded in the attack.
• April 28, 1999: Todd Cameron Smith, 14, shoots and
kills one student and wounds another in what is believed
to be a Columbine “copycat” at W.R. Myers High School
in Taber, Alberta, Canada.
• May 20, 1999: Thomas “T.J.” Solomon, 15, wounds six
students with a .22 caliber riﬂes at his high school in
Conyers, Georgia.
• November 19, 1999: Victor Cordova, 12, kills one student
with a .22 caliber handgun in the lobby of his school in
Deming, New Mexico.
• December 6, 1999: Seth Trickey, 13, wounds four students
when he shoots them with a 9 mm semi-automatic gun at
his middle school in Fort Gibson, Oklahoma.
Chronology
329

• February 29, 2000: Dedrick Owens, 6, ﬁnds a loaded
gun at his uncle’s house and brings it to school, shooting
6-year-old Kayla Rolland at Buell Elementary School in
Flint, Michigan.
• March 16, 2000: Nathaniel Brazill, 13, kills his teacher with
a .25 caliber semi-automatic pistol on the last day of classes
in Lake Worth, Florida.
• March 5, 2001: Charles Andrew “Andy” Williams, 15, kills
two students in the high school bathroom in Santee,
California.
• March 7, 2001: Elizabeth Catherine Bush, 14, shoots and
wounds a female student in the high school cafeteria in
Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
• March 22, 2001: Jason Hoffman, 18, kills four students and
two teachers at his high school in El Cajon, California.
• May 7, 2001: Jason Pritchard, 33, cuts and stabs four
elementary
school
students
on
their
playground
in
Anchorage, Alaska.
• June 8, 2001: Mamoru Takuma fatally stabs 8 and injures
13 at Ikeda Elementary School in Osaka, Japan.
• Chris Buschbacher, 17, takes two students and one teacher
from his high school hostage in Caro, Michigan. He releases
all of them, then commits suicide.
• December 5, 2001: Corey Ramos, 17, stabs and kills his
principal in Springﬁeld, Massachusetts.
• January 16, 2002: Peter Odighizuwa, 43, a former student,
shoots and kills three and wounds three others at
Appalachian School of Law in Grundy, Virginia.
• April 29, 2002: Dragoslav Petkovic, 17, shoots and kills one
teacher and wounds another before committing suicide at
his high school in Vlasenica, Bosnia-Herzegovina.
• March 2, 2002: Mike Placencia, 14, stabs a student who
made a racist remark in Cashmere, Washington.
330
School Violence

• April 26, 2002: Robert Steinhauser, 19, kills 13 teachers,
two students, and one police ofﬁcer at Johann Gutenberg
Secondary School in Erfurt, Germany. Steinhauser commits
suicide.
• April 29, 2002: Dragoslav Petkovic, 17, shoots and kills a
teacher and wounds another before he commits suicide in
Vlasenica, Bosnia-Herzegovina.
• October 28, 2002: Robert Flores Jr., 41, kills three female nurs-
ing professors and then himself at the University of Arizona.
• June 27, 2002: Supreme Court rules in Board of Ed. of
Pottawatomie Schools v. Earls that drug testing students
seeking to participate in any extracurricular activity is
constitutional.
• April 14, 2003: Steven Williams and James Tate kill one
student at John McDonogh High School in New Orleans,
Louisiana.
• April 24, 2003: James Sheets, 14, shoots and kills his
middle school principal and then himself in Red Lion,
Pennsylvania.
• May 9, 2003: Biswanath Halder, a former student, kills one
student and wounds a professor and a student at Case
Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio.
• September 24, 2003: Jason McLaughlin, 15, shoots and kills
two students at Rocori High School in Cold Spring, Minnesota.
• September 1, 2004: A group of Muslim pro-Chechen rebels
take more than 1,200 schoolchildren and adults hostage in
Beslan, North Ossetia-Alania. After a three-day standoff,
Russian security forces storm the building. A series of explo-
sions followed by a ﬁre and gunﬁre exchanges result in the
death of at least 334 hostages, including 186 children.
• March 21, 2005: Jeff Weise, 16, kills his grandfather and
grandfather’s girlfriend before shooting and killing ﬁve stu-
dents, a teacher, a security guard, and then himself at his
high school on Red Lake Indian Reservation in Minnesota.
Chronology
331

• November 8, 2005: Kenny Bartley, 15, kills Assistant
Principal Ken Bruce and wounds two other administrators
at his high school in Jacksboro, Tennessee.
• August 24, 2006: Christopher Williams, 27, shoots and kills
his ex-girlfriend’s mother. He then attempts to ﬁnd his ex-
girlfriend at the school where she taught. When he cannot,
Williams kills another teacher and wounds another. He
attempts suicide but is instead captured.
• September 13, 2006: Kimveer Gill, 25, shoots 20 at
Dawson College in Montreal, Canada. One victim dies on
the spot. Gill commits suicide after being shot in the arm
by a police ofﬁcer.
• September 27, 2006: Duane Morrison, 53, takes six girls
hostage for hours, molesting them before shooting and kill-
ing one girl and then himself at Platte Canyon High
School in Bailey, Colorado.
• September 29, 2006: Eric Hainstock, 15, shoots and kills his
principal in Cazenovia, Wisconsin.
• October 2, 2006: Charles Roberts, 32, ties up and then
kills ﬁve girls at an Amish school in Nickel Mines,
Pennsylvania. Five others are injured before Roberts kills
himself.
• November 20, 2006: Sebastian Bosse, 18, shoots ﬁve people
at his former high school in Emsdetten, Germany. Police
commandos ﬁnd Bosse dead.
• April 16, 2007: Seung-Hui Cho, a senior, shoots and kills
32 and wounds many others at Virginia Tech College in
Blacksburg, Virginia.
• September 21, 2007: Loyer Braden, 18, shoots and kills two
fellow Delaware State University students.
• October 10, 2007: Asa Coon, 14, shoots and kills two stu-
dents
and
two
teachers,
then
commits
suicide
at
SuccessTech alternative high school in Cleveland, Ohio.
332
School Violence

• November 7, 2007: Pekka-Eric Auvinen, 18, shoots and
kills eight people and then himself at a high school in
Tuusula, Finland.
• February 8, 2008: Latina Williams, 23, shoots and kills two
students, then commits suicide at Louisiana Tech College in
Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
• February 12, 2008: Brandon McInerney, 14, shoots and
kills Lawrence King because he was gay at E.O. Green
School in Oxnard, California.
• February 14, 2008: Steven Kazmierczak, 27, a former stu-
dent, shoots and kills 6 people and wounds 18 on the cam-
pus of Northern Illinois University.
• August 21, 2008: Jamar Siler, 15, shoots and kills a fellow
student at Central High School in Knoxville, Tennessee.
• September 23, 2008: Matti Juhani Saari, 22, shoots and kills
10 people at the vocational college he attended in Kauhajoki,
Finland.
• October 26, 2008: Four men (Kawin Brockton, 19; Kelsey
Perry, 19; Mario Tony, 20; and Brandon Wade, 20) shoot
and kill two University of Central Arkansas students and
wound a visitor.
• November 13, 2008: Teah Wemberly, 15, shoots and kills
friend Amanda Collette at Dillard High School in Ft.
Lauderdale, Florida.
• March 6, 2008: Alaa Abu Dhein, 26, shoots and kills 8 stu-
dents and wounds 11 at Mercaz HeRav Yeshiva, a religious
school in Jerusalem, Israel.
• March 11, 2009: Tim Kretschmer, 17, a former student,
shoots and kills 15 at Albertville Secondary School in
Winnenden, Germany.
• April 30, 2009: Farda Gadyrov, 29, kills 12 and wounds 13
before killing himself at Azerbaijan State Oil Academy in
Azerbaijan.
Chronology
333

• June 25, 2009: Supreme Court rules in Safford v. Redding
that strip-searching a student for allegedly having ibuprofen
is unconstitutional.
• September 15, 2009: Andy Rodriquez, 17, stabs classmate
to death in Coral Gables, Florida.
• September 23, 2009: A 16-year-old student stabs a special
education teacher in Tyler, Texas. The teacher later dies
from the attack.
• October 16, 2009: Trevor Varinecz, 16, is shot and killed by
a school resource ofﬁcer after allegedly stabbing the ofﬁcer in
an altercation in Conway, South Carolina.
• January 14, 2010: Phoebe Prince commits suicide after being
bullied at South Hadley High School in Massachusetts.
• February 12, 2010: Biology professor Amy Bishop kills three
faculty members and wounds three employees at the
University of Alabama at Huntsville.
• February 23, 2010: Bruco Strongeagle Eastwood, 32, alleg-
edly shoots at middle school students as school lets out in
Littleton, Colorado. Two eighth-grade students are injured.
• March 9, 2010: Nathaniel Brown, 51, a custodian who had
been told he was being ﬁred, kills a co-worker and wounds
another at Ohio State University.
• March 17, 2010: Wayne Treacy, 15, brutally beats and
stomps Jose Lou Ratley in Deerﬁeld Beach, Florida. Ratley
survives the attack.
• April 2010: Xu Yuyuan, 47, stabs 28 children and two
adults in an elementary school in China. This is China’s ﬁfth
attack on schoolchildren in just over a month.
• September 2010: A spate of gay teens commit suicide after
being bullied by peers.
• October 2010: President Obama, Education Secretary Arne
Duncan, and Secretary of State Hilary Clinton speak out
against bullying.
334
School Violence

• October 24, 2011: Cape Fear High School, Fayetteville,
North Carolina. Ta’Von McLoren, 18, and another 15-
year-old student shoot 15-year-old Caitlyn Abercrombie.
• January 10, 2012: North Forest High School, Houston, Texas.
Eighteen-year-old Warren Lewis shoots at three students who
had bullied him A 16-year-old bystander is wounded.
• February 27, 2012: Chardon High School, Chardon, Ohio.
Seventeen-year-old Thomas “T.J” Lane opens ﬁre in the
school cafeteria, killing three and wounding three others.
Lane is sentenced to three life sentences.
• March 6, 2012: Episcopal School of Jacksonville, Jacksonville,
Florida. Twenty-eight-year-old former Spanish teacher Shane
Scheumerth shoots and kills headmistress Dale Regan after
being ﬁred.
• April 7, 2012: Oikos University, Oakland, California. Seven
students are killed and three others wounded in a classroom
by One L. Goh, 43.
• August 24, 2012: Banks County High School, Homer,
Georgia. A 16-year-old student commits suicide in a school
restroom.
• August 27, 2012: Perry Hall High School, Perry Hall,
Maryland. Fifteen-year-old Robert Wayne Gladden ﬁres
two shots in the cafeteria; a 17-year-old student is injured.
The shooter is sentenced to 35 years for attempted murder.
• September 26, 2012: Stillwater Junior High School,
Fairmount, North Dakota. Thirteen-year-old Cade Poulos
commits suicide in front of classmates while wearing a villain
costume from the Batman series.
• October 10, 2012: Canadian teenager Amanda Todd com-
mits suicide after enduring in-person and online bullying.
• December 14, 2012: Sandy Hook Elementary School,
Newtown, Connecticut. Twenty-year-old Adam Lanza kills
20 ﬁrst-grade students, six adults, and his mother, wounding
two more before committing suicide.
Chronology
335

• December 22, 2012: The New York Journal News publishes
the names and addresses of gun owners in Westchester and
Rockland Counties. Public outrage prompts New York and
six other states to exempt gun permit data from public
records requests.
• January 3, 2012: Governor Daniel Malloy creates Sandy
Hook Commission to make legislative recommendations
on school safety, mental health, and gun violence following
the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
• January 7, 2014: Secretary of Education Arne Duncan and
Attorney General Eric Holder author a document critiquing
zero tolerance laws.
• January 10, 2013: Taft Union High School, Taft, California.
Sixteen-year-old Bryan Oliver targets classmates who bullied
him. One student is wounded. Oliver is charged with two
counts of attempted murder.
• January 10, 2013: Colorado Governor John Hickenlooper
says he would consider universal background checks if it
would have prevented the mass shooting in an Aurora,
Colorado, movie theater in July 2012.
• January 12, 2013: Osborn High School, Detroit, Michigan.
A 16-year-old student is shot after a basketball game and
hospitalized.
• January 15, 2013: Stevens Institute of Business and Arts, St.
Louis, Missouri. A former student shoots and wounds an
administrator and then wounds himself in a stairwell.
• January 15, 2013: Governor Andrew Cuomo signs the SAFE
Act to tighten the state’s assault weapons ban, limit gun mag-
azine capacity, require background checks for gun and ammu-
nition sales, toughen penalties for illegal gun use, and exempt
gun permit data from public records requests.
• January 16, 2013: Chicago State University, Chicago,
Illinois. A 17-year-old student is shot and killed after a high
336
School Violence

school basketball game. Michael McNabb, 32, and Stephen
Gilbert, 29, are charged.
• January 16, 2013: President Barack Obama signs 23 execu-
tive orders designed to reduce gun violence. He also calls
on Congress to pass universal background checks and
address assault weapons.
• January 31, 2013: Price Middle School, Atlanta, Georgia.
A 14-year-old student is shot in the neck by another student,
15. The shooter is charged with aggravated assault.
• March 8, 2013: Governor Dennis Daugaard signs the
“school sentinels” bill to allow teachers, staff, and volunteers
to carry guns in classrooms.
• March 14, 2013: Republican Governor Bill Haslaim signs a
bill permitting handgun owners to store guns in their cars in
virtually any parking lot, including at schools.
• March 18, 2013: University of Central Florida, Orlando,
Florida. Former student James Oliver Seevakumaran, 30,
attempts to execute a mass killing outside a dormitory. The
plan is foiled and the perpetrator commits suicide.
• March 20, 2013: Colorado governor signs into law three
new gun-related laws mandating limits on magazine size,
authorizing fees for background checks, and requiring back-
ground checks for all gun transfers.
• April 4, 2013: Connecticut governor Dan Molloy signs into
law a requirement limiting magazine size, mandating back-
ground checks, and expanding the deﬁnition of assault
weapons.
• June 7, 2013: Santa Monica College, Santa Monica,
California. John Zawahri kills three people in a library after
killing his father and brother. Zawahri is killed by police.
• August 19, 2013: Ronald E. McNair Discovery Learning
Academy, Decatur, Georgia. Twenty-year-old Michael
Brandon Hill ﬁres shots in an elementary school, but
Chronology
337

nobody is injured. Front ofﬁce employee Antoinette Tuff
talks him down, and Hill is arrested.
• August 30, 2013: Carver High School, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina. Eighteen-year-old Christopher Lamont
Richardson shoots a 15-year-old student in the neck. The
victim survives.
• October 21, 2013: Sparks Middle Schools, Sparks, Nevada.
A 12-year-old student shoots and kills a teacher and two
other students before committing suicide.
338
School Violence

Glossary
Adolescence:
A stage in the life course between childhood
and adulthood, typically characterized by marginal social status
and identity, uncertain roles, and minimal power or meaning-
ful participation in U.S. social life.
Anger Management Programs:
Courses, often but not
always court-mandated, that help attendees understand what
triggers their anger and work on managing anger in healthy,
constructive ways.
Anomie:
Concept developed by French sociologist Emile
Durkheim to explain conditions of normlessness that are a
result of rapid social change.
Antisocial Behaviors:
Behaviors that involve violating social
norms and suggest a disregard for the feelings of others.
Antisocial Personality Disorder:
A personality disorder that
is characterized by impulsivity, inability to follow societal
customs and laws, and a lack of anxiety and guilt.
Arts-Based Programs:
Prevention or therapeutic efforts that
involve music, theater, dance, or other forms of art.
Assessment:
The evaluation of an individual’s development,
behavior, intellect, interests, personality, cognitive processes,
emotional functioning, or social functioning for the purpose
of identifying needs. Assessment methods include interviewing,
systematic observation, and psychometric testing.
Atavism:
Concept developed by Cesare Lombroso, an early
criminologist, suggesting that there are “born criminals” who
339

are less evolved and who share certain body structures and
features.
Attention-Deﬁcit Disorder (ADD) and Attention-Deﬁcit/
Hyperactivity
Disorder
(AD/HD):
Syndrome
typically
identiﬁed in childhood that involves a short attention span,
impulsivity, and sometimes hyperactivity.
Biological Theories:
A category of theories explaining abuse
as the result of heredity, childhood trauma, or head injuries.
Birth Order:
Order of birth relative to one’s siblings, found
in some studies to impact propensity for delinquency.
Borderline Personality Disorder:
A personality disorder
that features various manifestations, including impulsivity,
mood instability, and perhaps even functional psychosis.
Patients typically experience periods of normalcy as well.
Bullying:
Physical, sexual, verbal, emotional, and other forms
of harmful or violent behavior perpetrated by one person over
another. Typically associated with youth but shares the same
power–control dynamic as in dating and domestic violence.
Bystander Intervention Programs:
Educational programs
focused on informing participants about a phenomenon and
providing them with skills to intervene safely to disrupt harm-
ful behavior like bullying and abuse.
Case Management:
The arrangement, coordination, and
monitoring of services to assist victims and their families.
Child Protective Services (CPS):
In most states, the desig-
nated social services agency to receive reports of, investigate, and
provide intervention and treatment services to children and fami-
lies in which child maltreatment has allegedly occurred.
Child Victim:
A child for whom an incident of abuse or
neglect has been substantiated or indicated by an investigation
or assessment by authorities.
Child Witness:
Refers to a child who is present when abuse
occurs, regardless whether she or he sees the abuse.
340
Glossary

Chivalry Hypothesis:
A concept that suggests that females
are treated more leniently by police and other formal systems
of social control.
Choice Theories:
Criminological theories which emphasize
offenders’ free will and ability to make rational choices about
their behavior.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy:
A treatment approach that
focuses both on observable behavior and on the thinking or
beliefs that accompany the behavior. The goal of cognitive
behavioral
therapy
is
to
replace
maladaptive
behaviors,
thoughts, and beliefs with more adaptive ones.
Community Violence:
Community violence refers to both
predatory violence (e.g., robbery) and violence arising from
nonfamily interpersonal conﬂicts and may include brutal acts
such as shootings, rapes, stabbings, and beatings.
Compassion Fatigue:
Occurs when advocates experience a
state of exhaustion, often accompanied by depression and
hopelessness, due to the challenging nature of working with
traumatized populations.
Comprehensive Crime Control Act:
Enacted in 1984 and
considered to be one of the most dramatic changes in U.S.
crime control policy, it generally broadened the courts’ powers
to assign lengthy sentences for speciﬁc offenses.
Conduct Disorder:
Term used by the American Psychiatric
Association to describe adolescents whose behavior routinely
violates the rights of others and major conduct norms.
Conﬂict Resolution:
Strategies that help people identify the
causes of conﬂict and weigh possible resolutions. Programs
may or may not include mediators who help both parties
negotiate an agreeable resolution.
Conﬂict Theories:
Criminological theories derived from the
work of Karl Marx which focus on class conﬂict and power
differentials as the basic reasons for crime and violence.
Glossary
341

Containment Theory:
Theory developed by Walter Reckless
to explain both internal and external pushes and pulls toward
delinquency.
Corporal Punishment:
Physical punishments dispensed by
schools and other authority ﬁgures with the goal of modifying
misbehaviors.
Correlates
of
Delinquency:
The
statistical
association
between certain social and demographic characteristics and the
propensity to engage in delinquent or violent behavior.
Court-Appointed Representative:
A person appointed by a
judge or court ofﬁcial to represent a person in neglect or abuse
proceedings.
Cultural Competence
Help that is sensitive and responsive
to cultural differences. Mental health professionals are aware
of the impact of their own culture and possess skills that help
them provide services that are culturally appropriate in
responding to people’s unique cultural differences, such as race
and ethnicity, national origin, religion, age, gender, sexual
orientation, or physical disability.
Cyberbullying:
An aggressive behavior directed at another
person using various communication technologies such as e-
mails, instant messaging, texting, or sending images via cell
phones, blogs, Web pages, and chat rooms. Aggressors often
torment, threaten, harass, humiliate, or embarrass the victim
repeatedly. Cyberbullying is also referred to as online social
cruelty or electronic bullying.
Dating Violence:
Controlling behavior perpetrated by one
partner in a dating relationship against the other partner. May
include emotional, verbal, social, physical, and sexual forms.
Deterrence Theory:
A part of classical criminological theory,
the notion that stern and prompt punishment will prevent
offenders from reoffending and will stop others who might be
inclined to do so as well.
342
Glossary

Developmental Perspective:
An approach that takes into
account the growth and change of human beings as they age,
including cognitive development, social development, language
development, moral reasoning, and self and gender identity
formation.
Differential Association Theory:
Theoretical perspective devel-
oped by Edwin Sutherland focusing on crime as learned behavior.
Differential Identiﬁcation Theory:
Authored by Daniel
Glaser, a theoretical perspective maintaining that crime is
learned from those with whom one identiﬁes.
DSM-IV:
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition, is the ofﬁcial manual of mental
health problems developed by the American Psychiatric
Association. This reference book is used by psychiatrists, psy-
chologists, social workers, and other health and mental health
care providers to understand and diagnose a mental health
problem. Insurance companies and health care providers also
use the terms and deﬁnitions in this manual when they discuss
mental health problems.
Evidence-Based Practices:
Evidence-based practices, some-
times referred to as empirically validated treatments or empiri-
cally supported therapy, are practices that have been clearly
speciﬁed and found to be supported by scientiﬁc evidence.
Feminist Theories:
Theories that emphasize the study,
analysis, and explanation of crime as it relates to gender.
Gun-Free Schools Act:
Passed in 1994, an act that requires
states receiving federal funds to enact legislation mandating spe-
ciﬁc punishments for guns, drugs, and other forms of violence
on school grounds.
Hazing:
Any activity expected of someone joining a group
(or to maintain full status in a group) that humiliates, degrades,
or risks emotional or physical harm, regardless of the person’s
willingness to participate.
Glossary
343

Interpersonal Violence:
Violence between two individuals.
Intervention:
Services, activities, or treatments developed and
implemented to change or improve knowledge, attitudes, behav-
ior, or awareness. Interventions are purposeful responses, which
can be acute and provided either in the immediate aftermath of
a traumatic event or after an event has already occurred.
Keeping Children and Families Safe Act:
Enacted in 2003
(P.L. 108-36), this legislation included the reauthorization of
the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA).
CAPTA provides minimum standards for deﬁning child physical
abuse and neglect and sexual abuse that states must incorporate
into their statutory deﬁnitions in order to receive federal funds.
Labeling Theories:
Sociological explanations for crime and
violence that focus on the impact societal labeling and stigmas
may have on producing criminal or deviant behavior.
Learning Theories:
Criminological theories that emphasize
that crime is a learned behavior.
Medical Trauma:
Trauma associated with an injury or acci-
dent, chronic or life-threatening illness, or painful or invasive
medical procedures.
Mentoring:
Efforts to involve successful older people as role
models for youth.
Neglect:
Child neglect involves the failure to provide needed,
age-appropriate care although ﬁnancially able to do so or offered
ﬁnancial or other means to do so. This includes physical neglect
(e.g., deprivation of food, clothing, or shelter), medical neglect
(e.g., failure to provide the child with access to needed medical
or mental health treatments or to consistently administer pre-
scribed medications), and educational neglect (e.g., withholding
child from school, failure to attend to special education needs).
No Child Left Behind Act:
Legislation enacted in 2001 that
mandates drug prevention and response programs, new initia-
tives to increase graduation rates, and efforts to ensure safe
school climates, among other foci.
344
Glossary

Peace Education:
Education that includes content about
peace, justice, and nonviolence, typically delivered via egalitar-
ian and participatory teaching methods.
Physical Abuse:
Actual or attempted inﬂiction of bodily pain
or injury, including the use of severe corporal punishment.
Physical abuse is characterized by physical injury (for example,
bruises and fractures) resulting from punching, beating, kick-
ing, burning, or otherwise harming a child. In some cases, the
injury may result from overdiscipline or physical punishment
that is inappropriate to the child’s age or condition.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder:
An anxiety disorder deﬁned
in the DSM-IV that can develop after exposure to a terrifying
event or experience in which grave physical harm occurred or
was threatened. Diagnostic criteria for PTSD include exposure
to a traumatic event, re-experiencing of the event (e.g., night-
mares, ﬂashbacks), persistent avoidance of things associated with
the trauma (e.g., avoiding certain activities, avoiding talking about
the event), and increased physiological arousal. To meet diagnos-
tic criteria for PTSD, an individual must exhibit a certain number
of symptoms for a duration of more than one month and experi-
ence clinically signiﬁcant distress or impairment.
Primary Prevention:
Efforts to prevent domestic violence
from occurring. Typically these include efforts to reduce gender
inequalities and address gender role stereotypes, decrease vio-
lent media, educate young people about healthy relationships,
and more.
Proﬁling:
Efforts to identify potential perpetrators through
use of statistical data.
Protective Factor:
A variable that decreases the chance that a
phenomenon will occur.
Psychological Maltreatment:
Sometimes called emotional
abuse, psychological maltreatment includes acts or omissions by
parents or caregivers that have caused, or could cause, serious
behavioral, cognitive, emotional, or mental disorders. Examples
Glossary
345

include verbal abuse (e.g., insults, belittling, threats of violence),
bullying and the use of coercive control, emotional neglect (e.g.,
shunning, withdrawal of love), and intentional social deprivation
(e.g., isolation, conﬁnement).
Psychopathology:
Mental disorders. Some theorists main-
tain that batterers suffer from various psychopathologies.
Public Health Perspective:
An approach that focuses on
health promotion and disease prevention for the population at
large. A public health perspective considers behavioral and envi-
ronmental risk factors and targets primary, secondary, and
tertiary prevention and intervention strategies to populations
depending on their levels of risk.
Refugee Trauma:
Exposure to war, political violence, or tor-
ture. Refugee trauma can be the result of living in a region
affected by bombing, shooting, or looting as well as forced dis-
placement to a new home due to political reasons.
Resiliency:
Qualities that allow individuals to adapt and
remain strong despite risk and adversity.
Restorative Justice:
Method of justice that involves victims,
offenders, and community members in identifying an appropri-
ate strategy for repairing the harm done.
Risk Factor:
A variable that increases the chance that a
phenomenon will occur.
School Climate:
The quality and character of school life,
including student and staff morale, belief in a common vision,
and inclusivity, among other factors.
School Resource Ofﬁcer:
A sworn ofﬁcer assigned to a
particular school or district with the goal of reducing crime
and violence and increasing youth support for police.
Secondary Prevention:
Targeting at-risk populations for
services in order to decease risk factors, thereby decreasing
domestic violence.
346
Glossary

Secondary Trauma:
A risk incurred when engaging compas-
sionately or empathically with a traumatized adult or child.
Self-Defense:
Legal right to defend oneself when facing an
imminent threat.
Self-Directed Violence:
Violence perpetrated against one’s
self, like cutting, eating disorders, and suicide.
Sexual Abuse:
Child sexual abuse includes a wide range of
sexual behaviors that take place between a child and an older
person. Behaviors that are sexually abusive often involve bodily
contact, such as in the case of sexual kissing, touching, fondling
of genitals, and intercourse. However, behaviors may be sexually
abusive even if they do not involve contact, such as in the case
of genital exposure (“ﬂashing”), verbal pressure for sex, and sexual
exploitation for purposes of prostitution or pornography.
Sexual Harassment:
May include offers to exchange sexual
favors of some sort, called quid pro quo, or persistent and
derogatory remarks, jokes, exposure to images, or other factors
that result in a hostile environment.
Social Control Theories:
A category of criminological theo-
ries that emphasize the importance of social capital and social
bonds in constraining people from offending.
Sociopath:
A person who cannot differentiate right from
wrong and who is incapable of feeling guilt or remorse for his
or her actions.
Stalking:
Unwanted and repeated visual or physical proxim-
ity or nonconsensual communication resulting in fear for the
targeted person.
Standard of Care:
Current procedure and practice; generally
agreed upon principles of practice.
Strain Theories:
Criminological theories that place the origin
of crime and violence in the disjuncture between the idea of what
it means to be a success and the realistic ability to achieve it.
Glossary
347

Systemic Violence:
Violence that is built into how an insti-
tution or society operates. Might include harsh and discrimina-
tory teaching and disciplinary techniques as well as overall
school climates.
Teacher-Perpetrated Violence:
Violence committed by teach-
ers against students.
Techniques of Neutralization:
Criminological theory devel-
oped by Gresham Sykes and David Matza to explain how juve-
niles can rationalize or neutralize the negative impacts of their
behavior, including denying the victim, denying responsibility,
denying harm, condemning the condemners, and appealing to
higher loyalties.
Terrorism:
The U.S. Department of Defense deﬁnes terror-
ism as “the calculated use of violence or the threat of violence
to inculcate fear, intended to coerce or to intimidate govern-
ments or societies in the pursuit of goals that are generally
political, religious, or ideological.” Terrorism includes attacks
by individuals acting in isolation (e.g., sniper attacks).
Tertiary Prevention:
Attempts to minimize the effects of
domestic violence by identifying and holding abusers account-
able and providing resources to victims.
Tracking:
Educational strategy that involves grouping stu-
dents according to ability level, as identiﬁed by standardized
test scores and academic performance.
Trauma Reminders:
People, places, activities, internal sensa-
tions, or other things that trigger memories of a trauma experi-
ence. Trauma reminders can cause feelings of fear or distress or
put people “on alert.” Trauma reminders can “restart” posttrau-
matic stress reactions or behavior even years after a traumatic
event has occurred.
Traumatic Grief:
Childhood traumatic grief occurs follow-
ing the death of a loved one when the child objectively or
subjectively perceives the experience as traumatic. The cause
of death can be due to what is usually described as traumatic,
348
Glossary

such as an act of violence, accident, disaster, or war, or it can be
due to natural causes. The hallmark of childhood traumatic
grief is that trauma symptoms interfere with the child’s ability
to navigate the typical bereavement process.
Treatment Manual:
A written guide with step-by-step
instructions for conducting individual, family, or group treat-
ment. Treatment manuals typically cover multiple sessions
and describe the techniques used by the clinician, key elements
of various phases of treatment, and activities to be done by the
client or patient.
Zero Tolerance Laws:
Controversial laws mandating suspen-
sion or expulsion for speciﬁc offenses, typically drugs, weapons,
and alcohol.
Glossary
349


Index
Abuse, 10, 22, 23, 64–65,
96–97, 232–34
Action Markers, 161
Adler, Freda, 86
Agnew, Robert, 77
Alcohol, 91
American Association of
University Women
(AAUW), 9
American Bar Association, 116
American Psychological
Association (APA), 11, 70
Anonymous tip lines, 105–106
Asperger’s Syndrome, 37,
69, 227
Atavists, 66
Attention Deﬁcit Disorder
(ADD), 5–6, 88–89
Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), 5–6, 88–89
Auvinen, Pekka-Eric, 32–33
The Basketball Diaries, 24
Bath Consolidated School
bombing, 18–19, 211,
212–14
Beslan School Massacre, 29–30
Biochemical theories, 68
Birth order, 94–95
Board of Education of
Independent School District
No. 92 of Pottawatomie
County v. Earls, 44–45
Bosse, Sebastian, 32
Brain dysfunction, 68–69
Brazill, Nathaniel, 28–29
Break the Cycle, 212, 242–43
Breivik, Anders Behring, 36
Brewer, Michael, 34–35
Bullycide, 33–34, 149, 211
Bullying, xv, 4, 283–93
against teachers, 11, 65, 99,
266–67
bullycide, 33–34, 64,
240–41, 241–42
cyberbullying, 7–8, 33–34,
102–103, 240–41,
241–42, 253–54
disability, 5–6, 69–70
effects, 63–66
gender, 12, 13, 33–34,
86–87, 136–38, 239–40,
265–67
351

legislation, 21, 28, 28,
37–40, 116–120
LGBTQ youth, 6–7, 34,
102, 145–64
personal stories, 133–136,
136–138, 204–208
physical, 4
prevention programs, 103,
253–54, 255–57
protective factors, 100–105,
150–151, 253–54
race, 13–14, 265–67
risk factors, 87–100,
150–51, 253–54
school shootings, 11–12,
21, 22, 24, 26–27, 64
social, 4
statistics, 5, 13, 14–15,
253–54, 266–74
verbal, 4
Bully Police, 117–18
Bystander interventions, 93,
103, 180–98
Canada, Geoffrey, 212,
243–46
Canine searches, 47,
114–15
Carneal, Michael, 22
Center for the Study and
Prevention of Violence,
106–107
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC),
10, 12, 13, 87–88, 95,
100, 103, 180–98
Chambliss, William, 83
Chivalry hypothesis, 86–87
Circle Model, 190–92
Cloward Richard, 76–77
Cohen, Albert, 76
Columbine High School,
26–27, 32, 67, 74, 90,
105–106, 211, 215–19
Coming Out, 152–55
Comprehensive Crime
Control Act, 37–38
Conﬂict resolution, 100,
110–11
Coon, Asa, 96
Corporal punishment, 41–42,
98–99
Curricula, 102–104, 162
Cyberbullying, 7–8,
102–103, 283–93
Dann, Laurie, 20, 90, 211,
219–22
Dating violence, 10,
64–65, 103
education, 103, 120,
199–203, 212
Davis v. Monroe County Board
of Education, 9, 42–43
Democratic Front for the
Liberation of Palestine
(DFLP), 19
Differential Association
theory, 79–80
Differential Identiﬁcation
theory, 79–80
Do Something, 5
352
Index

Doom, 22, 27
Dress codes, 107–108
Drug testing, 43–45
Due process, 41
Dugdale, Richard, 66
Duncan, Arne, 34, 158–59,
265, 283–93
Durkheim, Emile, 74–75
Eisler, Riane, 212, 246–47
Estabrook, Arthur, 66
Eugenics, 66–67
Family size, 94–95
Female perpetrators, 12,
19–20
Focal concerns, 77–78
Fourteenth Amendment, 156
Franklin v. Gwinnett County
Public School, 9
Free speech, 40–41, 107–108
Freud, Sigmund, 70
Gangs, 76–77, 99–100, 105,
266–67
Gang Resistance Education and
Training (G.R.E.A.T), 105
Gay, Lesbian and Straight
Education Network
(GLSEN), 6–7, 34, 147,
162, 212, 247–49
Gay-Straight Alliances, 102,
148, 162–63, 248
General Theory of Crime, 85
Golden, Andrew, 25
Goss v. Lopez, 41
Goring, Charles, 66
Gottfredson, Michal, 85
Greenberg, David, 84
Gun control laws, 21, 28, 29,
37, 37–40, 227, 231–32
Gun-Free Schools Act,
38, 115
Gun-Free School Zones Act,
38, 115
Halligan, Ryan, 33, 241
Hamilton, Thomas, 21
Harlem Children’s Zone,
212, 243–46
Harris, Eric, 26–27, 32, 67,
74, 90, 211, 215–19
Hazing, 7–8, 252–53
harassment hazing, 8
laws, 120
subtle hazing, 8
violent hazing, 8
Hirschi, Travis, 81–82, 85
Humanity Project, The,
204–208
In loco parentis, 43–44
Ingraham v. Wright, 11, 41–42
Insanity pleas, 21–22
IQ, 87–88, 100
Jeremy, 21, 228
Johnson, Mitchell, 25
Johnston, Jeffrey, 33
Katz, Jackson, 93, 212,
249–50
Index
353

Kehoe, Andrew, 18–19, 211,
212–14
Kindness Clubs, 189
King, Lawrence, 34
Kinkel, Kip, 26, 69, 211,
222–26
Kivel, Paul, 212, 251–52
Klebold, Dylan, 26–27, 32,
67, 74, 90, 211, 215–19
Kretschmer, Tim, 33
Lanza, Adam, 36–37, 69,
211, 226–29
Laub, John, 85
Lead exposure, 68
Learning disabilities, 5–6,
69–70, 87–88, 222–26
Legislation, 21, 28, 28,
37–40, 116–20, 158–59,
265, 275–81
Lemert, Edwin, 82–83
Liberation hypothesis, 86
Life-course theory, 85
Lombroso, Cesar, 66
Long, Tyler, 241
Loukaitis, Barry, 21–22, 211,
228–29
Measuring school violence,
12–18, 265–74
limitations, 17–18
Media literacy, 101
Meier, Megan, 33
Mental illness, 90–91,
219–22, 222–26, 226–29
Merton, Robert, 75–76
Metal detectors, 97–98,
108–109
Microaggressions, 138–42,
145–64
Militarism, 176–99
Miller, Walter, 77–78
Mofﬁtt, Terrie, 85
Monitoring the Future,
16–17
Moral panic, 65, 164–66
Morrison, Duane, 31
Movies, 21, 24, 92, 93,
228, 250
Music, 21, 94, 228
National School Climate
Survey, 6–7, 147
Natural Born Killers, 21, 228
Neblett, Rachel, 33
No Child Left Behind Act, 39
Nuwer, Hank, 212, 252–53
Obama, Barack, 34, 265,
281–82
Ohlin, Lloyd, 76–77
Olweus Bullying Prevention
Program, 103
Owens, Dedrick, 27–28
Parenting, 94–96, 100–101
PeaceJam, 166–76
PeacePals, 110
Peaceable schools, 111–12
Peace education, 103–104,
180, 192–99, 246–47
Peer mediation, 110–11
354
Index

People’s Court, 142–45
Prescription drugs, 26,
88–90, 215, 217–18,
219–22, 239–40
Prince, Phoebe, 33–34, 211,
241–42
Proﬁling, 106–107
Prothrow-Stith, Deborah, 86
Prozac, 26, 89–90, 239–40
Psychological disorders,
70–71
Purdy, Patrick, 20–21, 211,
229–32
Quinney, Richard, 83–84
Rachel’s Challenge, 189
Rage, 21, 228
Ramsey, Evan, 22, 96, 211,
232–34
Rational Choice theory,
72–73
Restorative Justice, 112
Restoring Conﬂict Creatively
Program, 111–12
Ritalin, 89
Roberts, Charles, 31–32, 211,
234–36
Rollins, Kayla, 27–28
Routine Activities theory,
73–74
Safe and Drug-Free Schools
Act, 38–39
Safe Schools Improvement
Act, 120, 265
Safford United School District
#1 v. Redding, 45–46
Sampson, Robert, 85
Sandy Hook Elementary
School, 36–37, 226–29,
281–82
Sandy Hook Elementary
Violence Reduction Act,
265, 275–81
School-Associated Violent
Death Study, 14,
265, 266
School climate, 97–98,
101–104, 145–64,
166–76
School police ofﬁcers, 112–14
School shootings, xv, 11–12,
14, 19–33, 34–37
abuse, 22, 23, 229–32
adults, 18–19, 19–20,
20–21, 29–30, 31–32,
212–14, 234–26
gender, 12, 19–20, 219–22
international, 19, 21,
29–30, 32–33
racial hatred, 20–21,
229–32
suburban, 21–25
violent media, 21–22
Search and seizure, 43–45,
45–46, 47, 98–99, 113
Seductions of crime
theory, 74
Sedwick, Rebecca, 241
Sexual harassment, 8–10, 42–43
gender, 9–10
Index
355

hostile environment, 8–9
Quid pro quo, 8
school liability, 9
teachers, 10
Sexting, 241–42
Sheldon, William, 67
Social bond theory,
81–82, 85
Social disorganization theory, 78
Somatotyping, 67
Status frustration, 76
Spencer, Brenda, 19–20
Steinhauser, Robert, 29
Steubenville Rape Scandal,
211, 236–39
Stopbullying.gov, 5, 212,
253–55
Strip searches, 45–46
Students Against Violence
Everywhere (SAVE), 212,
255–57
Supreme Court Cases, 40–47
Sutherland, Edwin, 79–80
Systemic violence, 10–11
corporal punishment,
10–11, 41–42
drug testing, 43–45
strip searches, 45–46, 98–99
Teaching Students to Be
Peacemakers, 110
Techniques of Neutralization
theory, 80–81
Terrorism, 29–30
Theories to explain school
violence, 66–87
biological theories, 66–70
choice theories, 72–74
conﬂict theories, 83–85
feminist theories, 86–87
integrated theories, 85–87
labeling theories, 82–83
psychological theories, 70–72
social control theories, 81–82
social learning theories,
79–81
social strain theories, 74–78
Tinker v. Des Moines
Independent Community
School District, 40–41,
108, 155
Title IV of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act, 9
Title IX of the Education Amen-
dment Acts of 1972, 158
Todd, Amanda, 241–42
Tough Guise, 92, 250
Tracking, 98
Treacy, Wayne, 34–36
Trenchcoat maﬁa, 27
Turning points theory, 85
Twins, 68
United States v. Place, 114
United States Department of
Health and Human
Services, 5, 118–120,
212, 253–55
Vernonia School District 47 J v.
Acton, 43–44
Video cameras, 110
356
Index

Video games, 22, 27, 92,
232–34
Violent media, 21–22, 24, 25,
29, 32–33, 37, 79–80,
92–94, 138–42, 217–18,
249–50
Visibility Markers, 160–61
Weise, Jeff, 30–31, 211,
239–40
Wimberley, Teah, 34–35,
199–203
Woodham, Luke, 22–23
Wrestling with Manhood: Boys,
Bullying and Battering, 93,
250
Wurst, Andrew, 25–26
Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance System
(YBRSS), 12–13, 266
Zero tolerance laws, 97–98,
115–16
Index
357


About the Author
Laura L. Finley earned her Ph.D. from Western Michigan
University in 2002. Prior to earning her doctoral degree in soci-
ology, Dr. Finley was a high school social studies teacher. Since
then she has taught at a variety of colleges and universities in
Michigan, Colorado, and Florida. She is currently associate
professor of sociology and criminology at Barry University in
Miami Shores, Florida, where she teaches courses on crime,
justice, and human rights. Dr. Finley is the author, co-author,
or editor of 13 books as well as numerous book chapters and
peer-reviewed journal articles. Additionally, Dr. Finley is
actively involved with a number of local, state, and national
initiatives. She serves on the boards of No More Tears, which
helps victims of domestic violence; the Humanity Project, an
antibullying organization; Floridians for Alternatives to the
Death Penalty; and the Peace and Justice Studies Association.
Dr. Finley is also a mentor for at-risk girls, co-chair of the
South Florida Diversity Alliance, and an organizer of the
College Brides Walk.






