
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Communicating Knowledge
in a Digital Age
Edited by
Alan G. Gross
University of Minnesota
and
Jonathan Buehl
The Ohio State University
Afterword by Charles Bazerman
Baywood’s Technical Communications Series
Series Editor: Charles H. Sides

First published 2016 by Baywood Publishing Company, Inc. 
Published 2017 by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
Copyright © 2016 by Taylor & Francis
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
Notice: 
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library of Congress Catalog Number:
ISBN 13: 978-0-89503-897-5 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-89503-898-2 (pbk)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Gross, Alan G. | Buehl, Jonathan.
Title: Science and the Internet : communicating knowledge in a digital age /
edited by Alan G. Gross, and Jonathan Buehl ; afterword by Charles
Bazerman.
Description: Amityville, New York : Baywood Publishing Company, [2015] |
Series: Baywood’s technical communications series
Identifiers: LCCN 2015036696| ISBN 9780895038975 (clothbound : alk. paper) |
ISBN 9780895038982 (paperbound : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780895039002 (epdf) |
ISBN 9780895038999 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Science--Computer network resources. | Communication in
Science. | Internet research.
Classification: LCC Q224.5 .S36 2015 | DDC 501/.4--dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015036696

Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1. Revolution or Evolution? Casing the Impact of Digital
Media on the Rhetoric of Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Jonathan Buehl
CHAPTER 2. Learning to “Share Your Science”: The Open Notebook
as Textual Object and Dynamic Rhetorical Space . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Chad Wickman
CHAPTER 3. The Scientific Journal: Making It New? . . . . . . . . . .
33
Joseph E. Harmon
CHAPTER 4. Evaluation After Publication: Setting the Record
Straight in the Sciences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Alan G. Gross
CHAPTER 5. The Online Research Article and the Ecological
Basis of New Digital Genres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Christian F. Casper
CHAPTER 6. The Chemistry Liveblogging Event: The Web
Refigures Peer Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Michelle Sidler
CHAPTER 7. Controversies on the Web: The Case of Adult
Human Neurogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Jeanne Fahnestock
CHAPTER 8. Radiolab and Parasites: Podcasting Horror and
Wonder to Foster Interest in Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Sarah Wardlaw
CHAPTER 9. Online Visualizations of Natural Disasters and
Hazards: The Rhetorical Dynamics of Charting Risk . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Charles Kostelnick and John Kostelnick
iii

CHAPTER 10. Meltdowns in the Media: Visualization of
Radiation Risk from The Printed Page to the Internet
. . . . . . . . . . 191
James Wynn
CHAPTER 11. Intersections: Scientific and Parascientific
Communication on the Internet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Ashley R. Kelly and Carolyn R. Miller
CHAPTER 12. Why People Care About Chickens and
Other Lessons About Rhetoric, Public Science, and Informal
Learning Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Stacey Pigg, William Hart-Davidson, Jeff Grabill, and
Kirsten Ellenbogen
CHAPTER 13. Afterword: Social Changes in
Science Communication: Rattling the Information Chain . . . . . . . . 267
Charles Bazerman
Editors’ Biographies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
iv
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 1
Revolution or Evolution?
Casing the Impact of Digital Media
on the Rhetoric of Science
Jonathan Buehl
ABSTRACT
This introductory chapter for Science and the Internet: Communicating
Knowledge in a Digital Age describes a recent controversy in biochemistry
to frame the intellectual commitments of the entire collection. After NASA
researchers published findings that a rare bacterium can use arsenic instead
of phosphorous in its biomolecules, a critical scientist used her blog to voice
concerns about the research. Comments on her blog posts from experts and
lay readers hint at the range of ways that the Internet is changing scientific
discovery, the circulation of scientific knowledge, and access to scientific
conversations.
REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION?
In December 2010, a team of NASA researchers led by astrobiologist Felisa
Wolfe-Simon made a remarkable announcement: Bacteria living in California’s
Mono Lake can replace the phosphorous in their biomolecules with arsenic
(Wolfe-Simon, Blum, Kulp, Gordon, Hoeft, Pett-Ridge et al., 2010). A
first-of-its-kind discovery, the extraordinary biochemistry of species GFAJ-1
offered “proof” that life could exist in environments without phosphorous; that is,
in environments whose chemistries differ vastly from ours. In other words,
different kinds of life might exist on planets with scant resemblance to Earth.
1

The team’s findings appeared in the journal Science, and NASA widely pub-
licized the research. Footage of an elaborate press conference was broadcast
on major television news channels, and video of the entire event was uploaded to
YouTube. Although circulating video on the Internet is no longer novel, other
aspects of the Mono Lake project’s digital life are emblematic of Internet-enabled
rhetorical processes that are changing scientific practice.
On December 4, just two days after the initial announcement and online
prepublication of the article, Rosie Redfield, a microbiologist at the University
of British Columbia, posted a 2,100-word critique of the Mono Lake research
on her blog RRResearch. After identifying apparent flaws in the researchers’
methods, analyses, and reasoning, Redfield questioned the motives of Science
and the NASA team:
I don’t know whether the authors are just bad scientists or whether they’re
unscrupulously pushing NASA’s “There’s life in outer space!” agenda.
I hesitate to blame the reviewers, as their objections are likely to have
been overruled by Science’s editors in their eagerness to score such a high-
impact publication. (2010)
Like many blogs, RRResearch allows readers to post comments about its
stories. The comments on Redfield’s “Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s
claims)” post included general affirmations (e.g., “Way to go, Rosie.”), additional
critiques of Wolfe-Simon’s paper, refinements of Redfield’s arguments, and
links to other blogs. Other readers posted poems about biochemistry, criticisms
of Wolfe-Simon’s demeanor during the press conference, identifications of
Redfield’s typos, and corrections (but not outright refutations) of Redfield’s
calculations. Most of these comments were posted by other scientists, but non-
expert laypeople also entered the conversation. For example, self-identified
nonexpert Zinegata (2010) wondered about some of Redfield’s commentary:
I’d just like to make a clarification—why did Dr. Redfield suggest to
use standard E. coli in the end of the article? Is this to have some kind
of control group to verify the methodology? Wouldn’t standard E. coli
simply die when they are put in an arsenic solution? I’m a bit of a layman,
so please forgive my ignorance.
Other comments included reflections on scientific behavior and the prin-
ciples of peer review—the traditional mechanism for establishing and policing
scientific knowledge. For example, Sanford May (2010) was particularly upset
by the medium Redfield chose to present her critique:
This whole thing is grossly inappropriate. You should have sent this to
the journal of record FIRST, where it can be properly reviewed. You’re
not some advanced hobbyist layman with a good idea but no standing.
You’d almost certainly be given a full hearing in the appropriate forum.
2
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

The comment goes on to suggest that in blogging her criticism Redfield damaged
her professional ethos:
Since this constitutes a formal challenge without review, I urge you to take
it down until it has been properly reviewed. And I’d keep accusations like
the above quoted out of any formal challenge. You come across like you
have an ax to grind, and while that may make you a star on the Internet,
it’ll cost you respect in the professional community. Probably already has.
Other commentators did not agree that a peer-reviewed response is the only
appropriate tool for critiquing published scientific claims. For example, a respon-
dent identified as PetHW (2010) replied that peer-reviewed forums should not
be the only rhetorical spaces available to scientists:
I do not think that every single opinion and comment we, as scientists,
have or make should be peer-reviewed. If they decided to publish this
paper too soon, then they must face the consequences of their decision and
questionable science. The paper is out there for anybody to comment.
Others suggested that blogs offer a form of peer review that is even more
productive than the traditional process. One commentator described the speed
and efficacy of the blog medium:
What I perceived is that a load of valuable ideas, suggestions and knowledge
finds its way to this blog and within 2 days this complex piece of work is
thoroughly analyzed, erroneous information is corrected within an hour
by specialized people (+ review), new insight is born and supplied with
feedback and it leads to a scientific “report” which is immediately reviewed
on contents and language.
And I think: Wouldn’t it be perfect if this process would become the
standard for scientific research? The knowledge for everything is somewhere
and every somewhere is connected to the Internet. I’m afraid that the old
fashioned way with the magazines, at least for the millions of “half way
publications,” is not suitable anymore. (Erik, 2010)
Other comments concurred that blogs might be superior peer-reviewed venues
for advancing scientific knowledge. For instance, Joy Kennedy (2010) compared
the epistemological affordances of blogs to those or traditional journals:
I do have to say, however, that I wish my field had a forum such as this for
vetting and responding to published research. If we are looking for a viable
alternative to the current system of peer-reviewed publications, which often
screens IN bad science and screens OUT good science with null findings, I
think we’ve found it. In just a few days, we have achieved a thorough critique
by an expert in the field, which has in turn been reviewed and further
REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION
/
3

critiqued by other experts in the same and related fields. The result is a
thorough and accurate assessment of the original work.
The public scrutiny of the Wolfe-Simon paper was not overlooked. When
the print version of the paper finally appeared in Science in June of 2011, the
journal also printed 8 of the 25 “Technical Comments” it had received about
the article, “the most Science has published for any one paper” (Pennisi, 2011,
p. 1137). It also printed a “News & Analysis” piece by Elizabeth Pennisi entitled
“Concerns About Arsenic-Laden Bacterium Aired” (2011). Although the story
is not an outright defense of the Wolfe-Simon paper, it does paint the research in
positive light while subtly questioning the role of scientific blogs. Its opening
sentence makes a seemingly conservative statement about privileged channels of
scientific critique: “The debate that erupted 5 months ago . . . is finally being aired
in the scientific literature rather than on blogs” (Pennisi, 2011, p. 1137). Pennisi
(2011) notes that the vetted technical comments in Science “formally raise
many of the criticisms that were quickly hurled” through blogs (p. 1137). In
short, the appropriateness of the sanctioned peer-reviewed forum is juxtaposed
with the reckless speed of the Internet.
Redfield continued to activate the rhetorical affordances of the Internet as
she blogged about experiments she planned and ran on samples of GFAJ-1
received from the Wolfe-Simon team. Most of these posts are summaries, but
some offer open questions about how to investigate the bacterium. For instance,
a July 2011 post, which was framed as an open email from Redfield to three
collaborators, invited comments on her experimental process:
I’m confident that I can find a suitable growth condition for the ±P/±As
growth experiments. But this probably won’t be exactly the same condition
reported by Wolfe-Simon et al., so we need to decide whether it’s appro-
priate to use my growth condition to test their observation. (Redfield, 2011)
She followed a detailed description of her plans to determine appropriate
growth conditions with a query: “Do you think that this would be seen as a
valid test of the reported result?” In response, an anonymous comment offered
some rhetorical advice:
I think it is essential to test exactly the same medium used by Wolfe-Simon,
including tungsten, to show that there is no growth (assuming that will be
the case). After that, testing her claims about arsenic under slightly dif-
ferent conditions would be good enough for the scientific community.
(Anonymous, 2011)
The author’s advice is grounded by his or her knowledge of the rhetorical
norms of the discourse community; that is, he or she knows what will be “good
4
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

enough” for the sake of argument. In this case, the blog becomes a space for
considering the connections between scientific methods and argumentation.
The
asynchronous
and
occasionally
tempestuous
conversations
about
GFAJ-1that played out in the pages of Science and on the Web pages of the
blogosphere raise interesting questions about science and rhetoric. Is the Internet
changing the scope, meaning, and timing of scientific peer review? Is the Internet
reconfiguring the rhetorical boundaries of scientific practice? Is the Internet
fundamentally changing the nature of scientific collaboration? Of scientific argu-
mentation? These are but a few of the questions addressed by the chapters in
this collection on science and the Internet.
Assessing the effects of the Internet on the rhetoric of science—and indeed
all forms of epistemic rhetoric—requires critical perspective. It is easy to
be seduced by the Internet’s seemingly profound—perhaps revolutionary—
implications. As the case of GFAJ-1 suggests, the Internet has accelerated
the pace of scientific communication to peers and to other publics. It promises
wider and more fruitful collaborative networks, enabling full documentation
of experiments and the universal and immediate scrutiny of results. Elsewhere,
the multimodal affordances of the Internet have even enabled alternative formats
of scientific publishing, such as videographic journals (e.g., The Journal of
Visualized Experiments) and live-streamed experiments (see Sidler’s contribution
to this volume). Some scholars (including the editors of this collection) would
argue that collectively these changes are altering science’s social structure and
its epistemology, leading to greater democracy within the scientific community
and to the increased credibility of experimental results. But is the term “revo-
lutionary” an appropriate descriptor for these changes? How large an “impact”
has the Internet really had on science and its rhetorics?
In reviewing Science and Technology Studies scholarship on new media and
knowledge creation, the Virtual Knowledge Studio (VKS) notes that most work
addressing the “informationization of academic work” falls into one of three
categories: “impact talk, deconstruction of impact talk, and detailed empirical
description” (2008, p. 321). The phrase “impact talk” describes commentary
that reflects technological determinism: the Internet is the main character in
a master narrative of revolutionary change. According to VKS, impact talk
about the Internet can be compelling because the narrative seems to hold up in
many contexts: “First-time users, as well as more advanced users, of a particular
Internet-based tool can ground their experiences in a coherent story about the
‘impact of the Internet’” (p. 320). But the determinism underwriting impact
talk can pose philosophical and methodological problems. As Eduardo Aibar
(2010) has explained, “Particular technologies are usually taken as something
given or coming out of the blue: they are just there and social scientists are
expected to explain what their effects on society will be” (p. 178). Such deter-
minism fails to account for the social forces that shape technology as a much
as technology shapes them.
REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION
/
5

Deconstructions of impact talk challenge or at least qualify the Internet’s
effects on the social systems that produce knowledge. For example, John
MacKenzie Owen’s The Scientific Article in the Age of Digitization (2007)
concludes that claims of an impending digital revolution in science are hyperbolic
and misguided strains of technological determinism. Such claims, he shows,
began in the 1970s, and yet the traditional scientific journal article has endured
the advent and proliferation of various incarnations of e-journals. Predictions
of revolution, he argues, say more about the philosophical and political positions
of the prophets that the realities of scientific communication. Moreover, such
claims label evolutionary socially grounded processes as revolutionary tech-
nologically driven events (p. 221).
Owen supports his claims with a thorough empirical study of electronic
journals from 1987 to 2004, which quantifies the uptake and application of
new technological affordances. After coding 86 scientific journals against 15
criteria and analyzing his results, Owen determined that electronic publishing has
not revolutionized science:
There is no evidence that digitization has transformed the practice of
scientific authorship at the level of the journal article. This study has
found that authors show little interest in adopting new ways of docu-
menting and presenting research results by means of the research article, or
in deviating too far from the traditional culture of scientific communication.
(2007, pp. 224–225)
We find Owen’s framework productive, but his study ends at 2004, just before
the advent of many significant developments in digitized scientific publishing,
such as those leveraging Web 2.0 technologies. These more recent technological
developments warrant reexamining Owen’s conclusions. Moreover, as many of
the cases collected here show, social media and multimedia technologies are
changing rhetorical practices both in journals and in other contexts. Owen’s
exclusive focus on journal articles is too narrow to examine fully the diverse sites
where rhetors use digitally mediated discourse to create and circulate scientific
knowledge. To be fair, Owen’s work is a dedicated study of the scientific journal
and the articles therein and not a study of scientific rhetoric more broadly
conceived. As many chapters in this collection show, the Internet’s influence
on the invention, production, and circulation of knowledge claims is significant
in arrays of genres and contexts. These arrays include scientific journal articles,
but not exclusively.
Most of the chapters of Science and the Internet fall into the last of the
categories of “Internet and academic research” scholarship posed by the VKS—
detailed empirical description. Collectively, they argue that rhetorical theory
can illuminate science and the Internet without resorting to hyperbolic “impact
talk” or dismissive deconstruction. Rhetoric offers tools for analyzing specific
6
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

social actions enabled and mediated by Internet technologies in order to
generalize about the Internet’s rhetorical role in communicating modern science.
Labeling the magnitude and nature of the Internet’s effect on science is less
important (for us) than understanding—at a functional level—how the Internet
is used in creating and distributing scientific knowledge. We leave it for our
readers to decide if these new technological affordances and rhetorical practices
are evolutionary or revolutionary.
The chapters in Science and the Internet approach a common question: How
is the Internet changing how science is communicated? Although these textual,
contextual, and empirical analyses isolate the local effects of information tech-
nologies on specific rhetorical activities, they can be grouped into two broad
categories: communicating to (and among) scientists and communicating to
(and among) nonexperts.
The chapters in the first section are arranged according to the lifecycle of
scientific arguments. The first of these chapters considers how technologies
influence the creation of scientific knowledge; that is, how the Internet can affect
rhetorical invention in science. Blogs offer one mechanism for refining scien-
tific and rhetorical procedures transparently and collectively, as Redfield’s
open invitation for comments about her methodology suggests. However, blogs
are just one mechanism for collaborative invention. Chad Wickman’s chapter
demonstrates how “open science” movements are changing the discursive and
material practices of scientists. Wickman’s study of open access notebooks—
laboratory notebooks posted online—shows how digital mediation has trans-
formed what were once private paper archives into dynamic, collaborative
rhetorical spaces with global audiences.
The other chapters on communication between scientists consider how net-
worked technologies are changing the representation, circulation, and reception
of knowledge within and between scientific communities: How might the Internet
affect the arrangement, style, and delivery of scientific arguments? How has
the Internet changed the ways in which peers react to their colleagues’ argu-
ments? Blogs like Redfield’s allow researchers to self-publish informal scientific
arguments, but formal scientific forums are also adapting to the rhetorical
affordances of the Internet, and new digital tools have expanded how data is
represented and used. Joseph Harmon’s quantitative study of electronic articles
published in 2010 and 2011 offers an updated survey of the proliferating afford-
ances offered by the Internet. His findings demonstrate how much has changed
and not changed since Owen conducted his study.
The case of GFAJ-1 is but one example of how Internet-enabled genres
and processes are changing the where, how, and who of peer review. Alan Gross
shows how Retraction Watch and other blogs use the narrative mode and ironic
stance of investigative journalism to comment on problematic published research;
he also shows the limits of these tactics of critique. Christian Casper examines
how informal postpublication comments have become institutionalized through
REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION
/
7

online commenting features integrated into the electronic interfaces of two
journals. Michelle Sidler shows how scientists have taken the process of peer
review to the next level by liveblogging replication experiments that refute
published claims. Together, these chapters demonstrate how the Internet enables
new, richer, and more democratic mechanisms for the communal policing of
scientific knowledge.
The contributions to the second half of Science and the Internet describe how
nonexperts receive and react to scientific knowledge communicated through
digital channels. Chapters in this section include case studies of lay interaction
with professional scientists (e.g., a blog gave layperson Zinegata a forum to
ask questions about Redfield’s critique), but they also offer accounts of digital
technologies transforming how science is accommodated for broader publics.
Jeanne Fahnestock provides a case study of the Web presence of a contro-
versial claim about adult human neurogenesis; that is, the brain can grow new
neurons in areas dedicated to higher reasoning. By tracking how the arguments
of different researchers were represented on blogs, listservs, and news sites
as well as in YouTube videos and other genres, Fahnestock charts the unique
affordances and problems of popularizing science via the Web.
Sara Wardlaw’s chapter examines a different Web-enabled genre for
popularizing science: the podcast. Confirming earlier work on print science
journalism, Wardlaw verifies her analysis of wonder appeals in a Radiolab
podcast on parasites through close readings of online comments from users.
Thus, she demonstrates one of the key methodological advantages of studying
rhetoric on the Web—mineable sources of reception evidence.
Three chapters investigate the role of the Internet in risk communication.
Kostelnick and Kostelnick examine relationships between specific digital afford-
ances—data visualization tools used in earth science—and specific rhetorical and
ethical problems, such as expressing certainty and probability when describing
the risks of natural disasters to the public. Two chapters address Internet-enabled
risk communication and the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. James Wynn
examines how digital technologies have transformed the representation of
risk offered by radiation maps. His comparison of printed radiation maps from
previous disasters with recent digital maps of the Fukushima event demonstrates
how verbal and visual rhetorical choices are affected by technological afford-
ances, contextual factors, and available scientific details. Ashley R. Kelley and
Carolyn Miller approach the Fukushima disaster through “parascientific” genres,
such as posts on Facebook, Twitter, Wikipedia, and other social media sites.
They show how these Internet channels offered nonexperts in Japan the means
to communicate information about the event; that information was then com-
mented upon by speculating experts, thereby “eroding” the boundaries between
expert and nonexpert communities.
The section on accommodating science via the Internet concludes with a
chapter on online science writing and informal science learning. In this study of
8
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

the Science Museum of Minnesota’s Science Buzz blog, Stacey Pigg, William
Hart-Davidson, Jeff Grabill, and Kirsten Ellenbogen use rhetorical discourse
analysis to document how blog posts demonstrate learning about science. Their
close reading of a popular blog thread identifies factors that encourage public
engagement with scientific topics, which has implications for how science-
learning institutions position themselves on the Web.
In a concluding reflection chapter, Charles Bazerman offers a candid assess-
ment of the rhetoric of science in the Internet era in the light of the contribu-
tions to this volume. Bazerman situates the conclusions of these cases in relation
to the longer history of scientific communication, and he identifies additional
opportunities for studying the Internet’s influence on the scientific article and
other genres.
REFERENCES
Aibar, E. (2010). A critical analysis of information society conceptualizations from an
STS point of view. tripleC: Cognition, Communication, Cooperation, 8(2), 177–182.
Anonymous. (2011, July 20). Email to my GFAJ-1 collaborators [Blog comment].
RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Erik. (2010, December 8). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog comment].
RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Kennedy, J. (2010, December 9). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog
comment]. RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
May, S. (2010, December 7). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog
comment]. RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Owen, J. M. (2007). The scientific article in the age of digitization. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Springer.
Pennisi, E. (2011). Concerns about arsenic-laden bacterium aired. Science, 332(3),
1136–1137.
PetHW. (2010, December 7). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog
comment]. RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Redfield, R. (2010, December 4). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog
post]. RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Redfield, R. (2011, July 20). Email to my GFAJ-1 collaborators [Blog post]. RRResearch.
Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
Virtual Knowledge Studio (VKS). (2008). Messy shapes of knowledge—STS explore
informationization, new media, and academic work. In E. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska,
M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies
(3rd ed., pp. 319–352). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wolfe-Simon, F., Blum, J. S., Kulp, T. R., Gordon, G. W., Hoeft, S. E., Pett-Ridge, J.,
et al. (2010). A bacterium that can grow by using arsenic instead of phosphorus.
Science, 332(6034), 1163–1166.
Zinegata. (2010, December 9). Arsenic-associated bacteria (NASA’s claims) [Blog
comment]. RRResearch. Retrieved from http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com
REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION
/
9

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 2
Learning to “Share your Science”:
The Open Notebook as Textual Object
and Dynamic Rhetorical Space
Chad Wickman
ABSTRACT
Laboratory notebooks have historically provided scientists with an important
resource for documenting, warranting, and communicating the outcomes of
their day-to-day research. Over the past decade, however, the genre has
undergone some interesting changes: once a situated, print-bound activity,
the practice of note making has begun to develop into a highly distributed,
multimedia undertaking—a development that is beginning to reconfigure
the traditional relationship between the laboratory, scientific community,
and broader public sphere. The growing movement toward “open notebook
science” (see Bradley, 2006; Bradley, Owens, & Williams, 2008) specif-
ically raises questions about the ways in which notebooks function as a
proprietary safeguard for individual scientists and as a dynamic rhetorical
space within which groups of scientists and other stakeholders can
present, discuss, revise, and circulate information. Through analysis of
OpenWetWare, a Web-based scientific community, this chapter examines
how scientists use familiar genres to balance the relationship between
stability and change as they make the transition from traditional rhetorical
practices that focus on individual ownership to emerging rhetorical practices
that focus on the open sharing of information through digital infrastructures.
I will argue specifically that open notebooks reinforce a type of “shared
praxis” (Nielsen, 2011) that is necessary for open access to take hold in the
scientific community and that may be contributing to a broader shift in
the rhetorical and epistemological dimensions of scientific research culture.
INTRODUCTION
The Art of Scientific Writing, a style guide for practitioners in the natural sciences,
emphasizes the importance of written communication for sharing information,
11

publishing findings, and generally contributing to one’s field of inquiry. Among
the genres the authors discuss—from reports to dissertations to journal articles—
they pay early and detailed attention to the laboratory notebook, describing it
as the “‘germ cell’ of the scientific literature” (Ebel, Bliefert, & Russey, 2004,
p. 16). I mention this quote not simply to point out what might be evident to many
scholars of rhetoric: namely, that writing is an essential component of scientific
communication and knowledge production. More interesting to me is how the
authors explicitly characterize the laboratory notebook as progenitor to a larger
and more complex body of scientific discourse. This is no trivial statement. It
is a telling one, however, in that it speaks to the constructive role that texts play
not just in the dissemination of published findings but also in the seemingly
mundane, day-to-day work of scientists at the laboratory bench.
Laboratory notebooks have historically provided scientists with a textual resource
for documenting their inquiry and thereby establishing proprietary ownership
over their inventions and discoveries. The fact that the genre warrants its own
section in a well-known guide to scientific writing only affirms its ongoing
relevance to students of science and working professionals alike. Yet similar to
other genres of scientific communication, the laboratory notebook has undergone
some interesting changes over the past decade. Once a situated, print-bound
activity, the practice of note making has begun to develop into a highly dis-
tributed, multimedia undertaking—a development that is beginning to recon-
figure the traditional relationship between the laboratory, scientific community, and
broader public sphere. The growing movement toward “open notebook science”
(see Bradley, 2006; Bradley, Owens, & Williams 2008) specifically raises ques-
tions about the ways in which notebooks function as a proprietary safeguard for
individual scientists and as a dynamic rhetorical space within which groups of scien-
tists and other stakeholders can present, discuss, revise, and circulate information.
Open access is a recognized yet still-evolving phenomenon in the scientific
community. Sometimes referred to as Open Science, or Science 2.0, it involves
making one’s research, from raw data to journal publications, freely available
to anyone who might benefit from it (see Willinsky, 2006).1 In a 2006 blog
post, chemist Jean-Claude Bradley coined the term “open notebook science” to
12
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 Scientists sometimes do this of their own accord, and they are sometimes required to do so.
For instance, the NIH implemented a policy in 2008, under the Consolidated Appropriations
Act, that requires “all investigators funded by the NIH [to]submit or have submitted for them
to the National Library of Medicine’s PubMed Central an electronic version of their final,
peer reviewed manuscripts upon acceptance for publication, to be made publicly available
no later than 12 months after the official date of publication” (nih.gov). While the long-term
impact of such policies has yet to be determined, a growing number of scientists have actively
begun to support open access practices. The 2012 boycott of Elsevier by mathematicians
and other researchers is just one recent example. See Brienza (2012) for a general overview
of the “Academic Spring” movement.

describe a method of sharing information analogous to the open-source-software
movement. It is “a way of doing science,” he suggests, “in which . . . you make all
your research freely available to the public and in real time. . . . The underlying
philosophy is that there should be no insider information” (Poynder, 2010).
Under this description, the image of the individual scientist making notes in
the laboratory takes on a new look: it now includes a vast network of scientists,
technical experts, and other interested parties who openly share information
using Web-based technologies. There is a democratic—and perhaps even non-
agonistic—impulse at work in the open access movement that emphasizes the
value of freeing knowledge for humanitarian purposes. Open notebook infra-
structures help to accommodate this need by providing a nontraditional rhetorical
space within which to communicate and deliberate about the sometimes-mundane
details of laboratory practice (see Borgman, 2007).
The very metaphor “open notebook science” calls to mind the physical rela-
tionship between scientists and the writing they perform in the dynamic flow
of their day-to-day research. In many ways, to “open” one’s notebook is to reveal
intimate details related to the process of inquiry and, more personally, to one’s
unique thought processes. Advocates of open notebook science see the practical
benefits of sharing their data and technical expertise freely with others; and,
for scientists like Jean-Claude Bradley, they also find value in promoting a
philosophy that privileges collective problem solving over individual ownership.
Opportunities for rhetorical study abound on both accounts. Within the
scope of this chapter, I specifically take steps to define the open notebook as a
textual object and examine open note making as a dynamic rhetorical activity.
These steps include describing new and emerging features of the notebook genre,
exploring how the practice of note making mediates research- and teaching-related
activities in an online scientific community, and theorizing how open notebooks are
contributing to the development of open access as a viable paradigm for scientific
communication in the 21st century. By addressing these foci, I hope to illustrate the
tensions involved in open notebook science and the potential benefits that accrue
from collaborating in a densely networked Web 2.0 environment.
The focus of this chapter is an online scientific community, OpenWetWare,
that specializes in the study and application of synthetic biology. I designed a
case study of the site to explore how it functions as an open notebook and to
investigate how it promotes communal standards for note making through the
use of semiformalized templates and a flexible, wiki-based infrastructure. My
analysis suggests that open notebooks borrow from conventional features of the
genre—for example, they provide a textual space within which to document
routine laboratory work—but shift the locus of writing activity away from the
individual scientist and toward a broader community of practitioners. Note
making thus preserves its traditional function as a semiprivate meditational means
(dialogue with oneself or one’s collaborators) but takes on a new role as an
object of public deliberation (dialogue with audiences outside the immediate
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
13

laboratory context). Sites like OpenWetWare in particular reveal how scientists
use a familiar genre to balance the relationship between stability and change
as they make the transition from traditional rhetorical practices that focus on
proprietary ownership to emerging rhetorical practices that focus on the open
sharing of information through digital infrastructures. I will argue, specifically,
that open notebooks reinforce a type of “shared praxis” (Nielsen, 2011), which
is necessary for open access to take hold in the scientific community and which
may be contributing to a broader shift in the rhetorical and epistemological
dimensions of scientific research culture.
THE SCIENTIFIC NOTEBOOK AS GENRE
AND TEXTUAL OBJECT
Scholars have investigated the constructive power of genre across a diverse
range of institutional and disciplinary contexts. Nowhere is this more apparent
than in the sciences. Bazerman’s (1988) study of scientific writing in the early
modern period, for instance, demonstrates how the experimental report emerged
in response to specific rhetorical problems and thereby assisted in the formation
of a coherent research culture (see Atkinson, 1999; Gross, Harmon, & Reidy,
2002). “By examining the emergence of a genre,” Bazerman suggests, “we can
identify the kinds of problems the genre was attempting to solve and how it
went about solving them” (p. 63). Berkenkotter and Huckin’s (1995) related
study traces the 20th-century evolution of the experimental article and the ways in
which textual practices shape the construction of scientific knowledge. According
to them, genres are “sites of contention between stability and change. They are
inherently dynamic, constantly (if gradually) changing over time in response
to the sociocognitive needs of individual users” (p. 6; see Orlikowski & Yates,
1994; Schryer, 1994). More recently, scholars have begun to examine how the
ongoing integration of digital media into the world of scientific publishing has
begun to impact the genre’s form and function (see Owen, 2007).
The experimental article has been a generative object of analysis for exam-
ining the role of writing and rhetoric in science. Yet other research genres, like
notebooks, have not gone unnoticed. Indeed, researchers have used these texts
to explore the microhistorical and tacit dimensions of experimental inquiry
(see Gooding, 1990a, 1990b; Holmes, 1984, 1990, 2004; Holmes, Renn, &
Rheinberger, 2003); the social and rhetorical dimensions of scientific invention
and discovery (see Bazerman, 1999; Campbell, 1990; Crick, 2005; Gross, 2006);
and the semiotic dimensions of writing and representation in the context of
laboratory practice (see Kozma, Chin, Russell, & Marx, 2000; Wickman, 2010).
Collectively, these scholars illustrate how notebooks contributed to important
episodes in the history of science and technology, and they confirm that note-
books continue to provide scientists with a constructive resource for carrying out
14
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

their day-to-day inquiry. What they have not fully investigated, however, is
how digitization and recent developments in open access communication have
begun to impact the genre and therefore the ways in which it mediates the
relationship between scientists, their objects of study, and the audiences with
whom they share their work. I believe that approaching notebooks from this
perspective specifically offers a basis both for identifying how emerging features
of the genre respond to new rhetorical problems and exigencies and for theorizing
how the genre helps to reinforce specific types of social and rhetorical action
both in the laboratory and in broader public forums.
Notebook Transformations and the Evolution of a Genre
The move toward electronic notebooks and open access recordkeeping is
gaining momentum within the scientific community. Even so, not all agree that it
is a welcome development. Waldrop (2008) claims that the “wide-open approach
to science still faces intense skepticism” (para. 15) from scientists over what
emerging textual practices signify for issues of privacy—for example, pro-
tecting the anonymity of research participants—and intellectual property—for
example, establishing proprietary ownership over inventions and discoveries.
Elliot (2011) suggests that electronic laboratory notebooks have “helped
hundreds of organizations to organize records and retain research knowledge”
but do not necessarily “eliminate the need for proper records management”
(para. 18). And Giles (2012) raises questions about what it means for notebooks
to “go paperless” at all. Implicit in these arguments is the assumption that note
making is a more or less codified textual practice that, depending on medium,
can either positively or negatively impact scientific research activity. Even a
cursory investigation of notebooks, however, reveals them to be increasingly
diverse in their form and function, whether referring to print, electronic, digital,
or open access versions of the genre.
Scientists have traditionally used print notebooks to achieve multiple objec-
tives. A short list would include the following: recording technical procedures
and outcomes in the laboratory, interpreting one’s research findings over time,
facilitating collaboration through shared textual space, and staking claims to
intellectual property. Electronic notebooks function similarly to their print
counterparts but offer a different set of affordances. Most prominently perhaps,
they facilitate recordkeeping through specially designed software programs
that can be used to record, archive, index, search, and share vast amounts of
information (see Butler, 2005). According to Myers (2003), electronic notebooks
offer “clear advantages to the researcher” and “provide a strong driver away
from paper records” (p. 1; see Rubacha, Rattan, & Hosselet, 2011). Myers argues,
however, that to be successfully integrated into scientific practice, they must
afford the same advantages as print notebooks, for instance, in terms of providing
scientists with an in situ technology for sharing information between practitioners
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
15

who are focused on common problems (see Klokmose & Zander, 2010; Myers,
Fox-Dobbs, Laird, Le, Reich,& Curtz, 1996; Tabard, Mackay, & Eastmond,
2008; Talbott, Peterson, Schwidder, & Myers, 2005; Turner & Turner, 1997).
Adopting an electronic medium in itself does not radically alter the exigency for
keeping a notebook—for example, it still addresses the problem of recording
information for personal and proprietary use—but it does influence how
notebooks organize research activity and therefore how they contribute to
processes of scientific knowledge production.
The electronic notebook is a precursor to more recent developments in note-
book technology. Over the past decade in particular, scientists have increasingly
begun to use—and often repurpose—digital media to suit their own, specialized
needs in the laboratory. I differentiate between electronic and digital notebooks
on two accounts. The first tend to be designed with software that relate to
discipline-specific laboratory practices and institutional needs. So, for example,
a group of scientists or technicians may share common devices and/or programs
that can be used to optimize workflow and share information with one another.
The second do not necessarily require specialized software designed for technical
or scientific disciplines. Indeed, scientists often use common word processing
programs like Microsoft Word or Web infrastructures like blogs to record and
share their work with each other. It is worth mentioning that to keep a digital
notebook often involves posting information online and making it available to
audiences that extend beyond institutional collaborations. Under this description,
one’s notebook may be accessed by anyone with an Internet connection, but the
information is not completely “open” in the sense that it is still nonmodifiable—
for example, if it takes the form of a secured PDF file—and thus does not funda-
mentally alter the traditional relationship between producer/rhetor and user/audience.
Open notebooks combine the affordances of print, electronic, and digital
media. Like print media, scientists use them to facilitate inquiry and document
laboratory practices; like electronic media, scientists use them to record, archive,
index, search, and circulate information in an efficient way; and like digital
media, scientists use them to post information online and thereby make their
research available to anyone who might benefit from it. Open notebooks also
contribute at least two novel features to the genre: notebook entries tend to be
designed exclusively for public consumption and use, and notebooks can be
modified by different users and not just the original writer or writers.2 The model
16
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
2 The definition of “open” or “open notebook” is not fully settled. Jean-Claude Bradley
(2006) has argued, for instance, that open notebook refers to making one’s research notes
immediately available online. I choose to modify this definition to include information that
can be readily accessed and modified by different audiences. The latter definition, which
I use throughout the remainder of this chapter, attempts to account for the collaborative
nature of note making and thus the collective nature of knowledge production that takes
place in some online spaces.

for sender-receiver is not wholly different from a print scenario where the writer
anticipates how the reader will engage with the text and where the reader brings
his or her own interpretive lens and background knowledge to the situation. Yet
there is a key difference, and that is, the reader in this case is also a potential
collaborator and producer of the text in an explicit way. As I define it here, the
open notebook is not an immutable mobile in Latour’s (1990; see Latour, 1987;
Latour & Woolgar, 1986) sense of the term, but rather a type of fluid object (see
de Laet & Mol, 2000) that serves a generally recognizable purpose but can be
adapted to context-specific needs. Given these characteristics, it is somewhat
unclear whether open notebooks actually constitute an extension of the genre or,
more radically, a complete break from it. What we do know is that the rhetorical
situation for note making is changing as it begins to accommodate new media,
wider audiences, and novel exigencies related to open access.
A commonplace within the North American genre studies scholarship is that
genres are not static vehicles for delivering information. Rather, in Miller’s
(1984) well-known phrasing, they are “typified rhetorical actions based in
recurrent situations” (p. 159). The situation for keeping an open notebook is not
completely typified in the way Miller describes; indeed, open notebook science
itself is an emerging phenomenon and therefore presents a challenge for anyone
who attempts to theorize it as a “type” of rhetorical activity. My inclination,
however, is to characterize recent developments in the genre as a productive
tension between stability and change that is still unfolding; that is, open note-
books are recognizable enough to invite a particular response yet flexible enough
to accommodate, and reinforce, emergent forms of social and rhetorical action.
Geisler (2001) suggests that “a key characteristic of texts used for internal control
. . . is their public character, which makes compliance or failure to comply an
observable fact” (p. 4). Texts that “jump the wall,” she argues, move from private
meditational means to public motive and, in doing so, become a “culturally-
valued” outcome of activity (p. 9). With traditional notebooks, this would
involve an active attempt to share one’s work outside the laboratory context.
But with open notebooks, writing is always a public activity. It is therefore
always constrained by one’s ability either to adhere to or depart from communal
standards for note making. My aim in the remainder of this chapter is to show how
these claims take shape in the context of an online scientific community.
EMERGENT CONTEXTS FOR WRITING IN SCIENCE
My interest in laboratory notebooks grew out of a previous study that
explored processes of writing and representation in a chemical physics labora-
tory. Through that inquiry, I found these texts being used in a variety of ways:
for example, technically (scientists use them to record and archive procedural
information); epistemically (scientists use them to generate meaning and interpret
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
17

phenomena in the flow of laboratory inquiry); and rhetorically (scientists use
them to stabilize meaning over time and develop propriety ownership over the
outcomes of their research). From these perspectives, notebooks offer a valuable
resource for theorizing scientific writing from the perspective of in situ laboratory
activity. Specifically, we can situate them in relation to specific tasks; we can
study them in relation to workplace ensembles and collaborative activities; we
can examine them in relation to other textual practices; and we can theorize them
as a type of meaning- and knowledge-constructive rhetorical technology. A
similar method applies to these study of open notebook science, only it requires
that we adapt our print-based thinking about scientific texts to accommodate
emerging forms of writing activity that take place in online spaces.
I initially approached the website OpenWetWare (OWW) as a dynamic
network and eventually as an identifiable community that is bound together by
a range of textual practices. The site itself served as a general object of study to
bound off my analysis; but, I also focused on discrete written interactions as a
means to explore how scientists and other stakeholders negotiate object-referents
through the practice of note making and open notebook production. I gained
access to OWW by composing a letter to the organization that manages the site
and by becoming an official member of the community.3 The following methods
contributed to my data-collection efforts: observations and field notes, visual
mapping of the site, analysis of intertextual relationships and written interactions,
and semistructured interviews with members of the community. I also looked
to other open notebook practices outside of OWW as a point of comparison.
(The UsefulChem Project [n.d.] is a well-known example that builds on similar
principles related to open access but defines and manifests them in different
ways.) Over time, I narrowed my focus to two objects of analysis: the site itself
and the way it functions as an open notebook; and notebook templates within
the site and the way they structure rhetorical dynamics between members of the
community. I describe these processes in greater detail in the following sections.
OpenWetWare: Learning to “Share Your Science”
OpenWetWare was launched in May 2005 by a group of graduate students
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) who wanted to coordinate
their work through a shared Web space (see Waldrop, 2008). Over time, the
project developed into a much larger collective of practitioners and students
18
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
3 I made my presence known in different ways: for example, by obtaining IRB approval
for this research; by writing to executive members of the organization; by contacting indi-
vidual members directly; and by developing my own Web space on the site. OWW itself is
a diverse space with a diverse membership base. My presence was therefore not as noticeable
as it would typically be in a physical research environment.

who use the site as a resource for obtaining and sharing information related to
the field of biology and the discipline of biological synthesis. OWW’s stated
mission is to
support open sharing of research, education, publication, and discussion in
biological sciences and engineering. We promote and support collaborations
among researchers, students, and others who are working towards these
goals. We believe that open sharing of research improves the quality and
pace of scientific and engineering research. (OWW, n.d.)
The early vision for the community was based on a “Science 2.0” philosophy
that encouraged members to exchange information in the most efficient manner
possible and therefore make “good use of 21st century technology for sharing
and publishing . . . with societal goals of openness regarding the development and
constructive application of technology” (OWW, n.d.). The OWW community
originally consisted of only a handful of graduate students and related labora-
tories, but over the past 7 years, it has continued to proliferate. At the time of
this writing, in 2012, the site has received over 80 million page views and
includes over 11,000 members from countries that span the globe. I see these
numbers as evidence of a growing interest both in synthetic biology—a common
area of interest for members of the OWW community—and open notebook
science—a related interest that many in the community share.
Synthetic biology is an emerging discipline that has grown in interest over
the past decade. According to Benner and Sismour (2005), synthetic biologists
“extract from living systems interchangeable parts that might be tested, validated
as construction units, and reassembled to create devices that might (or might
not) have analogues in living systems” (p. 533; see Andrianantoandro, Basu,
Karig, & Weiss, 2006; Knight, 2005). The possibilities for application are vast.
Endy (2005), an early advocate for OWW and co-founder of the Biobricks
Foundation, argues that open, reliable, and standardized information are key
components for helping synthetic biology fulfill human needs. In an article
published in the scientific journal Nature, he suggests, specifically, that
the biological engineering community would benefit from the development
of technologies and the promulgation of standards that support the definition,
description and characterization of the basic biological parts, as well as
standard conditions that support the use of parts in combination and overall
system operation. (p. 450)
The very existence of a community like OWW responds to this need both
directly and indirectly. On the one hand, the site provides the biology community
with a usable infrastructure within which to share procedural information related
to biological engineering. On the other hand, it standardizes the process of note
making, transforming it from an individual meditational means to a collective and
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
19

public rhetorical activity and thus promotes the growth of synthetic biology as a
coherent body of research. (It is worth noting that Endy’s students helped to
launch OWW based on an earlier model they developed called “Endipedia.”)
The Biobricks Foundation, a public-benefit organization devoted to the study and
production of standardized biological parts, or Biobricks, now manages the site.
Open notebook science is compelling in part because it seeks to create access
to information that might not be made available through other forms of scientific
communication. This is one recognizable feature of the genre; that is, scientists
have traditionally used notebooks to document successes and failures whereas
only the former have traditionally made their way into published journal articles
(see Medawar, 1964). Early developers of OWW recognized the potential value
of sharing laboratory notes with other researchers in the synthetic biology com-
munity. We can see this explicitly stated in a grant proposal OWW submitted
to the National Science Foundation (NSF) in 2006:
The process of biological research generates and makes use of a wide
variety of information, most of which is either inaccessible or unrecorded.
For example, research papers and conference proceedings typically only
summarize completed projects and results, while biological databases
store and share heavily refined experimental data. Most of the remaining
knowledge, and the process through which that knowledge is produced, is
not recorded in any structured form or made available. . . . As a result, much
biological research knowledge is consigned to individual and collective lore.
(2006, p. 1)
According to the proposal, OWW provides an important space not only for
sharing the minutiae of research—what we might refer to as the “germ cells” of
the scientific literature—but also for laying bare the very process of knowledge
production. The recording of failure is a particularly relevant example: just
because an experiment did not work out as hypothesized does not render it worth-
less to scientists (and students of science) working on similar projects. Inter-
estingly, the grant proposal makes an implicit argument about the ways in which
genres constrain scientific communication and thus influence the larger scientific
enterprise. In this case, the open notebook offers affordances to researchers that
other genres, or even other media within the same genre, may not offer.
OWW as Open Notebook
OWW is designed using wiki software and is therefore “open” in the sense that
any member can freely modify the structure or, on a more fine-grained level,
revise individual notebook entries. Members represent countries from around the
world and join the site for any number of reasons. Some are synthetic biologists
interested in promoting their research; some are practitioners coordinating the
20
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

work that takes place in their laboratories; and some are students who are ful-
filling course requirements. OWW thus provides a space for practicing scientists
to communicate about their research but also serves as a pedagogical resource
for those who are learning to be scientists (or simply, who might want to learn
more about synthetic biology). There is some overt regulation of communicative
activity in this setting—for example, users must go through a process of joining
the site if they want to create a new page or modify existing information—but
overall, the community governs itself through collective norms that are reinforced
through different note making practices. In this section, I focus on the features
of OWW that enable it to function as an open notebook.
OWW’s homepage is designed to organize important pages on the site and
sometimes link them to other related information on the Web. These include
the following: protocols, materials, labs & groups, courses, blogs, and a lab
notebook software program. Protocols and materials are dynamic wiki spaces
where technical information gets shared with and modified by members of the
community. Labs & groups identify different organizations affiliated with OWW
and provide links to individual pages both within and outside the site. Courses
provide information related to science classes offered at different universities
in the United States and around the world. Blogs provide a setting within which
members can communicate about general issues related to biology and biological
engineering. And the software program provides a template for creating an
individual notebook that one can use to record information and share it with
others. Together, these pages orient users to OWW as an open notebook and
more generally as a networked community of practitioners.
The site-as-open-notebook responds to a familiar exigence in the sense that
it provides users with a space within which to record their day-to-day laboratory
work. In this way, it functions similarly to other notebook media. Yet OWW
promotes a more collective approach to note making and more broadly to the
construction of procedural knowledge. Protocols and materials in particular
facilitate this practice. Protocol entries tend to focus on the communication of
techniques for carrying out procedures in the laboratory; and material entries tend
to focus on the communication of techniques for producing physical artifacts.
They each rely on the completion of technical tasks, but the former tend to be
techniques for acting while the latter tend to be artifacts that mediate activity
or can be acted upon. Protocol and material entries look like pages in a print
notebook in the sense that they communicate technical information through
multiple semiotic resources; one significant difference however is that the infor-
mation is immediately and publicly accessible and can be openly modified by
members of the OWW community.
Protocols and materials cover a range of subject areas related to the study
and application of synthetic biology. Some entries get modified regularly while
others rarely get modified at all. These wiki pages function in similar ways,
but I focus on protocols here because they tend to get revised more often, and by a
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
21

greater number of members, than other entries on the site. The current template
for uploading protocols developed over time (2006–present) and through ongoing
interactions between individual members. The structure itself is relatively linear
and includes the following headings: overview, materials, procedure, notes,
references, and contact. Users simply adopt these categories to generate their
individual entries or conversely, input alternative categories or subsections as
they see fit. (They can do this by accessing the page’s source code.) The template
thus provides constraints for note making activity but is flexible enough to
accommodate localized needs. The entry titled Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
offers one illustrative example of the OWW protocol. It includes the following
headings adapted from the template structure: general procedures, casting gels,
buffers, loading dyes, notes, see also, and external links. Generally, it looks like a
normal, albeit cleaned-up, page out of a print-based laboratory notebook.
The “History” link at the top of the page allows users to trace how the Agarose
Gel Electrophoresis (AGE) protocol evolved between April 25, 2005 (the date
of the original entry) and April 29, 2010 (a recent modification). Altogether,
12 users contributed to it over a 5-year span, and over 50 changes were made
between the first and last entry. These changes suggest that procedural knowledge
communicated on OWW is the result of a dynamic interaction between users
rather than an instrumental reporting of technical data. For instance, the aim of
the original entry was to “prepare gels for gel electrophoresis” (April 25, 2005).
Approximately 6 months later, however, a different user off-loaded the existing
information to another page using a hyperlink and changed the protocol to
“Agarose gel electrophoresis.” The protocol thus evolved from a narrow focus
on material production—that is, how to prepare a gel— to a broader focus on
laboratory techniques that use material products—that is, how to perform the gel
electrophoresis technique. Once the original objective was modified, it offered
a basis for other participants to add new text (e.g., step-by-step directions),
visuals (e.g., an image of the agarose gel under UV light), and data displays
(e.g., a table that displays rules of thumb for the procedure). The final result is
a usable protocol and a page that has stabilized through ongoing collaboration
between community members.
The networked structure of OWW allows practitioners to supplement indi-
vidual entries through an intertextual weaving of hyperlinks that guide users
to internal and external sources. Protocol pages typically include two types.
The first connect to other pages on the site and often relate to the procedure itself.
So, for instance, the AGE page includes links to materials that are necessary to
carry out the protocol (e.g., preparing agarose gel) and to similar entries generated
by other individuals or groups within the site (e.g., affiliated labs that have
developed their own AGE procedures). The second connect to external websites
that provide alternative techniques for carrying out the protocol in question.
AGE includes several hyperlinks to pages outside OWW, and each one gets
rated on a “3-star” system so that readers have some sense of whether it is viable
22
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

information to consult. One benefit of connecting to other resources on the Web
is that the AGE page can provide users—some of whom may be novices just
learning to perform laboratory tasks—with information delivered in a range of
formats. These include the typical written instructions, visual images, and data
displays; but they also include media like virtual simulations. Users can thus
learn about AGE from several perspectives: whether by consulting the entry on
OWW and the revisions that were made to the protocol over time, by researching
the embedded hyperlinks to see how they might supplement their understanding
through other information found on the site and on the Web, or by experimenting
with tools for enacting material techniques in virtual spaces.
The fact that the AGE page underwent several transformations over a 5-year
span suggests that even the most basic (or seemingly basic) procedural knowledge
is a product of communal interaction. Sometimes this takes place over days
and weeks; and sometimes it takes place over months and years. The “Talk”
function embedded within the wiki facilitates this process by providing a
mechanism within which members can communicate with one another about
the changes they feel would improve individual entries. Consider an example
taken from the AGE page:
Hi Mike, nice additions to Agarose gel electrophoresis consensus protocol.
Would be great to have that as an image. I saw something similar once
in the Roche LabFAQ but the image is copyrighted. See you around on
OWW—Jakob 06:31, 29 June 2009 (EDT).
The writing displayed in the “talk” between scientists confirms that members
communicate with each other directly and not only through their contributions
to different protocols. And sometimes they discuss the most viable methods
both for completing technical work in the laboratory and for sharing it on OWW.
The object of this activity is not always something that can be discussed as, say,
one might discuss a new species of insect; indeed, synthetic biologists actively
design and engineer biological parts and systems that do not necessarily exist in
nature. The object-referent for these scientists, whether engineered materials
or protocols, might therefore be considered an active negotiation of meaning
through procedural discourse rather than a straightforward representation of
technical knowledge that they simply share with one another. In principle, the
negotiation itself could go on for an unlimited period of time, but I have found
that protocols and materials do stabilize as procedures get worked out through
ongoing community interactions.
OWW and the Standardization of Note Making Activity
A strategic issue for early users of OWW was whether protocols should be
dynamically generated or whether they should be based on templates that the
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
23

community proposes, creates, and approves (e.g., via steering committee). On
the one hand, the open nature of the site is valuable for creating new knowledge
through collective interactions and collaborative problem solving. On the other
hand, the open nature of the site can be messy, and perhaps obstructive, if
everyone has a unique method for uploading and sharing information. The
notebook software program embedded within the site responds to both needs;
that is, it provides a template for uploading information that exists as part of
the wiki structure and can be modified by other members of the OWW com-
munity; and the templates can be modified to accommodate (semi-) personal
use by individuals and subgroups within the site. Members who use the program
thus move from note making that takes place within a general structure to one
that takes place in a more circumscribed space, which, I have found, tends to
get used for individualized needs. The creation of a standardized yet flexible
notebook program contributes to the efficiency of research and communicative
activity and reflects an intentional effort to stabilize the ways in which users
access and modify information on the site.
The exigency for using the notebook program varies depending on the user
and audience. Individual scientists may use it to record their personal findings
and share them with the OWW community; teachers may use it to orient students
to laboratory techniques and writing practices; and students may use it simply
because they want to pass their courses or learn how to contribute to OWW
through their writing.4 I have found that the pedagogical function in particular
illustrates the power of note making to reinforce disciplinary norms related
both to research and communication. The NSF grant proposal referenced earlier
in the chapter is telling in this regard: “By exposing students to OWW via their
courses,” the authors suggest, “we will train a new cadre of researchers to
systematically and digitally document and share not only experimental results but
also the detailed context for those results” (2006, p. 3). I take two points of
interest from this statement. First, the authors see how notebooks function as a
pedagogical resource in the undergraduate classroom, and second, they appear
well aware of the connection between writing and disciplinary enculturation.
Over time, the logic goes, students will become practicing scientists who have
learned
to
“share
their
science”—including
the
“detailed
context”
for
experimental results—and open access will be less an argument to be made than it
will be a common practice in the scientific community.
Multiple groups associated with OWW use the notebook program to organize
their laboratory activities. One instructive example comes from American
University’s Biomaterials Design Lab (BDL), where the professor and principal
investigator, Dr. Matt Hartings, requires undergraduate students to document
24
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
4 As evidence of the latter, OWW has used the notebook program for students taking part
in the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) competition.

their laboratory work using the notebook program. The process of note making
for these members is similar to other writing that takes place on the site—for
example, inputting and modifying information—but is oriented toward a different
set of outcomes. In this case, Dr. Hartings (expert scientist) uses the site and the
notebook program as a medium for teaching undergraduates (novice scientists)
how to carry out field-specific procedures in the laboratory, and document and
interpret the outcomes of the procedures they perform. Students record their work
in notebooks, all of which are linked to the BDL homepage on OWW, and
Hartings assesses their entries by embedding his own comments on individual
pages. Students in turn respond to his comments and in doing so, learn how to
rhetorically present their findings in the style of an expert practitioner.
The template for the notebook program includes just two categories for
inputting information. The first is Description/Abstract, and the second is Notes.
It also includes two additional features that differentiate it from other templates
used within the site: a calendar that highlights the date of each entry, and a
search engine that can be used to locate information related to notebook entries
in particular. Hartings tailored his course template to include the following:
Objective, Description, Data, and Notes. While a simple modification, it is not
a trivial one. Indeed, the professor in this case takes advantage of the template’s
flexibility and uses it to bridge the materiality of laboratory inquiry with a textual
practice that connects students with a networked collective of practitioners in
the field. Hartings’s model for constructing a notebook page accomplishes at
least two objectives: it orients students to the technical tasks involved in carrying
out laboratory protocols and it orients them to rhetorical tasks involved in
documenting their work in an open notebook that potentially can be accessed
and modified by members of the OWW community. Both are necessary for
students to become facile with technical procedures they need to perform at the
laboratory bench and with the rhetorical techniques that will enable them to
become contributing members of a scientific discipline.
Students create their own notebooks through OWW, and Hartings uses entries
as a space within which to guide them in completing and documenting their
work. Similar to materials and protocols, it is possible to trace these interactions
through the “Revision History” feature located on individual notebook pages.
A September 2011 entry in Hartings’s notebook, for instance, required students
to carry out a technical procedure related to nanoparticle synthesis and document
their outcomes in their OWW notebooks. Once the task was completed, he
then commented on the entries individually. These comments included questions
like, “What do you make of your data?” and “What do you think it means?”
Hartings also directed students toward scholarly literature that they read as a
class, asking, “Is this consistent with what Bakishi et al [sic] see in their paper
for nanoparticle synthesis?” Students responded to these questions by correcting
their calculations, adding visual displays and including more textual explanation
to the entry. The rhetorical situation here combines the material and technical
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
25

dimensions of laboratory practice with the rhetorical dimensions of recording
data, interpreting and displaying it, and situating one’s work within the broader
field of study. And it all takes place within a pedagogical framework where
the professor is teaching students not only how to perform but also how to share
their science.
The dynamic between Hartings and his students is one that we might find in
any number of classroom settings. It goes something like this: professor assigns
task; student completes task; professor assesses task; student respond to assess-
ment (and so on). The relationship here, however, is different in the sense that
this interaction takes place on OWW and is therefore a public activity. Indeed,
different members of the group can consult each other’s work, and other members
of the OWW community can contribute their own insights if they so choose.
Similar to other forms of note making on the site, these notebook entries “jump
the wall” (see Geisler, 2001) when they move from private meditational means
to public motive. Only in this situation, the relationship is somewhat more
complex because it involves a decidedly educational component; that is, notebook
entries that once mediated between professor and student now take on a much
wider audience. It is not only an expert practitioner posting his or her research
to the Web; it is a more systematic attempt to enculturate an upcoming gener-
ation into particular ways of approaching laboratory tasks—completing technical
procedures—and writing about the outcomes of those tasks—interpreting, struc-
turing, and displaying information in the form of notebook entries that provide
detailed contexts for experimental results. It may be that professor Hartings
is simply attempting to help his students “get it right.” Yet a more nuanced
view might suggest that he is showing them how to process information in
the style of an expert scientist and, just as important, how to build knowledge
through collaborative interactions in general and through the practice of open
notebook science in particular.
CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS
Open notebook science is just one of many new practices emerging within
the complex ecology of 21st-century scientific communication, but I believe
it usefully illustrates how scientists are attempting to balance the relationship
between stability and change through a familiar textual practice. The laboratory
notebook genre has traditionally been “fuzzy” (see Medway, 2002) in the sense
that individual texts tend to share a common exigence but also tend to be
somewhat idiosyncratic to the individual scientist or group. With electronic
notebooks, however, the process of uploading information becomes increas-
ingly standardized through predesigned templates. Note making in turn begins
to resemble a relatively streamlined process of data entry. Open notebook
sites like OWW converge these two phenomena in the sense that they provide a
26
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

dynamic yet structured space within which scientists can share information with
others on the Web. The flexibility of the wiki ensures that note making is not
a wholly standardized or rote activity, and the public and modifiable nature of
notebook entries ensures that individual writers must at least remain accountable
to community norms (lest they find themselves at odds with the community).
Through this process, notebook entries become less fuzzy, more recognizable in
their form and function, and potentially more powerful in their ability to reinforce
particular habits of writing and rhetorical action.
Online communities like OWW offer many possibilities for collaborative
inquiry and collective problem solving. Yet on a broader scale, the power of
open notebook science is potentially inhibited if there is no clear standard for
communicating about problems and the techniques used for solving them. And
here is where open notebooks have some role to play in transforming scientific
research culture. Nielsen (2011) argues that
if we’re to amplify collective intelligence . . . participants must share a body
of knowledge and techniques. It’s that body of knowledge and techniques
that they use to collaborate. When this shared body exists, we’ll call it a
shared praxis, after the word praxis, meaning the practical application of
knowledge.” (p. 75, Nielsen’s emphasis)
Notebooks are not the only way to create a shared body of knowledge in
the sciences. Admittedly, a variety of textual genres exist for this very purpose.
Even so, the practice of open note making does represent a move to make all
research available—and not just the finished work that makes its way into
journal articles or other formal publication outlets. Some open notebooks func-
tion as an archive of details gleaned from research undertaken by scientists,
like Jean-Claude Bradley, who are willing to make their work public in real
time. Under this description, sharing knowledge becomes an act of making
information available and accessible. An open notebook infrastructure like
OWW, however, represents a somewhat different prospect for the idea of open
notebook science as an emergent model of scientific communication—precisely
because it reinforces shared praxis both through communal standards of note
making and through the reporting of practical techniques that lie at the heart of
much scientific inquiry. It does this in at least two ways: first, by providing a
flexible infrastructure within which members can share, revise, and otherwise
communicate about their research over time; and second, by providing dynamic
templates that promote rhetorical action based on principles of open access
and collective problem solving. These features contribute to the typification of
open note making as a textual practice and, for OWW in particular, the stabil-
ization of procedural knowledge related to synthetic biology.
I began this chapter by discussing how the art of scientific writing charac-
terized the laboratory notebook as a “germ cell of the scientific literature.” The
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
27

authors of that style guide were referring primarily to a print-based genre; for
them, the laboratory notebook is just the beginning of a long process through
which knowledge takes shape and gets communicated beyond the laboratory
walls. I believe that the germ cell metaphor still applies today but invites an
alternative reading given our current technological landscape. Note making is no
longer only a starting point for the communication of science; indeed, it is also a
telos, which over time may begin to effect subtle changes in the scientific research
culture. When scientists “open their notebooks” to the world, they are sharing
information, but they are also promoting a new way of thinking about knowledge
production. Studies of laboratory life have described science as a competitive
enterprise where scientists produce immutable and mobile inscriptions, amass
allies, and construct barriers between themselves and others. I would argue that
this agonistic model comes into question when they begin to integrate principles
of open access into their research and communication. With open notebook
science in particular, scientists are not only attempting to win arguments, they are
also learning to “share their science” and thus facilitate a collective approach to
knowledge production—one that benefits from increasingly fluid boundaries
between the classroom, laboratory, scientific community, and broader public
sphere.
What I hope to have shown in this chapter is that open notebook science
is a promising development within the open access movement. Yet like other
developments in open access, it is not without its complications. At the very least,
it will take a genuine effort on the part of individual scientists to communicate
information that may potentially undercut their claims to intellectual property.
We can see this happening on a very public stage (e.g., the “Academic Spring”
movement), and we can see this happening in everyday practice (e.g., scientists
who use sites like OWW to share their science and promote their research). There
is a question here of self-interest—getting credit for one’s intellectual work—and
communal interest—contributing to a body of knowledge for the sake of improv-
ing the human condition. Open notebooks have an increasingly vital role to play
in this process. And as writing researchers and rhetoricians, we have an increas-
ingly central role to play in showing how and the extent to which emerging textual
practices contribute to the production and dissemination of scientific knowledge.
When we do this, we are not critiquing the epistemology of science through
rhetorical study, but rather we are showing how rhetoric itself contributes to
conversations about the relationship between science and society in a digital age.
REFERENCES
Andrianantoandro, E., Basu, S., Karig, D. K., & Weiss, R. (2006). Synthetic biology:
New engineering rules for an emerging discipline. Molecular Systems Biology.
Retrieved from http://www.nature.com
28
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Atkinson, D. (1999). Scientific discourse in sociohistorical context: The philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London, 1675–1975. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experi-
mental article in science. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Bazerman, C. (1999). The languages of Edison’s light. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Benner, S. A., & Sismour, M. A. (2005). Synthetic biology. Nature Reviews Genetics, 6,
533–543.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication:
Cognition/culture/power. New York, NY: Routledge.
Borgman, C. (2007). Scholarship in the digital age: Information, infrastructure, and
the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bradley, J. C. (2006, September 26). Open notebook science. Retrieved from http://
drexel-coas-elearning.blogspot.com/2006/09/open-notebook-science.html
Bradley, J. C., Owens, K., & Williams, A. (2008). Chemistry crowdsourcing and open
notebook science. Nature Precedings. doi: 10.1038/npre.2008.1505.1
Brienza, C. (2012). Opening the wrong gate?: The academic spring and scholarly pub-
lishing in the humanities and social sciences. Publishing Research Quarterly, 28,
159–171.
Butler, D. (2005). Electronic notebooks: A new leaf. Nature, 436, 20–21.
Campbell, J. A. (1990). Scientific discovery and rhetorical invention: The path to
Darwin’s origin. In H. W. Simons (Ed.), The rhetorical turn: Invention and persua-
sion in the conduct of inquiry (pp. 58–90). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Crick, N. (2005). “A capital and a novel argument”: Charles Darwin’s notebooks and the
productivity of rhetorical consciousness. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 91, 337–364.
de Laet, M., & Mol, A. (2000). The Zimbabwe bush pump: Mechanics of a fluid tech-
nology. Social Studies of Science, 30, 225–263.
Ebel, H. F., Bliefert, C., & Russey, W. E. (Eds.). (2004). The art of scientific writing:
From student reports to professional publications in chemistry and related fields.
Germany: Wiley-VCH.
Elliot, M. H. (2011). New debates over intellectual property protection and ELN.
Retrieved from http://www.scientificcomputing.com
Endy, D. (2005). Foundations for engineering biology. Nature, 438, 449–453.
Geisler, C. (2001). Textual objects: Accounting for the role of texts in the everyday
life of complex organizations. Written Communication, 18, 296–325.
Giles, J. (2012). Going paperless: The digital lab. Retrieved from http://www.nature.com
Gooding, D. (1990a). Mapping experiment as a learning process: How the first electro-
magnetic motor was invented. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 15, 165–201.
Gooding, D. (1990b). Experiment and the making of meaning: Human agency in scientific
observation and experiment. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Gross, A. G. (2006). Starring the text: The place of rhetoric in science studies. Carbondale,
IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Gross, A. G., Harmon, J. E., & Reidy, M. S. (2002). Communicating science: The scien-
tific article from the 17th century to the present. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Holmes, F. L. (1984). Lavoisier and Krebs: The individual scientists in the near and
deeper past. Isis, 75, 131–142.
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
29

Holmes, F. L. (1990). Laboratory notebooks: Can the daily record illuminate the broader
picture? Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 134, 349–366.
Holmes, F. L. (2004). Investigating pathways: Patterns and stages in the careers of
experimental scientists. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Holmes, F. L., Renn, J., & Rheinberger, H.-J. (2003). Reworking the bench: Research
notebooks in the history of science. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Klokmose, C. N., & Zander, P. (2010). Rethinking laboratory notebooks. In M.
Lewkowicz, P. Hassanaly, M. Rohde, & V. Wulf (Eds.), Proceedings of COOP 2010:
Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Designing Cooperative Systems
(pp. 119–139). New York, NY: Springer.
Knight, T. F. (2005). Engineering novel life. Molecular Systems Biology. Retrieved
from http://www.nature.com
Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and
tools in the chemistry laboratory and their implications for chemistry learning.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 105–143.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Repre-
sentation in scientific practice (pp. 19–69). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Medway, P. (2002). Fuzzy genres and community identities: The case of architecture
students’ sketchbooks. In R. Coe, L. Lingard, & T. Teslenko (Eds.), The rhetoric
and ideology of genre: Strategies for stability and change (pp. 123–153). Cresskill,
NJ: Hampton.
Medawar, P. (1964, August 1). Is the scientific paper fraudulent? Saturday Review,
pp. 42–43.
Miller, C. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151–167.
Myers, J. D. (2003). Collaborative electronic notebooks as electronic records: Design
issues for the secure electronic laboratory notebook (ELN). In Proceedings of
the fourth international symposium on collaborative technologies and systems,
35, 13–22.
Myers, J. D., Fox-Dobbs, C., Laird, J., Le, D., Reich, D., & Curtz, T. (1996). Electronic
laboratory notebooks for collaborative research. In Proceedings of the 5th workshop
on enabling technologies: Infrastructure for collaborative enterprises (pp. 19–21).
Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Nielsen, M. (2011). Reinventing discovery: The new era of networked science. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
OpenWetWare (OWW). (n.d.). About. Retrieved August 1, 2012, from http://openwet
ware.org/images/7/72/OWWv17.pdf
OpenWetWare (OWW). (2006). NSF Grant Application. Retrieved August 1, 2012, from
http://openwetware.org/images/7/72/OWWv17.pdf
Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (1994). Genre repertoire: The structuring of communicative
practices in organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, 541–574.
Owen, J. M. (2007). The scientific article in the age of digitization. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Springer.
30
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Poynder, R. (2010). Interview with Jean-Claude Bradley: The impact of open notebook
science. Retrieved from http://www.infotoday.com/it/sep10/Poynder.shtml
Rubacha, M., Rattan, A. K., & Hosselet, S. C. (2011). A review of electronic laboratory
notebooks available in the market today. Journal of Laboratory Automation, 16,
90–98.
Schryer, C. F. (1994). The lab vs. the clinic: Sites of competing genres. In A. Freedman
& P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 105–124). London, UK: Taylor
& Francis.
Tabard, A., Mackay, W., & Eastmond, E. (2008). From individual to collaborative:
The evolution of prism, a hybrid laboratory notebook. In Proceedings of the 2008
ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work (pp. 569–578). New York,
NY: ACM.
Talbott, T., Peterson, M., Schwidder, J., & Myers, J. D. (2005). Adapting the electronic
laboratory notebook for the semantic era. In W. McQuay & W. W. Smari (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 2005 international conference on collaborative technologies and
systems (pp. 136–143). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Turner, P., & Turner, S. (1997). Supporting cooperative work using shared notebooks. In
J. Hughes (Ed.), Proceedings of the fifth European conference on computer supported
cooperative work (pp. 281–295). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
UsefulChem Project. (n.d.). Wikispaces. Retrieved August 1, 2013, from http://
usefulchem.wikispaces.com/
Waldrop, M. M. (2008). Science 2.0. Scientific American, 298, 68–73.
Wickman, C. (2010). Writing material in chemical physics research: The laboratory
notebook as locus of technical and textual integration. Written Communication, 27,
259–292.
Willinsky, J. (2006). The access principle: The case for open access to research and
scholarship. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
LEARNING TO “SHARE YOUR SCIENCE”
/
31

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 3
The Scientific Journal:
Making It New?
Joseph E. Harmon
ABSTRACT
In the early 1990s, as the first digital scientific journals were coming online,
Stevan Harnad made the prescient observation that “Electronic journals
should not and will not be mere clones of paper journals, ghosts in another
medium.” But the earliest Web-based scientific articles looked much like
clones of their print versions, except for the addition of hyperlinks to the
different article sections and references. Is that still the case two decades
later? To assess what, if anything, has changed compared with the typical
print-only scientific article of the 20th century, the author asked a common
set of questions of a random selection of 150 scientific research articles for
the period 2010–2011. These articles were chosen from the 10 most highly
cited science journals, as well as 5 journals available to readers without
any payment or institutional subscription (“open access”). This analysis
captured evolutionary changes that have occurred in the byline, abstract,
master finding system, visual presentation, and argumentative structure of
the digital scientific article, as well as the contents pages for the scientific
journal. The case is made that now is a time of extraordinary fecundity with
regard to communicative variations from 20th-century practices, directly
and indirectly propelled by the personal computer and Internet.
The future is already here. It’s just not evenly distributed yet.
—William Gibson
In a provocative 1992 essay for the New York Times, novelist Robert Coover
predicted the death of books of fiction and their transfiguration in a nonlinear
hypertext form:
33

Much of the novel’s alleged power is embedded in the line, that compulsory
author-directed movement from the beginning of a sentence to its period,
from the top of the page to the bottom, from the first page to the last. . . . But
true freedom from the tyranny of the line is perceived as only really possible
now at last with the advent of hypertext, written and read on the computer.
As one of the many novelists and poets heavily influenced by Ezra Pound’s
(1935) injunction to “make it new,” Coover confidently extrapolated that
hypertext would push literary experimentation in a new direction. From the
perspective of 2 decades later, however, it is now clear that Coover’s vision of the
end for creative writing as we have known it since the invention of the printing
press has yet to materialize. The typical novel or book of poems or collection
of essays we read on Kindle, iPad, laptop, or other electronic device—at least
those written by prominent writers like David Foster Wallace, or Zadie
Smith, or Joyce Carol Oates, or even Robert Coover—is not all that appreciably
different from their modernistic predecessors in printed book form. We still,
more or less, read “from the top of the page to the bottom, from the first page
to the last.” There are no embedded visuals, videos, or audio files. There is no
color. We do not interact with these literary texts other than to advance or
bookmark the page. The “tyranny” of the line and page continues to reign.
This chapter will be arguing that much of the above is not the case for the
typical present-day issue of any of the leading scientific journals. That thesis
may sound counterintuitive since, in contrast to modern literary artists, scientists
are not purposely trying to either make their communications “new” stylistically
or “intentionally disorient readers for artistic effect” (Bernstein, 1999), in fact,
quite the contrary. Nonetheless, the case will be made here that the scientific
literature is in the midst of a turbulent transitional period, where the print
era is still very much in evidence, yet driven in part by technological changes,
the dawn of the “post-Gutenberg era” has spawned an incredible explosion
of variations on the 20th-century norms. This transition is symbolized by the
typical Web version of a scientific article, where the digital contents page offers
links to a PDF file for printing and reading on paper and an HTML version for
reading on the Web—icons for the old and new sitting side by side on the
computer screen.
In part, this chapter is meant as a follow-up to Communicating Science: The
Scientific Article from the 17th Century to the Present by Gross, Harmon, and
Reidy (2002). In a series of chapters covering each of the last 4 centuries, we
analyzed a large corpus of whole articles and short passages from French,
English, and German scientific journals. Our analysis focused on the changes
over the past 4 centuries in the writing style, organization, and argumentative
structure of the selected articles. Our corpus began in 1665, the year the first
scientific journals were founded in Paris and London, and ended in the
mid-1990s, the time during which we gathered our sample of articles for analysis.
34
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

In the mid-1990s, the webification of the scientific literature was still in a very
early stage. We did note that about half the 35 journals in our 20th-century sample
were on the Web (p. 186), but did not then have a large enough sample to make
any observations about the effect, if any, on individual articles.
In a later quantitative study of the scientific literature, The Scientific Article
in the Age of Digitization, Owen (2005) analyzed 86 peer reviewed scientific
journals that had initiated publication on the Web between 1987 and 2001
(along with 100 peer reviewed digital journals in the humanities, law, social
science, and other disciplines). Surprisingly, his principal conclusion was that,
contrary to pretentious claims and expectations about the impact of digiti-
zation on scientific communication [p. 5]. . . , the journal article as a com-
municative form for reporting on research and disseminating scientific
knowledge does not seem to have been transformed by . . . [the Internet]: it
remains a digital copy of the printed form. (p. 11)
Owen views the current situation as preserving and extending “existing func-
tions and values rather than as an innovation that radically transforms a com-
municative practice that has evolved over the centuries” (p. 55). In other words,
gradual evolutionary, not revolutionary change, has occurred in the communi-
cative aspects of the research article in the typical digital journal to date. Owen’s
sample included such journals as the Brazilian Electronic Journal of Economics,
Internet Journal of Chemistry, and Journal of Cotton Science, but not the
most highly cited scientific journals producing printed and electronic issues like
Nature, Physical Review, Journal of the American Chemical Society, or even
the highly successful open access journals founded by the Public Library of
Science (PLoS). My contention is that the latter set constitutes the best journals
to scrutinize if one wants to discover what innovations, if any, have surfaced
in the digital scientific journal and the research articles therein. Such journals
have the wide readership and prestige necessary to introduce Web-based inno-
vations that scientists will gladly embrace in exchange for publication of their
manuscripts. Also important, the journal publishers as well as the authors them-
selves have the necessary financial resources, technical knowhow, and man-
power to implement such changes, even if only on a trial basis.
To tackle the basic question “What’s changed, if anything?” between the
printed articles of the 20th century and the digital articles of the 21st century,
I closely examined a random selection of scientific research articles published
in 2010 and 2011. These articles were chosen from the 10 most highly cited
science journals for the period 1999–2009 (Thomson Reuters, 2009). These 10
journals not only represent the elite journals of science, but also a long history
of article publication in print (see Table 3.1, left column). The oldest (NEJM)
has been in existence for over 200 years; the youngest (PRB), over 40 years,
though it is an offshoot of Physical Review, founded in 1893. All but one (APL)
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
35

still issue a print version of each issue, although according to its website,
JBC only continues to publish printed issues “for now.” All offer HTML and
PDF versions of individual articles, except the two Physical Review journals
(PDF only). All 10 journals require payment or subscription for access to all
articles in their latest issues. Also included in my sample are five journals
available to all readers without any payment or institutional subscription—three
from PLoS and two recent startup open access journals (also listed in Table 3.1,
right column). I analyzed 10 randomly selected articles from each of the 15
journals in Table 3.1 (150 total). I also gathered information about the homepage
and first page to a 2011 issue of each of the journals.
In this chapter, I argue that there are substantive differences between the
typical printed scientific article in the 20th century and the linked, multimedia
article accessible through websites in the 21st century. These differences do
not concern literary style per se, but strategies that “counter the line’s power” by
means of visualization, intertextuality, interactivity, and compartmentalization
36
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Table 3.1 Science Journals Analyzed and Year Founded
Most-cited science
journals
First
year
Open-access science
journals
First
year
New England Journal of
Medicine (NEJM)
Astrophysical Journal (AJ)
Nature
Journal of American Chemical
Society (JACS)
Science
Journal of Biological Chemistry
(JBC)
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (PNAS)
Physical Review Letters (PRL)
Applied Physics Letters (APL)
Physical Review B (PRB)
1812
1849
1869
1879
1880
1905
1915
1958
1962
1970
PLoS Biolog
PLoS Medicine
PLoS One
Journal of Modern Physics
(JMP)
International Journal of
Geosciences (IJG)
2003
2004
2006
2010
2010

of information into discrete sections for readers with different special interests.
Also changing is the meaning of authorship, an indirect consequence of the
Internet era. These differences are best understood not in the common metaphors
for dramatic change, such as “revolution” or “paradigm shift,” but in terms of
evolutionary variations and origins that can be traced to long before the Internet
era. And it is probably too soon to tell which variations evident on the Web
today will prove enduring. Yet even at this early stage, the digital scientific
article in the leading scientific journals listed in Table 3.1 looks substantially
different from the print-only article of the previous century. Exhibit A: compare
Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2.
AUTHORSHIP
One of the marked differences between Figures 3.1 and 3.2 concerns the list
of authors and their institutional affiliations. The Goodman and Rich (1962)
article has two authors, both from the same U.S. research organization. The Aron,
Klein, Pham, Kramer, Wurst, and Klein article (2010) has six authors, from three
German research organizations. This difference reflects one of the variations in
the 21st-century scientific article: its composition is a highly social activity, often
involving participants from different countries and organizations, presumably
exchanging texts, data, and images via the Internet.
Through the 19th century, scientific articles seldom had more than one author.
And for their sample of 20th-century articles, Gross et al. (2002) calculated an
average of a little over two authors per article, with a maximum of five. On the
basis of these data, they concluded that the practice of 20th-century science
was “largely the product of an individual or very small group trying to solve a
limited problem within a larger research field” (p. 175). Such a statement would
appear to be greatly in need of updating. Recent quantitative studies have reported
that single authors generated “the papers of singular distinction in science
and engineering and social science in the 1950s, but the mantle of extra-
ordinarily cited work has passed to teams by 2000” (Wuchty, Jones, & Uzzi,
2007, p. 1038), and that after 1975 these collaborations increasingly involved
multiple universities (Jones, Wuchty, & Uzzi, 2008).
The results from analyzing the bylines in my 21st-century sample of highly
cited journals support these recent conclusions. The average number of authors
per article was 12, higher by a factor of nearly 6 compared with the 20th-century
sample of Gross et al. (2002). There were only two single-author articles, while
two had author lists running into the hundreds. The average number of institutions
listed in the bylines was also impressively high, 5.7, and almost half (47%) of
the sample involved an international collaboration. Not too surprisingly, the
most represented countries in the bylines were the same ones that have been
major players in scientific research over the past several centuries: United States
(named in 45% of the bylines), Germany (17%), United Kingdom (17%), and
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
37

38
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 3.1. Screen shot of a digital article from PLoS Biology (Aron et al., 2010). Tabs open to article itself, metrics regarding
community reception, related articles on the Web, and reader comments. Shaded box adjacent to abstract is for navigating
article contents, adding a note to a selected passage, and making a general comment. Shaded box at upper right has
links for PDF and XML versions, reprint ordering, and citation information. “Metrics” shows total article views and
citations received to date. Links to social media at lower right.

France (11%). One journal (APL) also has an interesting variation on the byline,
including world maps with the geographic locations of the authors’ home insti-
tutions. This feature further reinforces the truly international nature of much
21st-century scientific practice.
The authorship data for the open access literature sample (Table 3.1, right
column) were slightly lower but no less impressive: average number of authors,
7.8, and participating institutions, 3.2. About 30% involved an international
effort. These lower numbers are largely due to the two journals in the sample
with negligible citation impact factors (JMP and IJG), both of which had
many articles with one or two authors representing a single institution (24%).
Interestingly, these two journals appear to be a host site for posting articles by
scientists from Russia, China, and countries without a long continuous tradition
of scientific publishing (Egypt, Iran, Brazil, Turkey, Iraq, etc.). They thus give
a voice to scientists working in underrepresented countries within the pages
of English-language scientific journals. This finding is consistent with another
recent quantitative study reporting that open access journals are widening
“the global circle of those who can participate in science and benefit from it”
(Evans & Reimer, 2009).
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
39
Figure 3.2. The first printed page of a 1962 PNAS article.
Reprinted with permission from Goodman, H. M., & Rich, A. (1962).
Formation of a DNA-soluble RNA hybrid and its relation to
the origin, evolution, and degeneracy of soluble RNA.
Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences, 48, 2101-2109.

For the sample as a whole, the article bylines clearly reflect the fact that
scientific practice today is largely a collaborative effort involving multiple
authors from different research institutions, often performing highly specialized
tasks in different countries. Obviously the lengthy lists in the bylines are not
directly a product of digital publication. But it is hard to imagine the existence
of such large collaborative teams without the ease of communicating verbal
messages, images, articles, and data through the Internet.
ABSTRACT
Especially over the last century, scientific communication has grown increas-
ingly complex and specialized (Gross et al., 2002, pp. 161–162; Hayes, 1992).
In partial compensation for the challenged reader, the heading “Abstract” was
invented in the early 20th century (Gross et al., 2002, p. 176). Its purpose is to
summarize what was done, how it was done, and what was discovered (Harmon
& Gross, 2007, pp. 3–18). Few articles of any length are now without one. Not
surprisingly, then, all the scientific articles in my sample except three have
such abstracts (the exceptions are a literature review and two articles only a
page in length). Armed with such information, the reader can make an informed
decision on whether to read further; moreover, whatever the complexities of
the main text, he or she will be provided upfront with the main message in
relatively straightforward language to more easily “follow the argument” and
grasp the main points.
Clearly, Web publication has caused the journals in my sample to think
seriously about how to better communicate complex information to a more
diverse learned audience. Observe that the Goodman and Rich (1962) article
has no heading abstract (see Figure 3.2), as was unusual but not uncommon in
the mid-20th century, while the Aron et al. (2010) article has not only a heading
abstract, but also an “author summary” (link in box next to heading abstract
of Figure 3.1) of about the same length whose stated purpose on the PLoS web-
site is “to make findings accessible to an audience of both scientists and non-
scientists. . . . Ideally aimed to a level of understanding of an undergraduate
student.” All research articles in the three PLoS journals include such author
summaries, as do PNAS and JBC (see Figure 3.3). Moreover, nearly all the
journals (Nature, Science, PNAS, PRL, PRB, NEJM, PLoS Biology, and PLoS
Medicine) offer links to synopsis or news type stories written by editors or
other scientists for at least some of the articles in a given issue. While such author
and editor summaries can also be added to print articles, the Web facilitates
their widespread adoption because of the lack of restrictions over space.
Other journals in the sample have adopted different approaches to combat
article complexity. Two (JACS and APL) are taking advantage of the ease of
displaying images and text on the Web to literally catch the readers’ eyes. For
40
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
41
Figure 3.3. An example of an article incorporating an abstract of an
abstract followed by a traditional heading abstract (Nina et al., 2011).
Reproduced with permission. Copyright © 2011 The American Society
for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

instance, the contents page to the physics journal APL shows the usual lists of
titles and authors, but also a one- or two-sentence abstract of the abstract and
the key image. In the example of Figure 3.4, the title announces the major claim
in a noun phase, the abstract of the abstract elaborates on that claim in two
complete sentences, and the graph visually represents the claim. Following the
link in the lower right corner then sends interested readers to the actual heading
abstract and byline. Finally, NEJM articles all have abstracts divided into four
discrete components: a paragraph on the background, one on the methods,
another for results, and yet another for conclusions—all linked to corresponding
sections in the main text. In all these elite journals, freed from the space restric-
tions in the printed issues, there appears to be a genuine effort to add content
to ensure that all readers, whatever their expertise, can follow the main points.
INTER- AND INTRATEXTUALITY
In general, the aim of the scientific research article is to solve a problem whose
importance, originality, and need are established by means of other texts. This
task involves, of course, scholarly citation. Gross et al.’s analysis (2002) found
that the number, format, and placement of citations in the scientific literature have
evolved continuously over time. In their 17th century sample, only about a third
had any citations whatsoever, normally incorporated into or adjacent to running
text with minimal bibliographic information or consistency (p. 43). In the 18th-
and 19th-century samples, more than half had citations incorporated into the
text or placed at the bottom of the page as footnotes (pp. 85, 131). The citation
format varied widely from journal to journal, and even article to article in a given
42
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 3.4. An example of an abstract from the APL contents page.
Reprinted with permission from Hader, J., Moloney, J. V., & Koch, S. W. (2011).
Temperature-dependence of the internal efficiency in GaN-based diodes.
Applied Physics Letters 99, 181127. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing, LLC.

journal. Also during this time, the average number of citations within a section of
text and the number of citation elements (author name, article title, page number,
etc.) slowly grew. In the 20th century, while the citation density in the text body
increased fourfold and the citation format standardized, the placement of the
citations shifted from the bottom of the page to a list at the end (pp. 169, 180).
The Goodman and Rich (1962) article is typical of the 20th century. The
25 citations are gathered in full at the end, numbered, and uniformly presented.
In each case, Goodman and Rich provide the author names, journal name,
volume, first page, and year of publication. The key information for finding the
article—journal name, volume, and first page—are differentiated by typeface:
italics for journal name, bold for volume, plain font for page number. To interfere
minimally with reading, the citations are interwoven into the text only by
their superscripted number. These references are dispersed throughout the text
body, not confined to the beginning or end, making the entire article, in a sense,
“intertextual.” This intertextuality serves two purposes: it rewards scientists for
having provided the article’s authors with information about their research that
was employed in a productive way, and it provides the readers with additional
reading material about the research problem, methods details, supporting infor-
mation about the main claims being made, and so forth.
The intertextuality of the scientific text continues to evolve in the 21st century,
spurred on by the Internet. As exemplified by the Aron et al. (2010) article, the
reference numbers in the text body and the reference list at the end remain.
What’s different is that in all the HTML-based articles in my sample, the
reference numbers are linked to the actual citation, and the actual citation is linked
to the corresponding article or its abstract. Readers thus can follow a reading path
of hyperlink in running text, to bibliographic details in the reference list, to actual
cited article, or at least its abstract; then to another set of superscripted numbers,
citation details, and cited article; and so forth. Such deviations from the main
pathway can lead to the reader making connections with the original article
wholly unimagined by the author. Yet whatever alternative reading paths
readers may follow, there always remains the central argument as originally
formulated by the author.
The intertextuality of the digital article has spread beyond the web of citations
within it. The digital scientific article often includes links to one or more of the
following: published works in the same journal by the authors (53% of 15
journals sampled had them), articles on the same topic by other authors not cited
in the reference list (73%), articles related to keywords chosen by the authors
(33%), information about manufacturers of equipment and materials used
in experiments or databases to relevant subject matter such as the Protein Data
Bank (7%), articles that cite the subject article after publication (93%), written
comments by readers and the authors’ responses (53%), and even blogs on the
subject matter (20%). This dense intertextuality is the one feature of the digital
scientific article that profoundly distinguishes it from its printed brethren.
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
43

The intratextuality of the scientific article is also important. As pointed out
by Gross et al. (2002), one of the more remarkable characteristics of the 20th-
century scientific article is its elaborate finding system of section headings,
graphic legends, numbered citations, and numbered equations, which evolved
gradually over time. This master finding system also allows readers to navigate
more easily among the diverse components of the article; they can thus extract
the desired bits of theory, methods, results, and conclusions without necessarily
having to read the text from front to back. The finding system acts like a map,
allowing readers to easily direct their attention on select components within
the argument being made. In the digital scientific article like that of Aron et al.
(2010), this finding system has been augmented by a linked contents segment
at the top (see Figure 3.1), links from section heading to actual section, links from
figure or table called out in running text to actual figure or table, links from
citation number in text to bibliographic information in the reference list to
actual reference, and so forth. The element of greatest interest to any given reader
within an article is thus a click away. And those readers more comfortable
with the traditional print version can download and print a PDF version (upper
right in Figure 3.1).
VISUALIZATION
Flip through the pages or scroll down the screen of a research article in any
of the journals from Table 3.1. It will be abundantly evident that scientists
communicate routinely not only through words but also through tables and
images. In Communicating Science, Gross et al. (2002) observed that one of
the main factors contributing to communicative change over time is “the increas-
ing prominence of visual representations, and their integration into argument”
(p. 231). In their 20th-century sample, Gross et al. found the percentage of
numbered figures and tables steadily increasing over that century (p. 172).
Overall, they also found the average percentage of space visuals occupied in
a 20th-century article to be a hefty 26% (18% figures, 8% tables). The most
prominent type of visual was the data graph: an average of 57% of articles had
at least one (72% after 1950). About 50% of articles had at least one table.
The visuals in the aforementioned article by Goodman and Rich (1962) are
fairly typical of 20th-century practices. The article has one table of data and
eight graphs of data trends displayed in five figures. The table and figures
occupy about 20% of the article’s length. They all have numbers and captions
and are integrated into the text close to first mention. Figure 3.5 reproduces
one of the graphs.
The data gathered in the present study suggest that—in large part due to the
abundance of new computer-based instruments for converting data into images,
usually in color, and the relative ease of incorporating such images into a digital
44
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

article—the visual has become much more prominent and far more colorful.
The visuals in the Aron et al. (2010) article contrast markedly from those
in Goodman and Rich (1962). This article has 125 images displayed in eight
figures (i.e., about 16 images per figure) and occupying about 38% of the article’s
length. These visual assemblages consist of various arrangements of bar graphs
(30), photographs at the microscopic scale (92), and Western blots of genetic
components (3). Of the 125 images, 63% are color. What’s more, the article
has Supporting Information not available in the print version, which consists
of 50 additional images displayed in four figures.
In terms of visual density, the Aron et al. (2010) article is a somewhat
extreme example. In our 21st-century sample, the average percentage of space
that visuals occupy in the main text is 28% (23% figures, 5% tables). While
the overall average is not dramatically higher compared with the 20th century, it
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
45
Figure 3.5. A graph integrated into text by Goodman and Rich (1962).
Reprinted with permission from Goodman, H. M., & Rich, A. (1962).
Formation of a DNA-soluble RNA hybrid and its relation to the origin,
evolution, and degeneracy of soluble RNA. Proceeding of the
National Academy of Sciences, 48, 2101-2109.

would appear that the space allotted to figures has grown at the expense of tables.
The averages for numbers of images and tables per article are also illuminating:
tables, only 1.4, and images, a robust 14, about half of which are in color. (These
data are for the main text only, not any supplementary information.) Moreover,
these visuals are more data driven than in previous centuries: nearly 90% had
at least one graph representing data trends, but usually many more than one.
The greatest change in visual presentation in the 21st century concerns use
of color. The first appearance of color figures in printed scientific documents
dates back to the 15th century, when astronomical figures in some books were
hand colored (see Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2006). And the journal Botanical
Magazine has routinely printed color botanical images since its first issue in
1787. Yet for the 20th-century sample of Gross et al. (2002), the number of color
figures was so small as to be not worth counting. With about half the images in
our 21st-century sample being in color, there can be little doubt that the ease of
generating a digital image and displaying it on the Web has ignited a riot of
color in the digital scientific article.
The presentation of figures has also changed dramatically. In the 17th and
18th centuries, the physical integration of figure with text tended to be haphazard
in large part as a result of limitations in printing practices. Figures might appear
gathered together at the end of each article or at the end of the individual journal.
They might appear in the margins. They might appear on separate pages from the
text within an article or integrated into the page close to their mention in the text.
They might or might not have descriptive captions. They might or might not
be numbered. The tighter integration of text with the accompanying images, along
with titles and numbers, did not occur until well into the 19th century, when
innovations in imaging technology made this economically practical.
The presentation of 21st-century figures on the Web differs markedly from
earlier centuries. All the journals in my sample, except for the four that do not
offer HTML articles (PRL, PRB, JMP, and IJG), display the images in a thumb-
nail size immediately after its first mention in a paragraph. For each figure,
readers have the option of either ignoring it altogether, clicking on a link to
view it in a much more easily scrutinized size, copying the figure for use in
another electronic document, or viewing and copying the figure as a PowerPoint
slide (Figure 3.6). The last option is available presumably for use of figures as
a teaching tool. While rare in earlier centuries, multicomponent figures such
as Figure 3.6 are rampant in my 21st-century sample. Meaning emerges as a
consequence of not only the interaction between image and text, as exemplified
in Figure 3.5, but also that among the diverse images within the figure. Like color,
creating such visual assemblages has always been possible, but it is hard to
imagine their widespread adoption before the invention of the personal computer
for their creation and Web for their dissemination.
Video and interactive images are brand new forms of visualization in the
scientific article that further contribute to visual prominence. However, on the
46
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

basis of my sample, they cannot yet be said to be routine: only six articles in my
sample have them (4%). The future prospects would appear to be bright, however,
as they re-create processes or represent changes in data or objects over time in
several ways not possible with static images. First, interested readers can see
what the scientist saw in the laboratory or field, giving an entirely new dimen-
sion to “virtual witnessing”: examples drawn from our sample include videos
showing the behavior of mice in a laboratory setting (Yizhar, Fenno, Prigge,
Schneider, Davidson, O’Shea, et al., 2011), the movement of a biological
substance from the cytoplasm to the nucleus within a cell (Ma & Yang, 2010), and
a villager walking through coals before revelers in a Spanish town as part of an
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
47
Figure 3.6. An example of a multicomponent figure with caption.
Reprinted with permission from Ma, J., & Yang, W. (2010). Three-dimensional
distribution in the nuclear pore core complex obtained from single-molecule
snapshots. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 107, 7305-7310.

annual ritual (Konvalinka, Xygalatas, Bulbulia, Schjodt, Jegindo, Wallot et al.,
2011). Second, readers can view objects from different perspectives, for example,
by rotating a microscopic section of a mouse spleen (Bodin, Ellmerich, Kahan,
Tennent, Lowsuh, Gilbertson, et al., 2010) or a vertebrae limb bud (Boehm et al.,
2010). Finally, readers can view data as they change over time: in our sample, that
includes a set of graphs demonstrating the stabilization over time of the quantum
state in a microsystem by means of a continuous feedback loop (Sayrin,
Dotsenko, Zhou, Peaudecerf, Rybarczyk, Gleyzes et al., 2011). All the above
moving pictures appear in a section called Supplemental Information (of which,
more later), which is separated from the main body and not included in the PDF
version. It seems safe to predict that these sorts of moving pictures will soon
migrate into the main body and increase in frequency.
One final note on visualization and its increased prominence. Several of the
sample journals also display all the figures within an article in a separate segment
on the screen at the article top or side. For example, Nature displays all figures
in a horizontal band after the abstract and before the introduction. With this
arrangement, the reader can both read the abstract and scroll through all figures
in an article and more easily make a judgment as to its worth before jumping
into a sea of specialized terms and data.
ARGUMENTATIVE STRUCTURE
According to Gross et al. (2002, pp. 229–231), the typical early scientific
article was either a straightforward description of the natural world or a narrative
centered on a string of loosely connected experiments or observations, often
arranged chronologically. Over time, however, the article evolved a modular
structure (abstract, introduction, methods, etc.) suited to authorship by a small
group of researchers and designed to present each article’s argument in a roughly
similar way and level of detail. A question worth asking is, has, will, or can the
hypertext nature of Web publication change the basic structure of that argument?
David Kolb (1994, 1996, 2008) asked that same question about scholarship
in the humanities, particularly his discipline of philosophy. In the end, he seems
to have reluctantly concluded that in general, “A philosophical argument (or a
mathematical proof) cannot be presented as a cloud of disjointed statements,”
and that attempts to escape the bounds of linear argument have largely failed
or only transformed a single linear argument into a set of linked linear argu-
ments. Yet he remained hopeful that hypertext might one day lead to a new
form of discourse “composed of fragmentary paths . . . with neither atomistic dis-
integration nor final unity.” In a similar vein, Landow (2006) asserted that “one
of the fundamental characteristics of hypertext is that it is composed of linked
texts that have no primary axis of organization” (p. 56). If such is the case,
then the digital scientific article is not hypertext and probably never will be.
True, readers can and do browse through a digital scientific article following
48
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

an orderly but nonlinear path, yet the same can be claimed of printed scientific
texts (Charney, 1993). And in both cases, scientist-readers know that the text,
when read from beginning to end, has as its “primary axis of organization” an
argument of Aristotlean rigor: basically, a research problem is introduced and
contextualized, a method for its solution is described, the results from having
applied the method are presented and discussed, conclusions are drawn, intel-
lectual and material assistance is acknowledged, and literature sources are
listed. Indeed, in most articles, whether in print or on the Web, the boundaries of
these components are signaled by section headings or different font size. Those
headings in the Goodman and Rich (1962) article are Introduction, Methods and
Materials, Results, Discussion, Summary, Acknowledgments, and References.
The Aron et al. (2010) article has similar headings: Abstract, Acknowledgments,
Author Summary, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Supporting Information,
Author Contributions, and References.
If anything, the structure of the digital scientific article is even more regi-
mented than ever before: all data-driven articles in my sample conformed to this
argumentative structure or a slight variation on it. The digital articles in eight
journals (JBC, PNAS, JACS, NEJM, AJ, and three PLOS journals) include a box
with sectional headings and navigational links (consult Figure 3.1, right side).
In these journals, the basic structure differs little if at all from article to article.
The other three journals providing HTML files (Science, Nature, and APL)
mostly publish very short articles with no need for any headings, though they
do still more or less conform to the standard structure.
With regard to their 20th-century sample, Gross et al. (2002, p. 185) men-
tioned two major variations in structure, appearing in the Journal of the Chemical
Society and Journal of the American Chemical Society in the early part of that
century. These articles were typically divided into two distinct parts. The first
half distilled the essence of the discovery and its intellectual context and was
aimed at an audience of chemists in general. The second provided the experi-
mental method and results in enough detail to satisfy experts in the subject
matter. This sensible variation did not take hold in the scientific literature at-large
during the 20th century. But now a similar variation is routine in two of the
journals in Table 3.1, Nature and Science. Within the space of several thousand
words, the article itself, available in the printed issue or as PDF from the Web,
conforms to the typical article structure but does so with minimal experimental
details, results, tables of data, and visuals. It is aimed at scientist-readers inter-
ested only in the main points and underlying argument. But there is also a link
to Supplemental Information, available only through the Web, conveying the
experimental methods, results, and such, for experts with a strong interest in the
subject matter (90% of articles in the two journals have supporting information).
Nearly 83% of the articles in seven other journals (JBC, PNAS, JACS, NEJM,
and the three PLOS journals) also include Supplemental Information, but the
articles themselves are more of standard length (5,000–10,000 words) and structure.
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
49

ture. The Supplemental Information provides authors with a space for additional
technical details (mostly methods and results) that would have had to have
been dropped because of space considerations in the past, as well as any videos,
interactive images, or audio files. The length runs from a few pages to 151.
Because of Supplemental Information, these journals can thus accommodate
much longer arguments in a way that does not burden readers uninterested in
the full details.
READER COMMENTS AND STATISTICS
A little more than half the journals in Table 3.1 (JBC, PNAS, Nature, Science,
NEJM, and three PLoS journals) allow readers to comment on articles after
publication, where links to those comments along with any author responses are
incorporated into the digital article. The Aron et al. (2010) article has a comments
tab at the top (Figure 3.1), but no comments yet entered. That is fairly typical.
Of the 80 articles randomly selected from such journals, only 11 (14%) had
technical comments attached (1 to 3 each), 7 of which appeared in the three PLoS
journals. Even though widely available, online commentary remains anemic.
In contrast to the most-cited journals, the open access journals also provide
statistics on what articles readers have viewed (see right side of Figure 3.1).
These data should give scientist-authors some encouragement that their articles
are read, or at least skimmed, by more than a few. The PLoS journals report
number of views for each article, the average in my sample being a robust 4,418
(the Aron et al. [2010] article had 7,536 views as of July 2012). And even though
the two other journals (JMP and IJG) are only recently founded and have
negligible citation impact factors, their average reported number of downloads
per article (one step beyond simply viewing) also appear impressive, 422. In a
sense, readers implicitly vote on an article’s potential interest by simply viewing
or downloading it. In the PLoS journals, readers can actually rate articles on a
scale of 1 to 5, but they seldom do so.
Such statistics give scientist-authors a sense of the reception of their writing
and scientist-readers a sense of what articles have received major attention in
a given issue or journal. When a healthy number of views or downloads is
displayed with the article itself, it serves a rhetorical purpose as well: adding
authority to the contents being reported beyond the reputation of the authors or
their institutional affiliations or the citation impact factor of the journal itself.
JOURNAL CONTENTS PAGES
A tangential component to the earlier-mentioned finding system for the scien-
tific article is the journal contents page—a listing of authors, article titles, and
corresponding page numbers for a single journal issue. This useful index has
50
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

been around since the very first scientific journals in the 17th century. The
most-cited journals in my sample have essentially two contents pages: one for
the journal itself, another for each issue. Anyone examining these pages on
the Web (e.g., Figure 3.7) will come away with little doubt that a major trans-
formation in journal contents has occurred: they are now portals to new knowl-
edge, edification, and even entertainment and social engagement.
Perhaps the most dramatic difference between print and digital scientific
journals is that the latter also function as virtual libraries. The contents pages
for all 10 journals offer portals to browsable electronic archives that cover all
previously published articles back to the first issue. And visitors to a journal’s
homepage can view not only research articles before the print issue but also
most viewed, most cited, most downloaded, and most emailed, as well as recently
published articles judged by the editors to deserve special attention, articles on
a narrow topic, and articles covered by the news media.
As another strategy for capturing reader attention, four of the most-cited
journals (Science, Nature, NEJM, and JACS) offer “multimedia centers” com-
posed of scientific images displayed for the reader’s aesthetic pleasure or edifi-
cation or both; podcasts highlighting the contents of individual issues or other
newsworthy matters; instructional webinars and visuals; slideshows on a variety
of scientific topics; and short videos produced by the journal or authors of
articles. For the most part, the purpose of these multimedia centers is not to
convey arguments for original knowledge claims—the primary function of the
research article itself—but to present stories about science meant to reach those
without specialized knowledge of the subject matter and present science and
scientists to a wider readership in a more personal light. JACS, for example,
has a link called “Video Abstracts,” which leads to an archive of short videos
(typically about 5 minutes), which are produced by the authors of published
articles; Science, Nature, NEJM, and JBC have podcasts summarizing issue
contents; PNAS has podcasts on various topics as well as interviews with scien-
tists about their research; and for teaching purposes, NEJM posts videos of
microscopic physical abnormalities in patients.
The digital journal has also embraced the world of social media. In the
print era, the main means for scientist-authors to contribute to a journal besides
research articles was letters to the editor. Mostly, these letters commented upon
published research articles or sociopolitical issues that concerned the journal’s
readership. They were normally published some weeks or months after submittal
and seldom drew a published response. Social media accessed through the journal
homepage are now transforming this once fairly sedate section of the scientific
journal (Figure 3.8). As a result, readers for some of the journals can immediately
post a tweet, blog, or Facebook comment about a published article or issue and, if
it is controversial, spark a lively or even contentious debate. With the
introduction of social media, journals are entering the freewheeling public sphere
of gossiping, complaining, exchanging information on professional experiences,
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
51

52
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 3.7. A sample issue home page from JACS. November 2011. Retrieved
from http://pubs.acs.org/toc/jacsat/133/45/. Image reprinted with permission
from Sasakura et al. (2011). Development of a highly selective fluorescence
probe for hydrogen sulfide. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 133(45),
18003-18005. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society.

deliberating, and even ranting on occasion. At present, 4 of the 10 elite journals
in my sample have links to such social media. Not coincidentally, these are the
same four journals with robust multimedia centers: Science, Nature, NEJM, and
JACS.
CONCLUSION
In Communicating Science, Gross et al. (2002) attempted to explain com-
municative change over time by means of a communicative selection theory.
They contended that over time, the scientific journal has evolved into a complex
network designed to meet the needs of varying and constantly emerging scientific
communities. In evolutionary terms,
in the case of the scientific article, the genotype is a set of predispositions:
to create arguments . . . to transform these arguments into sentences and para-
graphs, and finally, to order these sentences and paragraphs according
to well-organized organizational constraints. These predispositions are
behavioral tendencies generally shaped by learning. . . . When the situation
calls for it, scientists activate these predispositions to create a scientific
article. (p. 218)
This evolution, of course, does not mean that the 21st-century embodiment
is “better” than those of the 17th or 18th centuries. Evolutionary theories are
incompatible with any notion of progress that implies successive betterment.
The only notion of “better” that any evolutionary theory can tolerate is that of
“better adapted” to prevailing conditions.
The history of the scientific journal supports the hypothesis that its current
communicative and argumentative practices evolved, and continue to evolve,
as a consequence of variation and selective survival. And yet, as Owen (2005)
concluded in an earlier study, whether HTML or PDF, whether the science or
humanities, there is a strong impression of attempting to simulate the relative
permanence of printed publication. The founder of the physics preprint archive
(arXiv), Paul Ginsparg (2011), has expressed a similar view:
The transition to article formats and features better suited to modern tech-
nology than to print on paper has also been surprisingly slow. Page markup
formats, such as PDF, have only grudgingly given way to XML-based
ones that support features such as manipulable graphics, dynamic views,
linked annotations and semantic markup. Part of this caution is a result of
the understandable need to maintain a stable archive of research literature,
as provided by paper over centuries. (p. 147)
My contention here, however, is that numerous permutations on the 20th-
century norm are sprouting up in many digital articles published by the elite
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
53

54
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 3.8. Screen shot of the PLoS Biology home page showing social media.
Retrieved from http://blogs.plos.org.

scientific journals, along with their associated homepages. These variations
include multimedia centers, complete archives of back issues, social media,
links to most-cited and most-viewed articles, image albums, abstracts of abstracts,
summaries aimed at general audience, supplemental information omitted from
print articles, reader statistics, reader commentary, and so forth. Top-drawer
scientific journals are doing whatever they can to “make it new.” Worth noting
here is that the agents behind these innovations are largely software engineers,
Web designers, and the editorial staff of journals, along with article authors.
Recently, Elsevier Publishing developed what it called “The Article of the
Future” (articleofthefuture.com), which is really an amalgamation of many
existing features among the elite journals and is therefore more accurately
called “The State-of-the-Art Digital Article.” What of the current permutations
will eventually be transmitted to the typical digital article or journal homepage
of the future cannot be asserted with any authority. One can rest assured,
however, that evolution will continue as it always has, but now catalyzed by the
new communicative variations afforded by digital publication.
CODA: HUMANITIES JOURNALS ON THE WEB
As part of the instructions to contributors of this volume, the contributing
authors were asked, “Does your investigation of one or another aspect of scien-
tific communication have any implications for communication in the human-
ities?” Comparing the online variations of the elite scientific journals with those
in the humanities suggests that there is no comparison: the digital research
articles (whether formatted as HTML or PDF) in the elite humanities journals
are typically simulations of the printed version, and the contents of the journal
homepages carries only marginally more information than what can be found
in the printed issues from the 20th century. In 2005, Peter Suber noted that
“open access isn’t undesirable or unattainable in the humanities. But it is less
urgent and harder to subsidize than in the sciences.” The same might also be
said about implementation of Web-based features. This statement applies to
prestigious journals like PMLA (Journal of the Modern Language Association),
Isis (Journal of the Society of History of Science), Journal of Philosophy, Con-
figurations, Music Perception, College Composition and Communication, and
the like. It even holds for recently founded online journals. For example, within
the past decade, the Open Humanities Press (OHP) established 11 open access
journals in “response to the crisis in scholarly publishing in the humanities”;
tellingly, of these 11, the articles in all but one are in the form of PDF or HTML
files with straight text and few if any links or images. An exception is Vectors:
Journal of Culture and Technology in a Dynamic Vernacular, which “brings
together visionary scholars with cutting-edge designers and technologists to
propose a rethinking of the dynamic relation of form to content in academic
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
55

research”(OHP, n.d). Of course, an innovative website does not necessarily
translate to innovative scholarship. Moreover, for humanities journals, in which
the articles are primarily composed of words with few if any visuals and are
written in the form of the traditional linear essay, the print model appears to
serve their online needs perfectly well for the most part.
In contrast to humanities journals, the elite and PLoS scientific journals have
been in the vangaurd of adopting the Web for many reasons: the typical readers
and writers are comfortable with being first users of new technology, these
journals have sizable financial resources to draw upon to test and implement
new Internet features, these journals can get away with steep author charges for
open access to all, and their writers establish their reputations almost exclusively
by publishing journal articles, not scholarly monographs. (For a comparison of
the business models in scientific and humanities journals, see Waltham, 2010;
Harley, Acord, Earl-Novell, Lawrence, & Judson King, 2010.) Moreover, several
factors made the scientific article especially well suited for early adaptation
to the Web: its historic emphasis on visual as well as verbal communication;
its standard modular, hypertext-like structure; its heavy reliance on research
protocols and data too profuse for the typical article length; and the rapid creation
of an enormous electronic archive of past journal articles plus extensive citation
information about them (in Science Citation Index).
While innovative examples of online articles and journals in the humanities
remain outside the mainstream, they do exist. See, for example, the use of
multimedia in Favro and Johanson’s model article (2010) in the Journal of the
Society of Architectural Historians.
REFERENCES
Aron, L., Klein, P., Pham, T.-T., Kramer, E. R., Wurst, W., & Klein, R. (2010). Pro-
survival role for Parkinson’s associated gene DJ-1 revealed in trophically impaired
dopaminergic neurons. PLoS Biology, 8(4), e1000349.
Bernstein, M. (1999). Structural patterns and hypertext rhetoric. ACM Computing Surveys.
Retrieved from http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=345966&CFID=75143083&
CFTOKEN=10827851
Bodin, K., Ellmerich, S., Kahan, M. C., Tennent, G. A., Loesch, A., Gilbertson, J. A.,
et al. (2010). Antibodies to human serum amyloid P component eliminate visceral
amyloid deposits. Nature, 468, 93–97.
Boehm, B., Westerberg, H., Lesnicar-Pucko, G., Raja, S., Rautschk, M., Cotterell, J.,
et al. (2010). The role of spatially controlled cell proliferation in limb bud
morphogenesis. PLoS Biology, 8(7), e1000420.
Charney, D. (1993). A study in rhetorical reading: How evolutionists read “The Spandrels
of San Marco.” In J. Selzer (Ed.), Understanding scientific prose (pp. 203–231).
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
56
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Coover, R. (1992, June 21). The end of books. New York Times Book Review. Retrieved
from http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/09/27/specials/coover-end.html
Evans, J. A., & Reimer, J. (2009). Open access and global participation in science.
Science, 323, 1025.
Favro, D., & Johanson, C. (2010). Death in motion: Funeral processions in the Roman
Forum. Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, 69, 12–37.
Ginsparg, P. (2011). ArXiv at 20. Nature, 476, 145–147.
Goodman, H. M., & Rich, A. (1962). Formation of a DNA-soluble RNA hybrid and its
relation to the origin, evolution, and degeneracy of soluble RNA. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 48, 2101–2109.
Gross, A. G., Harmon, J. E., & Reidy, M. (2002). Communicating science: The scien-
tific article from the 17th century to the present. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hader, J., Moloney, J. V., & Koch, S. W. (2011). Temperature-dependence of the internal
efficiency in GaN-based diodes. Applied Physics Letters, 99, 181127.
Harley, D., Acord, S. K., Earl-Novell, S., Lawrence, S., & Judson King, C. (2010).
Assessing the future landscape of scholarly communication: An exploration of
faculty values and needs in seven disciplines. Berkeley, CA: Center for Studies in
Higher Education, University of California.
Harmon, J. E., & Gross, A. G. (2007). The craft of scientific communication. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hayes, D. P. (1992). The growing inaccessibility of science. Nature, 356, 739–740.
Jones, B. F., Wuchty, S., & Uzzi, B. (2008). Multi-university research teams: Shifting
impact, geography, and stratification in science. Science, 322, 1259–1262.
Kolb, D. (1994). Socrates in the labyrinth. In G. P. Landow (Ed.), Hyper/text/theory
(pp. 323–342). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kolb, D. (1996). Discourse across links. In C. Ess (Ed.), Philosophical perspectives on
computer-mediated communication (pp. 15–26). Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
Kolb, D. (2008). The revenge of the page. In P. Brusilovksy & H. C. Davis (Eds.),
Proceedings of 19th ACM conference on hypertext and hypermedia. New York,
NY: Association of Computing Machinery.
Konvalinka, I., Xygalatas, D., Bulbulia, J., Schjødt, U., Jegindø, E.-M., Wallot, S., et al.
(2011). Synchronized arousal between performers and related spectators in a fire-
walking ritual. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 108, 8514–8519.
Landlow, G. P. (2006). Hypertext 3.0: Critical theory and new media in an era of
globalization. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ma, J., & Yang, W. (2010). Three-dimensional distribution in the nuclear pore core
complex obtained from single-molecule snapshots. Proceedings of National Academy
of Sciences, 107, 7305–7310.
Metropolitan Museum of Art. (2006). Johannes de Sacrobosco, Regiomontanus,
Georg von Peuerbach. Sphaera mundi. In Heilbrunn timeline of art history. Retrieved
from http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/17.45
Nina, P. B., Morrisey, J. M., Ganesan, S. M., Ke, H., Pershing, A. M., Mather, M. W.,
et al. (2011). ATP synthase complex of Plasmodium falciparum: Dimeric assembly
in mitochondrial membranes and resistance to genetic disruption. Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 286, 41312–41322.
THE SCIENTIFIC JOURNAL
/
57

Open Humanities Press (OHP). (n.d.). “Vectors.” Open Humanities Press. Retrieved
June 11, 2012, from http://www.openhumanitiespress.org/vectors.html
Owen, J. S. M. (2005). The scientific article in the age of digitization. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Springer.
Pound, E. (1935). Make it new: Essays by Ezra Pound. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Sasakura, K., Hanaoka, K., Shibuya, N., Mikami, Y., Kimura, Y., Komatsu, T., et al.
(2011). Development of a highly selective fluorescence probe for hydrogen sulfide.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 133(45), 18003–18005.
Sayrin, C., Dotsenko, I., Zhou, X., Peaudecerf, B., Rybarczyk, T., Gleyzes, S., et al.
(2011). Real-time quantum feedback prepares and stabilizes photon number states.
Nature, 477, 73–77.
Suber, P. (2005). Promoting open access in the humanities. Syllecta Classica, 16,
231–246.
Thomson Reuters. (2009). Top ten most-cited journals, 1999–2009. Science Watch.
Retrieved from http://sciencewatch.com/dr/sci/09/aug2-09_2
Waltham, M. (2010). The future of scholarly journal publishing among social science
and humanities associations. Journal of Scholarly Publishing, 41, 257–324.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in
production of knowledge. Science, 316, 1036–1039.
Yizhar, O., Fenno, L. E., Prigge, M., Schneider, F., Davidson, T. J., O’Shea, D. J.,
et al. (2011). Neocortical excitation/inhibition balance in information processing
and social dysfunction. Nature, 477, 171–178.
58
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 4
Evaluation After Publication:
Setting the Record Straight
in the Sciences
Alan G. Gross
ABSTRACT
The blogs Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science have reinvented
investigative journalism in the interest of keeping science accurately on
course, detecting error, ferreting out fraud and plagiarism, and publicizing
their presence. Retraction Watch promotes transparency by disseminating to
all interested parties the retraction of articles that are erroneous, fraudulent,
or plagiarized; Abnormal Science actually detects instances in which either
fraud or plagiarism seems likely. Both sites rely on informants, largely
anonymous, to accomplish their aims. This reliance forces them to resolve
the ethical dilemma that anonymity brings in its wake: must sources reveal
their identity if they are to be trusted? Those maintaining sites that deal
directly with fraud and plagiarism, sites like Abnormal Science must also
take the law of libel carefully into consideration. Although the evidence of
alleged fraud or plagiarism may be presented, neither fraud nor plagiarism
may be alleged.
Tell truth and shame the devil.
—Hotspur, Henry IV
Are personal blogs merely personal diaries online, rehearsals of trivialities of
interest only to their creators, intimate friends, and nosy neighbors? Yes and no.
In some cases, personal blogs have been reconfigured so as to preserve the
immediacy inherent in the genre and the moral purpose inherited from famous
ancestors, like Boswell’s London Journal and The Diary of Anne Frank, works
59

that shape scattered incidents into meaningful lives. In Ivan Oransky and
Adam Marcus’s Retraction Watch, and Joerg Zwirner’s Abnormal Science,
everyday professional life is encountered, reflected on, and infused with moral
purpose. Marcus, Oransky, and Zwirner see themselves as successful only to the
extent that scientific journals openly retract erroneous, plagiarized, or fraudulent
articles and at the same time tell the scientific public exactly why they are
doing so. They are conservatives, motivated by the pressing need to keep science
true to an established principle: self-correction. In my view, Retraction Watch and
Abnormal Science succeed in the task they undertake: setting the scientific record
straight by turning their personal blogs into a form of investigative journalism,
reborn on the Web. They do so by activating a set of institutional imperatives,
shared by the scientists and science journals they criticize, norms first articulated
by the sociologist of science, Robert Merton (1968): the expectation that pub-
lished research is original, that it is generated by agreed-upon methods, that it has
survived the skeptical scrutiny of the authors’ peers, that it is free of the influence
of special interests unrelated to science, and that it will be shared freely with
one’s fellows. Because of this shared legacy, the error, plagiarism, and fraud that
Marcus, Oransky, and Zwirner expose and publicize cannot be easily dismissed;
nor can their insistence on open acknowledgement be readily gainsaid.
SETTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT
IN THE SCIENCES
After reading Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales—after the sweeping Prologue,
the dramatic Pardoner’s Tale, the raucous Miller’s Tale, the sermon that
is the Parson’s Tale—readers come upon what may well be the world’s first
Retraction Notice:
Now I pray to all who hear or read this little treatise, that if there is any-
thing in it that they like, they thank our Lord Jesus Christ for it, from
whom proceeds all wisdom and goodness. And if there is anything that
displeases them, I pray also that they ascribe it to the fault of my ignor-
ance and not to my will, which would readily have spoken better if I had
the knowledge. For our book says, “All that is written is written for our
doctrine,” and that is my intention. Therefore I beseech you, for the mercy
of God, that you pray for me that Christ have mercy on me and forgive
my sins, especially my translations and compositions of worldly vanities,
which I revoke in my retractions. (1933, p. 314)
In acknowledging error, some editors of science journals lack the poet’s
candor. One minced no words, responding to Marcus and Oransky’s (2011a)
request for reasons with the following terse comment: “It’s none of your damn
business.” This reluctance to admit error with candor and dispatch can have
60
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

serious consequences. When Tsou, Talia, Pinney, Kendzicky, Piera-Velazquez,
Jimenez et al. (2012) published an article on the effect of oxidative stress, they
found useful a much-cited article in the Journal of Biological Chemistry by two
Japanese researchers, Naohito Aoki and Tsukasa Matsuda (2000), published 12
years before. Their discussion contains a paragraph in which a conclusion of this
earlier article is incorporated into their argument by means of endnote 42, a
reference to PTP1B, an enzyme. We can safely ignore the details of their
argument, paying attention only to the fact that one of Aoki and Matsuda’s
conclusions has become part of it, as revealed by our italics:
We examined the expression and function of PTP1B, which has been
reported to be a negative regulator of receptor tyrosine kinases such as
PDGFR (30, 31). The association between PTP1B and PDGFR is further
supported by a study using PTP1B-knockout mice (38). In addition to the
PDGFR pathway, PTP1B appears to be a negative regulator in both insulin
and leptin signaling pathways (39, 40). Epidermal growth factor receptor
(41) and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins such as STAT-5 (42) have also
been shown to be targets of PTP1B. Although the expression of PTP1B was
similar in normal dermal fibroblasts and SSc dermal fibroblasts (Figure 4B),
the activity of PTP1B was significantly lower in SSc fibroblasts, suggesting
that only a portion of the expressed PTP1B is active in SSc fibroblasts.
(Tsou et al., 2012)
Were reference 42 eliminated, the article’s case would not fail, though it would
be weakened. As it turns out, it must be weakened, for in March of the previous
year, the Japanese paper had been retracted: “This article has been withdrawn
by the authors” was all that was said. This omission provoked only consternation
on the part of the two editors of Retraction Watch:
Whoa there! TMI! [too much information] Don’t share so much!
Alas, that’s all [the editor] wrote. In fact, neither the abstract nor the article
itself is marked as retracted, so it’s worse than useless. (Marcus & Oransky,
2011g)
It would be a serious mistake to say that Marcus and Oransky are just reporting;
they are deeply engaged in the politics of change, a politics with important
epistemic consequences. True, they are merely publicizing error, not detecting
it. Nevertheless, they are not merely participants, but leaders in the process of
scientific self-correction.
What is Retraction Watch? Begun by two medical journalists, it is a blog with
a difference. It was hosting about 100,000 page views a month shortly after its
launch and by mid-2014 claimed 33,490 followers, a testimony to its importance
as an influence in setting the record of science straight. In an entry called “What
people are saying about Retraction Watch” (Marcus & Oransky, 2011g), the site
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
61

posts prominent endorsements of its mission. In a Twitter feed, John Rennie,
former editor-in-chief of Scientific American, says that the blog is “one of the
most important recent developments in science journalism.” In Columbia
Journalism Review, Craig Silverman calls Retraction Watch “a new blog that
should be required reading for anyone interested in scientific journalism or the
issue of accuracy.” Ben Goldacre of the Guardian concludes, “Ivan Oransky and
Adam Marcus are two geeks who set up a website called Retraction Watch
because it was clear that retractions are often handled badly.” An editorial in the
Ottawa Citizen asserts:
Fortunately, there are some people in the world of science who think more
attention should be paid to retractions. Two of them have started a popular
blog, Retraction Watch, which has shed light on about 200 retractions
since its inception a year ago. The authors, both medical journalists, hope
to “open a window onto the world of scientific publishing, and, by impli-
cation, science itself.” If scientific publishers cared more about transparency
than damage control, that window would be easier to pry open, and science
would be better for it. (Making Science Transparent, 2011)
What is Abnormal Science? It is a German blog written by Zwirmer (2011a), a
former university science professor. Unlike Retraction Watch, Abnormal Science
is devoted, first to revealing, then to publicizing error, plagiarism, and fraud. Like
Retraction Watch, it is a blog deeply implicated in the politics of change, the
process of setting the record of science straight:
With this blog I hope to contribute to a critique of the absence of trans-
parency and of the secretive machinations of German universities when
it comes to scientific misconduct. The public review of cases in the news
illustrates serious flaws in the process of revealing misconduct. The behavior
of the German Ombudsman is a notorious example.
WHAT SCIENCE BLOGS REVEAL
What is revealed in these science blogs need not be the consequence
of scientific misconduct. On January 7, 2011, Retraction Watch reported that
an article had been retracted because researchers mistakenly used the wrong
mice, the result of a misreading of a confusing catalogue entry (Marcus &
Oransky, 2011b). On January 19, an article that appeared in the Journal of the
National Cancer Institute was quickly withdrawn by its authors: a conceptual
error had been made. Of the latter case, Retraction Watch commented, “No
misconduct involved—just good old-fashioned self-correcting science. So
we applaud Baker, Simon, their co-authors, and the JNCI [Journal of the National
Cancer Institute]” (Marcus & Oransky, 2011c).
62
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Nevertheless, retractions very often involve plagiarism and fraud. For
plagiarism, the rule is this: the ideas that scientists present to their publics should
be entirely original, except where a citation is provided; their prose should also be
wholly theirs, except where quotation marks are present. When Reginald Smith
published virtually the same paper in two journals, he clearly violated this
principle. A paper published in the European Respiratory Journal was retracted
by editorial fiat for the same reason:
Although the two papers were not exactly identical, there were overlaps
between the two papers, and more importantly, the authors have failed to
mention the existence of a closely related paper, using the same cohort of
patients, and being submitted to another journal. We do not say whether
this was intentional or simply due to a misunderstanding of our journal’s
policy, but the fact that the authors have failed to report (either to us or to the
chief editor of Respiratory Medicine) of this almost concomitant submission
of two very closely related papers was real and undisputable. (Marcus &
Oransky, 2010)
However defined, plagiarism is an offense against, and only against, the social
community that is science; it does not affect the community’s knowledge base.
It has no epistemic consequences. It is its effect on scientific knowledge that
makes fraud the graver offense. The case of Silvia Bulfone-Paus, a case we
reconstruct from Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science, reveals the impor-
tance of the Internet and its blogs in ferretting out fraud, pursuing the truth
relentlessly despite considerable institutional opposition. Marcus and Oransky
and Zwirner provide us with a window into institutional resistance to detecting
and correcting fraud and in punishing offenders.
What is symptomatic of an article in need of retraction on account of fraud?
Grant Steen (2011) investigated the characteristics of such articles, determining
that in general they were published in journals with a relatively high impact
factor, reflecting the ambition of their first authors; that they frequently had a
relatively large number of co-authors, a tactic that obscures responsibility; that
they were very often one of a series, a repetition indicating a pattern of decep-
tion; and finally, that the delay between publication and retraction was typically
long, resulting in large part from the authors’ reluctance to admit fault. The
Bulfone-Paus case exhibits all of the characteristics Steen detects (Frost, 2010;
Marcus & Oransky, 2011d, 2011e, 2011f). Some 12 of her papers were retracted
after an extended period of delay, clearly marked by resistance on her part. On
average, these papers had nearly eight authors. Their impact factor averaged
5.813, over double the average for journals in immunology, Bulfone-Paus’ field.
The first hint of difficulty with Bulfone-Paus’ work surfaces in November
2009, when Karin Wiebauer, a PhD working in her laboratory at the German
Research Center Borstel, alerts her to the possibility that some papers published
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
63

by her research team may contain manipulated images. Far from acting at once,
Bulfone-Paus waits until February 29, 2010, to inform her superiors of the
possibility. Only in May is an internal investigation initiated. Apparently as a
result of this investigation (its report is never released), in July 2010 an external
investigation begins, headed by Werner Seeger of the University of Giessen.
In the meantime, the Internet has not been silent on this matter. In his private
blog, Martin Frost, a pseudonym for a person unknown to any of the parties
in the investigation, openly accuses Bulfone-Paus of fraud. The first reaction
of the scientific community is severely critical of interference that it regards
as gratuitous and unwarranted. In September, a Nature editorial (A destabilizing
force, 2010) accuses Frost of carrying out a “trial-by-Internet” and threatening
“the impartiality of misconduct inquiries.” In October, Frost receives a letter
from a Hamburg law firm, presumably initiated by Bulfone-Paus, asking him to
remove his allegedly libelous comments. He does not comply. In November–
December 2010, the report of the external committee is made public. It concludes
that two post-doctoral students, co-authors Elena Bulanova and Vadim Budagian,
are responsible for image manipulation; however, there is no falsification of
data “in the sense that anything was made up.” There is no doubt, however,
that “fundamental responsibility” for any scientific misconduct has to rest on
the senior author, also Director of Immunology and Cell Biology. Despite
this finding, there is no reason for wholesale retraction because there was no
indication, the report asserts, that the “core findings” of these papers were in any
way undermined by the fraudulent images. In November, pending the public
release of this report, Bulfone-Paus is asked to resign as Director. She does not
comply.
In December, an email from Karin Wiebauer appears on Martin Frost’s blog
(2010). This appearance represents the turning of the tide against Bulfone-Paus.
In less than perfect and often bold-faced English, Wiebauer details the diffi-
culties she had in getting a hearing for her warnings and later, her accusations of
fraud, accusations that point directly at Bulfone-Paus.
Incidentally, in the long year, that followed my email to Silvia on 4th
November 2009, I took great pains to stay on the “legal” route for whistle-
blowers, trying to keep this case within the limits of the scientific community
and, most notably, acting always under my full name.
Did it lead me anywhere? It didn’t. Instead, I had to endure the mind-
boggling lies and/or excuses of all parties involved in this case of scientific
misconduct, starting with Prof. Bulfone-Paus and including the poor
co-worker condemned to reproduce non-existing data, the Editors-in-Chief
of Journal of Immunology and Molecular and Cellular Biology, the
speakers of ombudsman—and other committees, and—last not least—
the
“Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft”
(DFG)
[German
Research
Society]: This organization provided most of the money that enabled Prof.
64
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Bulfone-Paus to publish a series of science fiction articles for the past 10
years (SFB 506/C5, SFB 415/A10). It also approved the establishment of
SFB 877 (the successor of SFB 415) that contains a proposal by Prof.
Bulfone-Paus, which was based in part on publications that were purportedly
under investigation.
These accusations are accompanied by a visual series that make the degree
of image manipulation abundantly clear. My Figure 4.1 is one of Wiebauer’s
mash-ups. It is hard to believe in Bulfone-Paus’ innocence when we see her
Figure 5D transformed by Photoshop into Figure 3B.
Now the story approaches its climax. On March 16, Research Center Borstel
receives an open letter, signed by 24 researchers from the United States, England,
Sweden, Germany, Italy, and Israel, a stout defense of Bulfone-Paus as a
researcher above reproach. It is clear testimony to the high regard for her achieve-
ments within the relevant scientific community. On April 6, the Board of
Directors of the Research Center Borstel responds, defending its case against
Bulfone-Paus. They point to “Silvia Bulfone-Paus’s prolonged failure to be
completely up-front about the nature and extent of the fraud occurring in her lab.”
They add that “Silvia Bufone-Paus received repeated warnings (in writing) from
her former co-worker Dr. Karin Wiebauer as early as January 2004.” Finally, they
dismiss those who would trivialize the consequences of her misconduct:
It has been stated that, since many of the incriminated manipulations “only”
concern Western Blots showing loading controls, the main results reported
in the papers appeared not to be affected by the manipulations. The data
supporting this contention, however, have not yet been examined by inde-
pendent referees from the respective Journals.
Finally, they state unequivocally that “the principal investigator bears full respon-
sibility for any faulted data in publications.” As a consequence of their brief,
Bulfone-Paus has been demoted: She will no longer be Director.
What is the motivation for Bulfone-Paus’ misconduct? Why did this com-
petent and talented researcher commit fraud? According to Robert Merton
(1968), there are five shared norms essential to the proper conduct of science—
originality, communalism, universalism, disinterestedness, and organized skep-
ticism. These do not describe the way all scientists behave; they describe the
way all scientists ought to behave. Science editors whose retraction notices
lack candor violate the norm of communalism; plagiarists violate the norm of
originality; fraudsters, like Bulfone-Paus, violate the norms of disinterestedness,
universalism, and organized skepticism. Why?
They do so because there is a problem with these norms. Behaving well may be
a necessary condition for a successful scientific career; it is never sufficient.
Adherence determines only membership in good standing; it does not determine
relative status, the size of one’s share in the rewards one’s fellows can offer. This
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
65

66
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 4.1. Wiebauer’s mash-up illustrating fraud in an article by
Bulfone-Paus et al. (1999). Adapted from pages 3 and 4 of “Bulfone-Paus
et al. 1999 Part 3,” a PDF attachment of Wiebauer (2010). Retrieved from
http://martinfrost.ws/htmlfiles/dec2010/blame-elena-vadim.html.

size is a consequence of the significance of scientists’ work to their peers, its
impact on their particular community and on science as a whole. While it is
possible to increase one’s status without deviating from any community norms, it
is also possible to achieve the same result more swiftly simply by violating them.
In a healthy community, there is consensus that the benefits from adherence will
exceed those of violation—that crime does not pay. But if this consensus does
not obtain routinely—if adherence is perceived by some as a path to failure in
the competition for status—a state of anomie may well arise. For some at least, the
norms cease to be compelling. As more and more norm violations succeed, as
they lead to an increase in status for more and more members of the community,
anomie deepens and spreads; as it does, deviant behavior spreads. If the infec-
tion becomes general, the community becomes pathological: deviant behavior
becomes the norm. Scientists can no longer be trusted to do trustworthy science
(Merton, 1968).
The temptation to which Bulfone-Paus succumbed is not hers alone; it is
widespread in the biomedical community of which she is a member, a community
that suffers from increasing anomie, a state of affairs in which the norms of
originality, communality, universalism, disinterestedness, and organized skepti-
cism are in constant peril. Too often in biomedical articles, recommendations
and conclusions are not supported by data; too often their significance is exag-
gerated (Boutron, Dutton, Ravaud, & Altman, 2010; Gøtszche, 2006; Hewitt,
Mitchell, & Torgerson, 2008; Martinson, Anderson, & de Vries, 2005). Too
often, conclusions are biased by financial ties to sponsoring pharmaceutical
companies (Bennett, Lai, Henke, Bartnato, Armitage, & Sartor, 2010; Norris,
Herxheimer, Lexchin, & Mansfield, 2005, pp. 48–55; Yank, Rennie, & Bero,
2007). Too often, there is a lack of transparency: protocols are not presented and
vital methodological information is missing (Hopewell, Dutton, Yu, Chan, &
Altman, 2010; Martinson et al., 2005). Too often, industry-supported studies in
medical journals are more likely to report positive findings, regardless of the
evidence, and to support new and off-label treatments over standard ones
(Jefferson, Pietrantoni, Debalini, Rivetti, & Demicheli, 2009; Jørgensen, Hilden,
& Gøtzsche, 2006; Yank et al., 2007). Despite the heavy involvement of industry
in funding research, a survey established that only 26% of North American
medical journals required disclosure of any conflict of interest that might arise
from drug company subsidies (Norris et al., 2005).
As a consequence of these trends, we might infer that the number of candi-
dates for retraction exceeds by far the number of articles actually retracted:
Bulfone-Paus and her fellows, exposed by Retraction Watch, are the tip of the
iceberg. This is indeed the case. On the basis of one count, between 1995 and
2004, there were 328 retractions out of 5,041,587 articles listed in PubMed
(Redman, 2008). This is an absurdly small number (33 per year or 0.0065%),
given the articles likely in need of retraction. A survey of over 3,000 researchers
funded by the National Institutes of Health reported that one third of the
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
67

respondents admitted to “a range of questionable practices that are striking
in their breadth and prevalence” (Martinson, 2005). Owning up to falsifying
results was rare (0.3%), though still significantly higher than the number of
papers actually retracted. If 0.3% of 5,041,587 papers are fraudulent, then
15,125 are; that is 1,513 a year.
There are other problems. The study provides evidence of undue influence.
A substantial number of respondents acknowledged changing important aspects
of a study owing to pressure from the funding source (15.5%). Also alarming
was the fact that 27.5% of respondents self-reported sloppy recordkeeping, a
practice that makes extremely difficult the assessment of human error, experi-
mental replicability, or fraud. In addition, the results of this survey may be an
underestimation because, in all probability, misbehaving scientists were less
likely to respond and those responding were more likely to underreport their
deviance. The problems such unprofessional practices create would not be
solved, however, even if all fraudulent, biased, or otherwise tainted articles
were eventually retracted. Retraction does nothing to purge the literature of the
many citations to retracted articles, citations that permanently infect the liter-
ature (Howard, 2011). Indeed, retracted articles are cited, even after retraction,
partly because retractions are often hidden behind a pay-wall. Witness the
Aoki-Matsuda problem.
WHY SCIENCE BLOGS ARE PERSUASIVE
The websites of Marcus and Oransky and Zwirner are engaged in a heroic
quest, designed to rescue, not just bioscience, but all science from the throes of
error and self-deception. To do so, they turn the recent past into a story with
a moral, a Pilgrim’s Progress of scientists caught in the snares of institutional
constraints, tempted by sin into deviance. But can such moral journeys rest, as
those of Marcus and Oransky and Zwirner largely rest, on the accusations of
anonymous whistle-blowers? Should not accusations of plagiarism and fraud
be pursued only through proper institutional channels, behind closed doors, rather
than aired in public? And if pursued beyond proper channels, should whistle-
blowers be permitted to remain anonymous?
Those in favor of proper channels alone ignore the evidence that such channels
fail to work properly more often than not, a fact that Retraction Watch and
Abnormal Science regularly document and as the Bulfone-Paus case amply
demonstrates. Speaking of the German Ombudsman in charge of investigating
fraud, Zwirner (2011d) vents his understandable frustration at the approach
through proper channels:
Fig. 3C is obviously and unequivocally manipulated. The correct control
stain (double color stain) could prove it beyond doubt. . . . Instead you accept
the wrong control stain (single color). An analogy to your approach would
68
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

be that a court accepted a kitchen knife as weapon in a homicide case
although the victim had a gunshot wound in the forehead and the suspect
offender was in possession of the gun in question.
Those against anonymity seem unaware that the public forum afforded by a
blog is well suited for exposing the evidence for plagiarism and fraud. What
counts in the cases reported in Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science is, after
all, not the motive of the whistleblower but the evidence produced in defense
of claims. Moreover, those against anonymity seem also unaware that whistle-
blowing legislation has repeatedly failed to protect whistleblowers from retalia-
tion (Dworkin, 2007). Those against anonymity also ignore the fact that blogs allow
anyone to respond almost immediately to an accusation, including those most
knowledgeable about what really happened: the accused. Finally, those in favor
of anonymity ignore the existence of libel law as a protection for the accused.
Stories with a moral like those in Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science
are the routine products of investigative journalism (Ettema & Glasser, 1998).
In such journalism, “narrative is an instrument of both cognitive and moral
understanding. More than that, narrative is the instrument by which these two
intellectual impulses are united” (Ettema & Glasser, 1998, p. 128). It is a union
abetted by irony, a tool designed to persuade readers to share the authors’
indignation at the violation of Merton’s norms and to spur the demand for a return
to their adherence (Ettema & Glasser, 1998, p. 87). In telling Bulfone-Paus’ story,
for example, Retraction Watch combines cognitive and moral understanding in
a single narrative, one honed throughout by structural and verbal irony. Structural
irony contrasts her respected position with her reprehensible conduct, apparently
trying to quash a whistleblower in her lab and threatening to sue another. This
ironic stance is seconded by its verbal counterpart (Marcus & Oransky, 2011e):
Some of the notices have gone into great detail about what was wrong
with the original papers, and journals have even allowed the team to declare
that some of the results had been replicated. One simply said there had
been misconduct.
Then there’s this [retraction notice]:
This article has been withdrawn by the authors.
That certainly clears things right up.
This verbal irony is also seconded by readers who comment on the case, one
of whom is none other than Joerg Zwirner:
EMBO Journal editor Bernd Pulverer has done science a disservice. Without
good cause he provided platform to people (shall we still call them scien-
tists?) who gambled away their credibility. Key experiments reproduced and
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
69

confirmed? No proof? No evidence? Come on! Bulfone-Paus is not worthy
of our trust anymore. (Zwirner, 2011a)
In other Retraction Watch cases, where the violation seems particularly
outrageous, irony’s siblings, sarcasm and ridicule, play a significant role. For
example, in one post, Marcus (2011b) writes, “A team of Australian medical
writers who analyzed four decades worth of retractions has reached the con-
clusion—we trust you’re sitting—that people in their profession are more
honest than, well, the rest of us.” This freedom to belittle does not extend to
the Web equivalent of face-to-face interaction, an indication that Marcus and
Oransky’s moral compass is in order. Responding to a comment, Marcus’s tone
is as always sober, indicating by a modulation that ridicule extends only to the
article, not to its authors:
Our skepticism stems largely from the significant limitation of the study—
the inability to analyze papers in which the work of medical writers has
not been disclosed—and the implicit claim that medical writers add a
veneer of ethical purity. In our view, transparency and the willingness
to disclose (authorship, pharma involvement, etc.) probably are the best
insurance against misconduct. (Marcus, 2011a)
Marcus and Oransky and Zwirner also extend the permissible scope of investi-
gative reporting by their willingness to editorialize, to make their moral mission
explicit. It is this willingness that is behind a Retraction Watch entry that
attempts to give journals retraction grades. The most impressive of the 12 retrac-
tion notices analyzed acknowledge misconduct and do not permit the authors to
make unsubstantiated claims concerning the remaining worth of their retracted
papers. Less worthy notices mention that there are irregularities but do not
tell us what they are. Even less worthy notices say nothing whatever about
the cause of the retraction. The four worst notices specify exactly what was
wrong, but then allow “the authors to claim—without the journal editors having
reviewed any findings, one of them told us—that the data and conclusions
had been confirmed.” For example, “The authors declare that key experiments
presented in the majority of these figures were recently reproduced and that the
results confirmed the experimental data and the conclusions drawn from them”
(Marcus & Oransky, 2011f). Zwirner (2011c) goes even further out on a moral
limb in his attack on a melanoma study that, he alleges, continues to recruit
patients in defiance of medical plausibility:
The official website of the Department of Dermatology, the first and fore-
most purpose of which is to inform patients, their physicians as well as
scientists and students delivers false, misleading informations [sic] on a
large scale dendritic cell-based tumor vaccination trial. The website is an
important tool for the recruitment of melanoma patients in future trials with
70
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

dendritic cell-based immune therapy. From the perspective of patients and
their physicians it is totally inacceptable [sic] that the true fate of this
multicenter study and the inefficacy of the dendritic cell therapy as found
in that trial is not revealed.
Reader commentary extends investigative reporting’s scope even further.
In Retraction Watch, dozens comment, some only once, some seldom, some
frequently. Some prefer pseudonyms; some reveal their identity either directly
or indirectly. The case of ktwop, alias of Krishna Pillai, a research engineer with
a doctorate, reveals what a frequent commentator can contribute to reinforce
the goals of investigative journalism by employing its methods: straight reporting
informed by structural irony, criticism edged with sarcasm, editorializing. Com-
menting on the precarious state of academic integrity in Chinese science, ktwop
employs structural irony when replying to one of Marcus and Oransky’s posts:
After a quick trial, a local court in Beijing convicted urologist Xiao
Chuang-Guo on 10 October of assaulting two well-known advocates of
academic integrity in China. One victim of the attacks was Fang Shimin,
freelance writer and self-appointed watchdog of research misconduct.
Fang had questioned Xiao’s academic achievements, but this was not
what prompted the attack, Xiao claimed. Xiao told the court that he had a
decade-long personal conflict with Fang, mainly because Fang had insulted
Xiao’s wife and teacher. (ktwop, 2010)
A comment on an English case of scientific fraud is edged with sarcasm:
Perhaps friend Jatinder can follow the example of “zu Googleberg.”
[A reference to a German Defense Minister, Karl Theodor zu Guttenberg,
dismissed over a plagiarism scandal.] As the plagiarist he has retracted his
own PhD and Angela Merkel has let him continue in his job. But he has a
personal fortune of € 300 million to fall back on! (ktwop, 2011b)
Of a journal editor who was not forthcoming about the reasons for retraction,
ktwop editorializes:
It is increasingly obvious that it is not just the ethics of researchers which
can be involved in retractions. The ethics of the journal editors and the
journals themselves (including their peer-review process) are obviously
very relevant. He may be a wonderful surgeon and husband for all I know
but as an editor-in-chief he is no role-model and he does not impress.
(ktwop, 2011a)
For Marcus and Oransky, for Zwirner, and for their reader-commentators, narra-
tive tinged with irony is the tool with which to judge and to transform the moral
order so that it conforms more closely to the acknowledged norms of science.
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
71

There are limits to this approach. Retraction Watch never probes beneath the
surface to the source behind misconduct, to science as a social institution, to an
enterprise that has silently incorporated into itself incentives at odds with its
norms. To its credit, Abnormal Science does raise this issue, though Zwirner
(2011b) lacks the tools to address it adequately:
There has been a neglect of the sociological aspects of scientific misbehavior
to this day. One might argue that misconduct in science is as much a
sociological phenomenon as a scientific or legal issue. Such reasoning
has already been voiced in regard to doping in sports. . . . However, to keep
sports as well as science clean, it might prove to be insufficient to focus
exclusively on the scientist who personally fabricated, falsified or plagiar-
ized, or the athlete who used performance enhancers. Such a personalization
of misconduct might distract from other, equally important causes of failures
of compliance with accepted standards in science and sports.
Still, it would be unfair to judge Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science against
a standard they were not designed to meet. Their achievement is nothing less
than remarkable: two journalists and one former scientist have succeeded in
reinventing investigative journalism on the Web, creatively exploiting its possi-
bilities in pursuit of a better world of science, one more in conformity with its
own high standards.
CONCLUSION
Without the Internet, enterprises like Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science
are inconceivable. Neither newspapers nor television nor radio could focus so
relentlessly on a single topic of no interest to a general audience but of con-
siderable importance to every citizen. No other medium could maintain an
instantly available archive of cases, a history of scientific misconduct and retrac-
tion as it unfolds. No other medium could make reader comments an integral
part of its developing stories. No other medium could provide Twitter feeds
that keep the blog up-to-date, literally minute by minute. No other medium could
provide such ready access to other relevant Internet sources, including other
blogs or related articles. The story of Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science is
the tale of nodes in a network of expanding knowledge and epistemic, social,
and moral critique. Both blogs seriously influence how we know. By correcting
error, Abnormal Science does so directly by publicizing error and opening a
window to the efforts of others in doing so; Retraction Watch does so indirectly.
Bulfone-Paus’ exposure is a prime example of private endeavors working in
the public interest, an enterprise made possible and made public by the Internet.
We have a case, probably not the last case, of a prominent researcher seriously
misbehaving. It is a case that shows us that science is far from self-correcting and
72
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

that it can no longer insulate its lapses from wider public opinion operating
in virtual space. As a result of the efforts of these bloggers, we—all of us—have
a firmer sense of the state of knowledge at the research front in particular fields
of scientific endeavor.
REFERENCES
A destabilizing force. (2010). [Editorial] Nature, 467, 7312.
Aoki, N., & Matsuda, T. (2000). A cytosolic protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B specif-
ically dephosphorylates and deactivates prolactin-activated STAT5a and STAT5b.
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 275, 39718–39726.
Bennett, C. L., Lai, S. Y., Henke, M., Bartnato, S. E., Armitage, J. O., & Sartor, O. (2010).
Association between pharmaceutical support and basic science research on erythro-
poiesis-stimulating agents. Archives of Internal Medicine, 170(16), 1490–1498.
Boutron, I., Dutton, S., Ravaud, P., & Altman D. G. (2010). Reporting and interpretation
of randomized controlled trials with statistically nonsignificant results for primary
outcomes. JAMA, 303(20), 2058–2064.
Bulfone-Paus, S., Bulanova, E., Pohl, T., & Budagian, V. (1999). Death deflected: IL-15
inhibits TNF-N1-mediated apoptosis in fibroblasts by TRAF2 recruitment to the
IL-15RN1 chain. FASEB Journal, 13, 1575–1585. [retracted]
Chaucer, G. (1933). The poetical works. (F. N. Robinson, Ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
Dworkin, T. M. ( 2007). Sox and whistleblowing. Michigan Law Review, 105, 1757–1780.
Ettema, J. S., & Glasser, T. S. (1998). Custodians of conscience: Investigative journalism
and public virtue. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Frost. M. (2010). Frost’s meditations. Retrieved from http://www.martinfrost.ws/
htmlfiles/dec2010/blame-elena-vadim.html
Gøtzsche, P. C. (2006). Believability of relative risks and odds ratios in abstracts: Cross
sectional study. BMJ, 333, 231–234.
Hewitt, C., Mitchell, N., & Torgerson, D. (2008). Heed the data when results are not
significant. BMJ, 336, 23–25.
Hopewell, S., Dutton, S., Yu, L., Chan, A., & Altman, D. G. (2010). The quality of reports
of randomized trials in 2000 and 2006: Comparative study of articles indexed in
PubMed. BMJ, 340, c723. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c723
Howard, J. (2011). Despite warnings, biomedical scholars cite hundreds of retracted
papers. Chronicle of Higher Education, 57(32), 2–3.
Jefferson, T., Pietrantoni, C. D., Debalini, M. G., Rivetti, A., & Demicheli, V. (2009).
Relation of study quality, concordance, take home message, funding, and impact in
studies of influenza vaccine: Systematic review. BMJ, 338. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b354
Jørgensen, A. W., Hilden, J., & Gøtzsche, P. C. (2006). Cochrane reviews compared
with industry supported meta-analyses and other meta-analyses of the same drugs:
Systematic review. BMJ, 333. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38973.444699.OB
ktwop. (2010, October 7). Do plagiarism, fraud, and retractions make it more difficult to
trust research from China? [Blog comment]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved December
17, 2011, from http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2010/10/07/do-plagiarism-
fraud-and-retractions-make-it-more-difficult-trust/#more-496
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
73

ktwop. (2011a, January 5). Why was that paper retracted? Editor to Retraction Watch:
“It’s none of your business” [Blog comment]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from
http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/01/05/why-was-that-paper-retracted-
editor-to-retraction-watch-its-none/#more-1261
ktwop. (2011b, February 21). Ahluwalia did not tell UCL he had been dismissed from
Cambridge [Blog comment]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from http://retraction
watch.wordpress.com/2011/02/21/ahluwalia-did-not-tell-ucl-he-had-been-dismissed-
from-cambridge/#more-1817
Making science transparent. (2011, August 12). [Editorial] The Ottawa Citizen. Retrieved
from http://search.proquest.com/
Marcus, A. (2011a, February 3). Three more Bulfone-Paus rejection notices, in Journal
of Immunology [Blog comment]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from http://retraction
watch.wordpress.com/2011/02/03/three-more-bulfone-paus-retraction-notices-out-in-
journal-of-imm/#more-1656
Marcus, A. (2011b, April 15). Want to avoid a retraction? Hire a medical writer, say
medical writers. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from http://retractionwatch.com/
2011/04/15/want-to-avoid-a-retraction-hire-a-medical-writer-say-medical-wri/
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2010, December 28). Nearly identical twins: European
Respiratory Journal retracts another asthma in pregnancy paper similar to another
by the same group. Retraction Watch [Blog post]. Retrieved from http://retraction
watch.wordpress.com/2010/12/28/nearly-identical-twins-european-respiratory-journal-
retracts-ast/#more-1199
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011a, January 5). Why was that paper retracted? Editor
to Retraction Watch: “It’s none of your business” [Blog post]. Retraction Watch.
Retrieved from http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/01/05/why-was-that-
paper-retracted-editor-to-retraction-watch-its-none/#more-1261
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011b, January 7). Authors of Journal of Immunology paper
retract it after realizing they have ordered the wrong mice [Blog post]. Retraction
Watch. Retrieved from http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/01/07/
authors-of-journal-of-immunology-paper-retract-it-after-realizin/#more-1274
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011c, January 19). A lightning-fast JNCI retraction shows
how science should work [Blog post]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from
http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/01/19/a-lightning-fast-jnci-retraction-
shows-how-science-should-work/#more-1416
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011d, February 3). Three more Bulfone-Paus rejection
notices, in Journal of Immunology [Blog post]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from
http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/02/03/three-more-bulfone-paus-retraction-
notices-out-in-journal-of-imm/#more-1656
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011e, February 15). Bulfone-Paus retraction notice appears
in the Journal of Biological Chemistry [Blog post]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved
from http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/bulfone-paus-retraction-
notice-appears-in-the-journal-of-biologi/#more-1747
Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011f, March 14). As last of 12 Bulfone-Paus retractions
appears, a (disappointing) report card on journal transparency [Blog post]. Retraction
Watch. Retrieved from http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/2011/03/14/as-last-of-
12-promised-bulfone-paus-retractions-appears-a-disapp/#more-2048
74
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2011g, March 21). Freedom from Information Act? Another
JBC retraction untarnished by the facts [Blog post]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from
http://retractionwatch.wordpress.com/?s=matsuda
Martinson, B. C., Anderson, M. S., & de Vries, R. (2005). Scientists behaving badly.
Nature, 435(7043), 737–738.
Merton. R. K. (1968). Social theory and social structure. New York, NY: Free Press.
Norris, P., Herxheimer, A., Lexchin, J., & Mansfield, P. (2005). Drug promotion: What
we know, what we have yet to learn: Reviews of materials in the WHO/HAI database
on drug promotion. World Health Organization, WHO/EDM/PAR/2004.3.
Redman, B. K. (2008). Empirical developments in retraction. Journal of Medical Ethics,
34, 807–809.
Steen, G. (2011). Retractions in the scientific literature: Do authors deliberately commit
research fraud? Journal of Medical Ethics, 37, 113–117.
Tsou, P., Talia, N. N., Pinney, A. J., Kendzicky, A., Piera-Velazquez, S., Jimenez, S. A.,
et al. (2012). Effect of oxidative stress on protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B in
scleroderma dermal fibroblasts. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 64(6), 1978–1989.
Wiebauer, K. (2010, December 3). Fraud perfected—Accusations deflected? [or] How
to duplicate and plagiarize one’s own data [or] Data manipulation: A guided
tour through an expanding universe. [PDF files]. Attachments to correspondence
reproduced on Frost’s Meditations [Blog entry]. Retrieved December 4, 2010 from
http://martinfrost.ws/htmlfiles/dec2010/blame-elena-vadim.html
Yank, V., Rennie, D., & Bero, L. A. (2007). Financial ties and concordance between
results and conclusions in meta-analyses: Retrospective cohort study. BMJ. doi:
10.1136/bmj.39376.447211.BE
Zwirner, J. (2011a, February 3). Three more Bulfone-Paus rejection notices, in Journal
of Immunology [Blog comment]. Retraction Watch. Retrieved from http://retraction
watch.wordpress.com/2011/02/03/three-more-bulfone-paus-retraction-notices-out-in-
journal-of-imm/#more-1656
Zwirner, J. (2011b, September 15). SMS alert at Erlangen: The sociological aspects
of scientific misconduct [Blog post]. Abnormal Science. Retrieved from http://
abnormalscienceblog.wordpress.com/2011/09/15/sociological-aspects-of-scientific-
misconduct/#more-748
Zwirner, J. (2011c, September 19). SMS alert at Erlangen: The mystery of a cancer study
[Blog post]. Abnormal Science. Retrieved from http://abnormalscienceblog.word
press.com/2011/09/19/sms-alert-in-erlangen-the-mystery-of-a-cancer-study/#more-761
Zwirner, J. (2011d, September 27). German Ombudsman et al.: Systematic suppres-
sion of evidence. Abnormal Science. Retrieved from http://abnormalscienceblog.word
press.com/2011/09/27/german-ombudsman-et-al-systematic-suppression-of-evidence/
#more-790
EVALUATION AFTER PUBLICATION
/
75

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 5
The Online Research Article
and the Ecological Basis
of New Digital Genres
Christian F. Casper
ABSTRACT
Among the most significant outcomes of the emergence and evolution of
digital communication technology are the ways in which it enables formerly
disparate genres to exist within the same milieu. In other words, genres
that rarely interacted in print media find themselves suddenly thrown
together in the new digital world, and the ecological implications are often
fascinating. This chapter explores this development by examining the
particular case of online scientific journals and the interactions between
existing and new genres in these publications, and it proposes a conception
of genre in digital space based explicitly on its role within an “ecosystem”
of texts.
Scholars of communication and rhetoric have been interested in scientific genres
for some time. In fact, much of the seminal work in genre since the 1980s has
dealt with scientific texts (e.g., Bazerman, 1988, 1994; Berkenkotter & Huckin,
1995; Miller, 1984, 1994; Schryer, 1993, 1994; Swales, 1990, 2004), and these
studies have helped us understand the inherently social nature of genres (Miller,
1984), their key role in community formation and cohesion (Miller, 1994), and
the ways that genres evolve and interact in assemblages (Bazerman, 1994; Devitt,
1991; Orlikowski & Yates, 1994; Spinuzzi, 2002, 2004; Spinuzzi & Zachry,
2000; Swales, 2004; Yates & Orlikowski, 2002).
One of the most important developments in genre studies has been the recog-
nition that no genre is an island. Genres act together to play particular roles in
77

the communication of a community, much as particular species fill particular
niches in a biological ecosystem. Several models of genre assemblages1 have
been proposed over the years, including genre sets (Devitt, 1991), genre systems
(Bazerman, 1994; Yates & Orlikowski, 2002), genre repertoires (Orlikowski
& Yates, 1994), and genre ecologies (Spinuzzi, 2002; Spinuzzi & Zachry,
2000), in addition to Swales’s (2004) several “constellations” of genres. These
models are not mutually exclusive, but they do foreground different aspects
of the uses of genres that can be more or less useful depending on the artifacts
at hand and the questions asked.2
Owen (2007) describes the research article as having undergone a process that
he calls “encapsulation,” whereby the basic form of the genre remains constant
even as its medium of delivery changes. Contending that scientific journals
have passed the point at which they were likely to be significantly changed by
digital media (pp. 213–214), he explains that the research article has simply
migrated online, like moving a potted plant (p. 218). However, I argue here that
a complete consideration of a genre should not treat it as if in a vacuum but should
also take into account the “ecosystem” of genres in which it operates. Changes
that occur in the generic environment in which a text sits can have important
implications for the practice of its discourse community. The discourse
being carried out in new electronic annotation and discussion genres may very
well change the discursive environment in which the research article sits, so even
if the research article is not changing formally, its role as a text in the generic
milieu of science may very well be evolving with its environment. My study of
new genres that interact with the research article addresses how the research
article evolves as a genre even if it may not noticeably change in form. In short, I
argue here that developments in electronic media and their deployment in online
communication of scientific research suggest a conception of genre evolution that
focuses more on a genre’s role in its textual ecosystem than on any changes in its
“anatomical” form.
METHODOLOGY
To begin to address these questions, I undertook a critical and empirical
study of four tools for feedback on published research in science: comments
and notes in an innovative online journal called PLOS ONE, published by the
78
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 In a very useful article on some of these models Spinuzzi (2004) uses the term assem-
blages without its Deleuzian implications, and here so do I.
2 Crawford, Hurd, & Weller (1996), Garvey & Griffith (1972), and Hahn (2001) have
proposed models of the scientific communication process, which, although not framed as
descriptions of genre assemblages per se, are useful for understanding how scholars have
conceptualized the interplay of various kinds of texts related to scientific research.

nonprofit publisher Public Library of Science (PLOS), and “e-letters” and
traditional letters to the editor (which are published both in print and online)
in the highly regarded, well-established journal Science. PLOS ONE and
Science are both interdisciplinary journals publishing research from a wide
variety of fields. Established in 1880 with financial support from Thomas
Edison, Science has become one of the most prestigious scientific journals
in the world, rivaling its British counterpart Nature. PLOS ONE has been
published only since December 2006 but has become widely known largely
due to its open access, subscription-free publication policy and experimen-
tation with novel forms of online communication. Unlike the other journals
published by PLOS, such as PLOS Biology and PLOS Genetics, PLOS ONE
employs a unique standard of prepublication peer review in which submis-
sions are evaluated only on the soundness of the methodology and interpre-
tation of the data and not on the work’s perceived importance or significance.
Among this family of journals, PLOS ONE is where new online communi-
cation features are typically tried out first, so it provided the richest source of
data for this study.
(During the publication process of this book, PLOS ONE eliminated the
notes function and converted all existing notes to comments. I inquired about
this to PLOS’s product manager, and he explained that the program was
shuttered because the notes weren’t used very much, and the difference
between comments and notes was confusing to many readers. I have left the
remainder of the text of this chapter as it was before I became aware of this
development, but readers should be aware that the notes function no longer
exists as of 2013.)
Comments and notes in PLOS ONE are very much like other short, rela-
tively informal modes of online communication, like comments on a blog. The
comments are generally intended to be directed at the research article as a
whole, whereas notes can be directly appended to particular passages. E-letters
in Science are formal communications that are vetted by an editor before
publication. On the surface they closely resemble traditional letters to the
editor, but they are also accessible directly from the online edition of the article
to which they are directed. They also may be accompanied by formal replies
from the original authors of the article. Letters to the editor in Science are
very much like the e-letters in most respects, except that they are published in
the print edition of the journal as well as online.
For the textual analysis in this study, a dataset was assembled by collecting
comments and notes from PLOS ONE and e-letters and letters to the editor
from Science under a set of parameters described below. The goal in assembling
the dataset was to have a substantial, representative selection of comments and
notes from PLOS ONE and enough e-letters and letters to the editor in Science
from roughly the same period of time to support a reasonable comparative
analysis. New forms of online communication are a more central part of the
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
79

culture of PLOS ONE than of Science,3 so the sample would likely emphasize
the comments and notes in PLOS ONE, and this in fact turned out to be the case.
In order to control for differences in the use of online feedback tools that may
exist across disciplines, only comments, notes, e-letters, and letters to the editor
attached to research articles in the field of genetics and genomics were used.
All comments and notes on PLOS ONE articles bearing the journal’s “genetics
and genomics” subject tag and published between December 20, 2006 (the
journal’s launch date), and June 30, 2007, were collected and analyzed. This
period was chosen in order to mark the beginning of the online discussion
features particular to PLOS ONE so as to establish a baseline for possible future
diachronic studies of the evolution of scientific communication online. During
this approximately six-month span, 151 articles with the “genetics and genomics”
subject tag were published in PLOS ONE, of which 48 bore at least one comment
and 32 bore at least one note.
Science does not use subject tags to organize its articles, so I screened the
articles by hand, selecting e-letters and letters to the editor only from those
articles that in my judgment fell reasonably within the field of genetics and
genomics, based on my own background in the biological sciences and in com-
parison with the articles bearing that tag in PLOS ONE. Science publishes
not only original research but also news items and reviews, so for this study
only articles categorized as “brevia,” “research articles,” and “reports” were used.
(For simplicity, in this chapter, I refer to all of these types of articles generically
as research articles.) The e-letters and letters to the editor in Science, which
were less numerous than the comments and notes in PLOS ONE, were col-
lected from articles published over a longer span of time—December 1, 2006, to
December 31, 2007—in order to ensure an adequately sized sample. The sample
of e-letters and letters to the editor in Science was still considerably smaller
than that of comments and notes in PLOS ONE, but this reflects the greater use
of online communication tools in PLOS ONE than in Science.
The dataset was then segmented into units for quantitative analysis, generally
following the method of Geisler (2004). Within running text, paragraphs were
used as the standard unit of segmentation because they provide a strong visual
cue demarcating parts of the comment, note, e-letter, or letter. Smaller units
such as subject lines, salutations, signatures, and contact information were also
treated as individual units in the segmentation scheme. In this sample, another
advantage of paragraphs over smaller units of segmentation such as t-units was
that paragraphs were more self-contained than t-units usually were. In other
words, the actions performed by the text seemed to occur largely at the level of
the paragraph rather than the t-unit.
80
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
3 At the time of this study, PLOS ONE even had a staff member in the position of
“online community manager” to promote and manage communication in its online forums.

Coding Scheme
The empirical study discussed here was aimed at understanding what the
texts produced in the online feedback tools do and what aspect of the research
article they act upon. The coding scheme used in this study is based in part
on the concept of the speech act, which was introduced by Austin (1962) and
refined by Searle (1969, 1979). The coding scheme consists of two parts: a
primary set of codes corresponding to the most common speech acts performed
by the texts examined in this study and a secondary set of codes corresponding
to the objects of discussion—that is, the particular aspects of the research article
in question that are acted upon by the texts in the comments, notes, e-letters,
and letters to the editor.
Primary Codes (Speech Acts)
The first test applied to the data is a set of codes corresponding to the most
prominent speech acts performed by these texts. A summary of the primary
codes used in this study can be found in Table 5.1.
The first six codes are used for segments that address the status of the research
article in question as a knowledge artifact. Text segments taking a positive or
negative code in this study push the claims of the research article toward either
greater or lesser stability as knowledge artifacts, as in Latour’s (1987) positive
and negative modality of knowledge claims. Also addressed by these codes
are the rhetorical tactics (Howard, 2005) used in making arguments about the
epistemic status of the claims in the research article and thus corresponding to
Searle’s (1979) degrees of commitment in an assertive speech act. In this scheme,
negotiative rhetorical tactics indicate a contingent argument that acknowledges
that the matter is open to discussion or debate, whereas revelatory rhetorical
tactics implicitly or explicitly close off discussion and debate and present the
argument as, in effect, revealed truth. It should be noted that the apparent degree
of commitment expressed in the text may not necessarily correspond exactly to
the degree of commitment actually held by the speaker, since the normative
conventions of scientific communication include hedging (Hyland, 1998; Penrose
& Katz, 2004), which can disguise the speaker’s true degree of commitment.
The other primary codes are used for segments that do not directly make claims
about the epistemic status of the research article, although some may do so
implicitly. These codes include suggesting extensions of the work, asking a
question about the work, providing additional information, or posting a correc-
tion to the article.
Interrater reliability was determined with a second coder having domain
knowledge (a PhD and postdoctoral research experience) in molecular genetics,
using 101 text segments in the PLOS ONE comments (24.9% of the comments;
14.9% of the entire data set). The reliability was substantial (Cohen’s  = 0.7439)
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
81

82
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Table 5.1 Primary Code Corresponding to Speech Acts
Primary code
Definition
Positive-
Negotiative
Positive-
Revelatory
Positive-
Evidence
Negative-
Negotiative
Negative-
Revelatory
Negative-
Evidence
Extension/
Suggestion/
Criticism
Question/
Clarification
Information
Link
Politeness/
Convention
Correction
Other
Solidifies the claims of the research article in question as real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge and accepts that this
evaluation is itself open to discussion or debate
Solidifies the claims of the research article in question as real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge and closes off debate
on this matter
Provides data or other evidence to support an argument (in other
segments) that the claims of the research article in question are real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge
Denies the claims of the research article in question to be real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge and accepts that this
evaluation is itself open to discussion and debate
Denies the claims of the research article in question to be real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge and closes off debate
on this matter
Provide data or other evidence to support an argument (in other
segments) that the claims of the research article in question are not real,
acceptable, true, or fruitful scientific knowledge
Poses an extension of the work described in the research article in
question or helpfully suggests a modification to that work
Asks a question about the work in the research article in question or
requests clarification on an aspect of that research or the article
reporting it
Provides additional information that may be of interest to readers to the
research article in question
Provides an Internet hyperlink for further information that may be of
interest to readers of the research article in question
Serves only to fit the conventions of discourse in this context. Examples
of segments that may be coded thus are signatures and salutations
Corrects some part of the research article in question, either in its claims
or in supporting material such as contact information. Often used by
article authors or journal staff
Does not make a claim about the validity, reliability, or fruitfulness of
the research reported in the article in question and does not fit any
of the codes above. Neutral, descriptive titles of posts will usually fit
into this category

for the data coded with the codes. When the negotiative, revelatory, and evi-
dential portions of the first six codes were ignored, such that all positive-modality
and all negative-modality claims were grouped together, interrater reliability
was even greater (Cohen’s  = 0.7957). The negotiative/revelatory and evidential
codes were more subjective because, as noted above, the verbal clues about
negotiative and revelatory rhetorical tactics are more subtle and more difficult
to interpret than those of positive or negative claim types.
Secondary Codes (Objects of Discussion)
Each text segment was then coded a second time according to the particular
aspect of the research article—methods, interpretation, importance, reporting, or
“other”—that is addressed by the segment in question (Table 5.2). Interrater
reliability for these codes, using 88 different segments in the PLOS ONE
comments (21.7% of the comments; 13.0% of the entire dataset), was also
substantial (Cohen’s  = 0.7884).
RESULTS
In terms of general textual features, perhaps the most readily apparent
difference between the tools examined here is the “formality” of the e-letters
and letters to the editor compared to the comments and notes. Although this can
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
83
Table 5.2 Secondary Codes Corresponding to Objects of Discussion
Secondary code
Definition
Methods
Interpretation
Importance
Reporting
Other
Addresses the validity or appropriateness of the experimental,
observational, or computational methods described in the research
article in question
Addresses the validity or reasonableness of the interpretation of the
data as reported in the research article in question
Addresses the significance of the research reported in the research
article in question. Such claims may address such issues as the
novelty, scope, explanatory power, or fruitfulness of the research or
how it fits into the current conversation in the field
Addresses the way the research is presented in the article. Such
claims may address such issues as the quality of prose, the
appropriateness or clarity of figures, or the choice of what data to
report and what to leave out of the research article
Any segment that does not fit into one of the other secondary codes
above

be a subjective measure, in this case, formality is evidenced by the much greater
presence of salutations, institutional affiliations, and contact information, as
well as rich descriptions of the topics to be addressed (in order to provide
context for the argument) and thorough explanations of points made. The fol-
lowing is the opening paragraph of a letter to the editor in Science that was
included in the dataset:4
In the report “A common variant on chromosome 9p21 affects the risk
of myocardial infarction” (8 June, p. 1491; published online 3 May),
A. Helgadottir et al. use relative risks to describe an association between
myocardial infarction (MI) and a common sequence variant on a specific
chromosome. They conclude that individuals in the population homozygous
for this variant have an estimated 1.64-fold greater risk of suffering MI
than noncarriers and a 2.02-fold risk for early onset MI cases. Although
calculating relative risks and relative risk reduction is widely used to
represent experimental results, great care needs to be taken when reporting,
interpreting, and characterizing health risks and benefits based primarily
on relative risks.5
The paragraph opens with a concise summary of the research article it is
addressing, including the title of the article and an abbreviation of the list of
authors (“A. Helgadottir et al.”). This is followed by a concise statement, in
the passive voice, of a problem that the authors of the letter see in the inter-
pretation of the data presented in the article. This example is representative of
the style of communication across the e-letters and letters to the editor in the
dataset used in this study.
Similarly, formal communication can be found in the PLOS ONE notes and
comments, but much of the communication in these forums does not have these
characteristics and reads much more like off-the-cuff conversation. This com-
munication is still professional but more conversational, as in the opening two
paragraphs of a comment in PLOS ONE:
[Subject line:] Major problem in the estimates of the rate of gene family
extinctions.6
This paper addresses an important question: what is the rate and pattern
of evolution of the gene repertoire in mammals ? [sic] Indeed, whereas the
84
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
4 Throughout this chapter, examples from the dataset are given in the following format.
The subject line (if one is present) appears first, followed by the body text. Identifying
information for the authors of the examples given is omitted, but idiosyncrasies in writing
or presentation, such as typographical errors, are retained. Each paragraph or other segment
of text is followed by a footnote listing the primary and secondary codes (speech act and
object of discussion, respectively) for that segment.
5 Speech act: negative-negotiative; object of discussion: interpretation.
6 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: interpretation.

evolutionary forces shaping the rate of sequence evolution have been well
studied, little is known about the frequency of gene losses or gene gains.7
The problem of [this] paper is that the identification of gene losses and
gene creations (or duplication) relies exclusively on the analysis of the
content of Ensembl gene families. An Ensembl gene family that includes
only human genes is considered as a gene family “creation” in the human
branch. Conversely, a gene family that is present in chimpanzee and dog
but that does not include any human gene is considered as being “extinct”
in human. [sic]8
The differences between this comment and the letter excerpted above are subtle
but apparent. The comment directly indexes the research article rather than
referring to it through a citation, and the style is professional, but several typo-
graphical errors are present.
Other examples take a more “familiar” tone, as in this comment (in its
entirety) praising the article to which it is attached:
[Subject line:] Very interesting9
I found this article to be very interesting. Although ribosomes are ubiquit-
ously required for protein synthesis, discerning the effects of changes in
individual ribosomal proteins or rRNA nucleotides has been technically
challenging, particularly in vertebrates. We have traditionally had to rely
on nature providing us with rare mutants (e.g. Blackfan anemia) for such
insight. The gene knockdown approach used here represents a tremendous
breakthrough for the field.10
Still other comments adopt a similar tone in criticism, as in this comment (also
in its entirety):
[Subject line:] The C. elegans ALP/Enigma gene is called alp-111
This paper incorrectly identifies the C. elegans ALP/Enigma as eat-1.
It is NOT eat-1. The C. elegans ALP/Enigma was published as alp-1 (see
reference 50). The eat-1 gene has not been cloned and maps to a different
genetic locus from alp-1. The alp-1 gene encodes the C. elegans ALP/
Enigma. Please keep this in mind, the nomenclature for the C. elegans gene
is completely wrong in this manuscript.12
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
85
7 Speech act: politeness/convention; object of discussion: importance.
8 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: interpretation.
9 Speech act: positive-revelatory; object of discussion: importance.
10 Speech act: positive-revelatory; object of discussion: importance.
11 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: reporting.
12 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: reporting.

These last two examples also directly index the article in question, and their
sentences are shorter and more direct. They have more of the flavor of a personal
note than a published article or letter.
If the comments in PLOS ONE can be characterized as, by and large, some-
what shorter and less formal versions of the e-letters and letters to the editor
in Science, the notes in PLOS ONE are another step removed. They frequently
have the flavor of conversation in the lab, as in this one asking for clarification
on the food given to Drosophila fruit flies used in an experiment: “Should
this be molasses? Apologies if I’m wrong.”13 In this case, the note is attached
directly to a passage in the methodology section of the article discussing the
media in which the flies are raised, rather than linked from the header of the
article as comments are. It’s a brief interruption in the description of the method-
ology, much like a quickly raised hand in a seminar. Unlike a seminar question,
however, the note becomes a permanent part of the research article, readable by
others as long as the article remains online.
The differences between comments, notes, letters, and e-letters are due at least
in part to the editorial policies of Science, which include vetting by the journal’s
editorial staff, and the relatively less rigid standards of PLOS ONE, whose
comments and notes are vetted only after publication and only if a concern is
raised about a comment or note’s adherence to “the norms of civilized scientific
discussion” and the journal’s terms of use. Additionally, the PLOS ONE notes are
attached directly to the appropriate passage in the research report, which serves
to establish context, so this does not need to be done in the text of the note.
With regard to antecedent genres (Jamieson, 1975), the e-letters are clearly
related to traditional letters to the editor, as they share many of the same formal
characteristics such as salutations and careful attention to detail and establishing
of the context for the argument—and in fact, the current letters to the editor
really are traditional letters that happen to be published in both the print and
online editions of the journal. By contrast, the PLOS ONE notes and comments
have the appearance of blog comments, although some bear a closer resemblance
to letters. In fact, it would be possible to divide PLOS ONE comments into
categories of “blog-like” and “letter-like,” based on their level of formality and
the presence of conventions such as salutations, signatures, and institutional
affiliation. In general, though, they are often informal in tone and sometimes
contain typographical errors and infelicities in usage, and they are typically
shorter than the e-letters and letters to the editor in Science.
The e-letters and letters to the editor also are often accompanied by replies
that are solicited by the journal and published alongside the original letters,
whereas the comments and notes are published immediately, without formal
vetting, and can be replied to at will. The e-letters and letters to the editor also
86
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
13 Speech act: correction; object of discussion: reporting.

contain names and institutional affiliations and other contact information,
whereas the comments and notes in PLOS ONE frequently do not. In fact,
the comments and notes examined in this study are often pseudonymous,
which may very well affect the communication that occurs using those tools.
(PLOS ONE now requires commenters and annotators to register using their
real names and geographical locations.)14
Quantitative Textual Analysis
As described above, the text segments in the dataset were subjected to analysis
using a 2-part coding scheme analyzing the speech acts enacted by each segment
and the objects of discussion that they addressed. The details of this analysis are
less important than the broad trends, so I present the results here in summary.
Textual Analysis: Speech Acts
The first test applied to the dataset was an examination of the speech acts
(Austin, 1962; Searle, 1969, 1979) enacted by the texts analyzed in this study.
The speech acts in the PLOS ONE comments and notes demonstrate how different
the uses of two fairly similar online communication tools can be. The predomi-
nant speech acts in the comments are those employed in the service of politeness
or fulfilling the conventions of scientific writing (21.5%), extensions/criticism
(13.9%), and positive-revelatory claims (12.7%). “Other” speech acts not
covered in the other codes (such as subject headings in replies) make up 13.7%
of the sample. In the notes, the predominant speech acts are corrections (24.9%),
information (21.4%), links (10.9%) to other material such as blogs mentioning
the work reported in the research article, and negative-revelatory claims (8.6%),
with “other” speech acts making up 12.1% of the sample.
As noted above, the notes are generally shorter and less formal in tone than the
comments. They contain much less of the conventional components of a scientific
document such as institutional affiliation and contact information, and like the
comments, they may or may not even be signed with the real name of the author.
At the time of this study, the Public Library of Science, the publisher, required
those who wished to post comments or notes to register, but they were not
required to provide information that could positively identify them, although
many commenters and annotators are identifiable. (PLOS ONE now requires all
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
87
14 Authors of research articles may sometimes comment on their own articles. Authors
in PLOS ONE often post notes on their own articles in order to update contact information,
correct typographical errors, or direct the reader to supplementary material available else-
where on the Web. In the Science pieces in this dataset, authors wrote only formal replies
to letters and e-letters written by others, and no replies were published by parties other than
the article authors.

registered users to provide their full first and last names, geographical location,
and a valid email address.)
The e-letters and letters to the editor in Science show marked differences
both with one another and with the comments and notes in PLOS ONE. The
predominant speech acts in the e-letters are politeness/convention (36.7%),
positive-negotiative claims (22.4%), and negative-negotiative claims (14.3%).
“Other” speech acts not covered in the other codes made up 12.2% of the sample.
In the letters to the editor, the predominant speech acts are politeness/convention
(46.7%), positive-revelatory claims (10.0%), negative-revelatory claims (also
10.0%), and negative-negotiative claims (5.0%). “Other” speech acts make up
20.0% of the sample.
One interesting result here is the difference in rhetorical tactics between
the e-letters and the letters to the editor, with the former exhibiting a greater
tendency toward negotiative rhetorical tactics and the latter a greater tendency
toward revelatory tactics. The predominance of negotiative rhetorical tactics
in the e-letters reflects the hedging style that is typical of the professional scien-
tific literature (Hyland, 1998; Penrose & Katz, 2004). There is not an obvious
explanation for the difference between the letters and e-letters, but it could
indicate an expectation that electronic communication will be more conversa-
tional than communication in print media. This trend, however, does not extend
to the comments and notes in PLOS ONE.
Given the small sample size from Science, these results shouldn’t necessarily
be taken as representative of e-letters and letters to the editor in general. Still,
within this particular dataset, the difference between the PLOS ONE tools and
the Science tools is noticeable. The more formal nature of the e-letters and
letters to the editor in Science relative to the comments and notes in PLOS ONE
is accompanied by the prominence of the negotiative modality claims and the
politeness/convention code. The e-letters and letters to the editor in Science are
largely used for formal, detailed criticisms of the research articles to which they
respond. The PLOS ONE notes and comments are less formal but also more
diverse in the speech acts that are carried out in them.
Textual Analysis: Objects of Discussion
After the first coding pass for speech acts, each text segment was also coded
according to the aspect of the research article that it addresses. This step also
uncovered some important differences between the four feedback tools.
In the comments, the most prominent object of discussion is importance
(24.1%), followed by methods (16.3%) and interpretation (15.5%). “Other” made
up 34.3%. In the notes, reporting (38.5%) was easily the most prominent object
of discussion, followed by interpretation (23.7%), with “other” making up 19.5%.
In the e-letters, the predominant objects of discussion were interpretation
(40.8%) and importance (16.3%). “Other” objects of discussion constituted
88
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

42.9% of the sample, and no text segments (0.0%) in this relatively small sample
were addressed to methods or reporting. The letters to the editor were also heavily
associated with importance (23.3%) and interpretation (21.7%), with “other”
objects of discussion making up 48.3% of the sample. A few segments (6.7%)
in the letters to the editor were addressed to methods, and again, no segments
were addressed to reporting.
A significant purpose of the comments and letters to the editor, therefore,
seems to be to negotiate the status of the work in the research article (cf.
discussions of peer review in Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Myers, 1989), either
by addressing its importance and significance or the competence or thoroughness
of the work, whereas the notes tend to address matters concerning the writing of
the manuscript, although, as noted, some notes do address the conclusions drawn
from the data, which is also a primary purpose of the e-letters.
DISCUSSION: GENRES IN THE NETWORK
The following paragraph appears in the discussion section of an article
published in PLOS ONE in December 2006 entitled “Regulated Polyploidy in
Halophilic Archaea” (numbers in square brackets below are references listed
in the article):
It has been proposed that a selective advantage of polyploidy in prokaryotes
could be a higher resistance to DNA damaging conditions, especially those
that induce DNA double strand breaks. The radioresistant species D.
radiodurans can survive X-ray dosages that lead on average to more than
150 double strand breaks per chromosome [25]. However, a study where the
genome copy number of D. radiodurans was altered by growth in different
media found no correlation between ploidy and resistance to gamma or UV
radiation [26]. H. salinarum is also extremely resistant to X-ray irradiation.
The D10 values (10% survival) are 10 kGy for D. radiodurans and 5 kGy
for H. salinarum [27], [28]. For comparison, the D10 value of E. coli is
0.25 kGy [29]. However, H. volcanii, which has a similar genome copy
number to H. salinarum, is not particularly radioresistant (D10 = 1 kGy,
unpublished data).
The essence of the argument in this paragraph is that one might reason that
having more than one set of chromosomes (a condition known as polyploidy)
might confer upon an organism an evolutionary advantage by mitigating the
effect of damage to a chromosome, since the organism would have another copy
of the chromosome that would be unlikely to have similar damage. However,
altering the number of copies of the chromosome set of a particular species of
bacterium, Deinococcus radiodurans, was found to have no effect on its resist-
ance to x-ray radiation. Also, two species of a primitive single-celled archaeon
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
89

in the genus Holoferax, H. salinarum and H. volcanii, have very different levels
of resistance to radiation despite their having similar numbers of copies of
their genomes. Attached to the concluding sentence of this paragraph, about
H. volcanii, is a note posted by a reader of the article:
[Subject line:] More detail on radiation resistance of H. volcanii15
It would be useful to provide some more information about your results
on H. volcanii radiation resistance. I realizeyour [sic] comment is about
X-rays, but in my hands, H. volcanii is pretty resistant to UV irradiation.
Although my work on Haloferax was not published, some of the detail
can be found in my PhD thesis which I have put on Google base here:
http://www.google.com/bas.... [Note: In the original note this is a working
hyperlink.]16
I believe (but am not 100% sure) that McCready and others have also
shown Haloferax to be UV resistant. Are your results specific for X-rays?
Or do you also see little resistance for H. volcanii in terms of UV?17
The note asks for more information about the work on radiation resistance in
H. volcanii. The writer of the note says that she or he has found this species to
be “pretty resistant” to ultraviolet radiation and includes a link to the writer’s
PhD dissertation where some work on UV resistance in Holoferax was reported.
The writer asks if the article author observes in H. volcanii high resistance to
UV radiation and low resistance to X-ray radiation or if their results for UV
radiation resistant are conflicting. In response, one of the authors of the article
wrote a reply attached to the original note:
[Subject line:] RE: More detail on radiation resistance of H. volcanii18
In our hands, Haloferax volcanii is not particularly resistant to UV.
The D10 for dark repair of UV-B (254 nm) is around 60-90 J/m2, which
is not very different to Escherichia coli. An example of a UV-killing curve
for Haloferax can be seen in Guy et al (2006) J Mol Biol 358: 46-56.19
Much to [sic] the UV-resistance of haloarchaea appears to be due to
efficient photolyases, as shown for Halobacterium by McCready et al.
However, I do not think that these authors have tested Haloferax volcanii.20
This author reports that his research team found H. volcanii not to be very
resistant to UV radiation and argues that the typically high UV resistance in
90
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
15 Speech act: extension/suggestion/constructive criticism; object of discussion: reporting.
16 Speech act: extension/suggestion/constructive criticism; object of discussion: reporting.
17 Speech act: question/clarification; object of discussion: reporting.
18 Speech act: other; object of discussion: other (because it is simply carried over from the
original note).
19 Speech act: information; object of discussion: interpretation.
20 Speech act: information; object of discussion: interpretation.

similar species appears to be due to the efficiency of their DNA-repair enzymes
known as photolyases. One could wonder how the discrepancy between the
findings of the two research groups might be reconciled, but the discussion
ends there—at least at the time of this writing.
In this example, a small aspect of the research reported in the article has been
called into question, namely, the inclusion or exclusion of particular information
from the article relating to radiation resistance in a certain kind of microorganism.
One of the authors of the article replied by supplying the requested information
and offering a possible explanation for why the results turned out the way
they did. When scientific journals were found exclusively in print media, this
same conversation could have occurred, but it likely would have taken place
in private correspondence between the interlocutors.21 In online journals like
PLOS ONE, which provide open communication tools such as comments and
notes, this conversation happens in the open, and every subsequent reader of
this article can read it.
But this is just one example. As discussed above, the four tools for online
feedback examined here—comments and notes in PLOS ONE, e-letters and
letters to the editor in Science—are quite diverse, both in the variety of speech
acts and objects of discussion found within each tool and in the uses of each
tool compared to the others. The diversity of uses of these tools suggests that
each tool could support multiple genres—taken as recurrent forms (distributions
of speech acts and the objects of discussion that they address) linked to particular
social actions—just as, for example, email messages come in many different types
serving often very different social functions (Devitt, 2004, p. 45). An added
dimension to these results is that unlike different kinds of email messages, which
are found in the same medium, the affordances (Gibson, 1986; Norman, 2002) of
the online feedback tools in this study are different in sometimes subtle but
important ways: The comments, e-letters, and letters to the editor can be attached
to the research article as a whole, but only the notes can be specifically targeted
to a particular passage. Also, not only might each tool support multiple genres
but it appears that any particular genre could be found in more than one tool,
although some genres are more prevalent in certain tools than in others. There
seems to be, then, some relationship between genres and tools, but it also seems
that this correspondence does not account for all variation in the sample.
Furthermore, looming in the background throughout all of this are the research
articles. We need to understand how the new tools for online feedback and
postpublication review interact with the research article in the milieu of the
online scientific journal.
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
91
21 It also seems unlikely that this conversation would have taken place in letters to the
editor, because the perceived importance would not be high enough to justify the publication
of a letter occupying space in a print journal.

How Online Texts Can Interact
There are three primary ways that online feedback tools could poten-
tially interact with online research articles: (a) by altering the discursive
environment in which the research article sits and thereby altering the
conditions of its uptake over time, (b) by altering the text of the research
article itself, and (c) by causing the research article to be written differently
in the first place than it would have been for a journal without online
feedback and postpublication review. In the first of these modes of inter-
action, the feedback text, such as a comment or e-letter, can be attached
to the article, changing the immediate context of the article and creating
a cluster of texts that can act in concert as a knowledge artifact. The
addition of texts to the article’s discursive environment can then alter the
article’s uptake, contributing to an evolution of the expectations, perceptions,
and interpretive frameworks of readers. This differs from printed texts
because when online texts are associated in this way, they are linked for
every reader, whereas this is not necessarily the case for printed texts,
where a single copy may be seen by only a small portion of the intended
audience
and
where,
for
example,
a
subsequent
letter
to
the
editor
has no necessary proximity to the original research article. In the second
mode of interaction, the feedback text might actually amend the existing
text by questioning or expanding on an argument within the article directly
at the point in question. Notes in PLOS ONE are often used by article
authors to amend their own texts and by other readers to raise questions
about specific portions of the article. In the third mode of interaction, the
research article may potentially be composed differently than it would be
if the author did not anticipate online feedback, so this would constitute
a kind of preemptive interaction. A discourse community may discover
that
a
research
article
intended
to
act
as
the
seed
of
an
ongoing
discussion should be presented differently than one standing alone in
a print journal.
The first two modes of interaction were in fact observed in this dataset,
while no clear evidence for the third was found outside of one respondent
to a brief survey, an author of an article in PLOS ONE who indicated
that the possibility that others might leave comments or notes on the
article affected how she or he wrote it. (The other six respondents to this
question indicated that this possibility did not affect how they wrote their
articles.) The first mode of interaction, putting a text in the same online
space as the article, is exemplified in the PLOS ONE comments and the Science
e-letters and letters to the editor. Below is an example of such a text PLOS ONE
comment criticizing the methodology in the article to which it is attached:
92
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Subject line:] Flaws in this paper22
The result shown in Figure 1 with FLPe is wrong. A stable selection
protocol like the one used here will give nearly 100% recombination with
FLPe. Indeed even wtFLP will give nearly 100% recombination in a
stable experiment. The authors equate their experiments with experiments
in reference 8 to confirm that FLPe gives only 5% recombination with
mosaicism. However the experiments of reference 8 were transient expres-
sion experiments without selection, not stable expression experiments with
selection as performed here. These two types of experiments cannot be
compared. Furthermore, the authors show no evidence that codon alteration
improved FLP mRNA or protein expression levels. For example, if existing
FLPe constructs contained cryptic splicing signals, these can be detected
by RT-PCR. Minimally, improved protein expression levels are needed
to draw the conclusions presented. Rather, the conclusions are based on a
fundamentally flawed experiment that has no control. The simplest explan-
ation of the FLPe result of Figure 1 is that the expression construct is
damaged. Hence there is basis to conclude that FLPo is better than FLPe.
It may be, but these experiments do not permit that conclusion.23
In this case, the comment changes the discursive environment of the original
article. A similar comment could have been made about an article in a print
journal, but in that case, the commentary would not necessarily be expected to
become known to any reader of the article. The comment might appear in a letter
in a later issue of the journal, or it might have existed ephemerally as a spoken
comment in a research group meeting where the article was brought up in the
discussion. In PLOS ONE, this comment pushing the article’s claims, in Latour’s
(1987) terms, toward the conditions of their origin, questioning the methods
by which the claims came to be made, has become a permanent part of the
article. The relationship between the research article and this negative-revelatory
argument against its acceptance as canonical scientific knowledge is more than
just ephemeral or intertextual (Bakhtin, 1986; Barthes, 2001; Devitt, 1991);
they are yoked to each other, part of a single textual unit.
An example of the second form of interaction is exemplified by this note
in PLOS ONE attached to a different article and posted by one of the authors
of that article:
[Subject line:] Plasmids available at Addgene24
Please visit http://www.addgene.org/pgvec1?f=c&identifier=PUBMED . .
. to find the plasmids from this article.25
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
93
22 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: other.
23 Speech act: negative-revelatory; object of discussion: methods.
24 Speech act: information; object of discussion: methods.
25 Speech act: link; object of discussion: methods.

Here, the text of the article is altered by the addition of a link within it to
supplemental information, in this case, information on some of the materials
used in the experiments reported in the article. This example isn’t nearly as
dramatic as the previous one, but it still represents an alteration of the text after
publication. In the print era, such a notice could be placed in a future issue of
the journal, or it could be circulated among an article author’s “invisible college”
(Crane, 1972) of colleagues working in the same area or related fields, but the
article itself would be unchanged.
So it seems that either of these texts could conceivably have existed in
another forum as print or oral speech, but their relationship to the research article
would have been different. The differences, from a genre-theory perspective,
involve a change in the “ecological” relationships between genres.
The Genre Ecosystem of Science
Let’s consider here how the particular tools examined in this study might
affect what we could call the “genre ecosystem” of science. I use the term
ecosystem here to mean something similar to the genre ecologies described by
Spinuzzi (2002; Spinuzzi & Zachry, 2000) but without their commitment to the
principles of cultural-historical activity theory because, as Miller (2007) has
argued, such a conception can be problematic for the symbolic and social nature
of genres. Rather, what I draw from the genre-ecology concept is the intrinsic
relationships between texts that make the enacted genres dynamic and
decentralized players within the larger genre ecosystem. These properties are
readily apparent in the texts examined in this study. All texts exist in a fluctu-
ating pool of other texts, but there is a greater diversity of relationships between
online texts than between print texts. All texts are used in a particular textual
environment. A scientific laboratory usually has a variety of books—textbooks,
monographs, laboratory notebooks, and theses and dissertations by former lab
members, to name just a few examples—as well as recent issues of one or more
scientific journals (although print subscriptions for individuals are becoming
less necessary when institutions purchase electronic subscriptions). These texts
can be read one after the other, often drawing mental connections between them.
In this sense, they exist in the same discursive environment. However, the articles
in the journals are connected in a way that two textbooks, say, are not. They
have a different relationship to each other. The relationships between online
texts are similarly varied, but there is an added dimension to online texts in
that they can be linked to each other in more complex patterns, via hyperlinking,
and these relationships can be altered much more easily and with much wider
effect. Any individual can rip an article out of her copy of a journal or magazine
or add marginal notes to one of her books, but those changes occur only in her
copies. In online media, these changes can be made universal.
94
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Implications for the Research Article
Even as its discursive environment changes with its move online and the
development of various tools for online feedback and postpublication review,
the research article as a textual form does not seem to be changing drastically in
response to these developments. Articles in PLOS ONE and Science typically
maintain the traditional IMRAD structure common in the scientific literature,
and I have seen no overt references to online communication in the articles
outside of the occasional link to online supplemental information. Owen (2007)
concluded from his own similar observation that the scientific article has
undergone “encapsulation”—that is, that its form and content have remained
steady even as it has moved into a new medium—and that utopian predictions of
its drastically changing or becoming obsolete are misguided. However, the
research article in PLOS ONE and Science has changed in terms of the niche that
it occupies in its ecosystem of texts. It’s possible, of course, to make too much of
a biological metaphor when writing about inanimate things like the written word,
but there are some parallels. Just as introducing a new species into a biological
ecosystem alters the niches filled by the native species and thus may alter those
species, so does introducing new genres into an ecosystem of texts alter the niches
occupied by the existing genres and thus possibly those genres.
If print journals are sometimes complex amalgamations of various genres
such as research articles (Bazerman, 1988), review articles (Myers, 1991), short
communications (Blakeslee, 1994), editorials, news features, book reviews, and
others, then electronic journals are even more so, with the introductions of
discussion forums, annotation functions, and other features mentioned above.
The textual environment in which the research article sits is changing signifi-
cantly, at least in the journals that employ some form of online feedback or
postpublication review. Bazerman (1988) contrasted books and journal articles
in Newton’s time by writing that, due to their comparatively slow publication
time and limited distribution, “books tend to present self-contained universes,
accounts complete in themselves with little opportunity for response, except in
the muffled comments of the unsatisfied reader” (p. 130). Journals, by contrast,
had shorter publication times and wider distribution, and Newton found, to his
dismay, that they encouraged public criticism of his ideas:
Just as correspondence networks had served to increase the amount and
immediacy of criticism, the journal made the critical activity public, casting
the natural philosopher into the regular role of public defender of his work.
The role of the third-party audience became important in the resolution
of disputes. (p. 135)
In some senses, electronic media represent another step in an organic evolution
from book publishing to the circulation of journals, in that the publication cycle
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
95

decreases further and the scope of distribution can increase. But in other senses,
online media are as different from print media as the latter are from oral speech,
particularly in the ways that texts can be collaboratively edited, added to, and
modified. The results above show that the new online feedback tools appearing
in the milieu of the research article in some online journals fosters a kind of
communication that would probably have greatly troubled Newton. The research
article in these spaces is even less a discrete unit of scientific argument than it
had been in the print media. In online journals, the research article is the core
around which a cluster of texts arises, which can significantly affect it as a
knowledge artifact. It therefore constitutes a new genre that will be of continuing
scholarly interest.
REFERENCES
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). The problem of speech genres. In C. Emerson & M. Holquist
(Eds.), Speech genres and other late essays (pp. 60–102). Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press.
Barthes, R. (2001). The death of the author. In V. B. Leitch, W. E. Cain, L. Finke, B.
Johnson, J. McGowan, & J. J. Williams (Eds.), The Norton anthology of theory and
criticism (pp. 1466–1470). New York, NY: Norton.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experi-
mental article in science. Madison,: WI University of Wisconsin Press.
Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of genres and the enactment of social intentions. In
A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 79–101). London,
UK: Taylor & Francis.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communi-
cation: Cognition/culture/power. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Blakeslee, A. M. (1994). The rhetorical construction of novelty: Presenting claims in a
letters forum. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 19(1), 88–100.
Crane, D. (1972). Invisible colleges: Diffusion of knowledge in scientific communities.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Crawford, S. Y., Hurd, J. M., & Weller, A. C. (1996). From print to electronic: The
transformation of scientific communication. Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Devitt, A. J. (1991). Intertextuality in tax accounting: Generic, referential, and functional.
In C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical
and contemporary studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 336–355).
Madison,: WI University of Wisconsin Press.
Devitt, A. J. (2004). Writing genres. Carbondale,: IL Southern Illinois University Press.
Garvey, W. D., & Griffith, B. C. (1972). Communication and information processing
within scientific disciplines: Empirical findings for psychology. Information Storage
and Retrieval, 8(3), 123–126.
Geisler, C. (2004). Analyzing streams of language: Twelve steps to the systematic coding
of text, talk, and other verbal data. New York, NY: Pearson Longman.
96
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Gibson, J. J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual perception. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hahn, K. L. (2001). Electronic ecology: A case study of electronic journals in context.
Washington, DC: Association of Research Libraries.
Howard, R. G. (2005). Sustainability and radical rhetorical closure: The case of the
1996 “Heaven’s Gate” newsgroup campaign. Journal of Communication & Religion,
28(1), 99–130.
Hyland, K. (1998). Hedging in scientific research articles. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
John Benjamins.
Jamieson, K. M. (1975). Antecedent genre as rhetorical constraint. Quarterly Journal of
Speech, 61(4), 406–415.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70(2),
151–167.
Miller, C. R. (1994). Rhetorical community: The cultural basis of genre. In A. Freedman
& P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 67–78). London, UK: Taylor
& Francis.
Miller, C. R. (2007). Tracing genres through organizations [Book review]. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 16(4), 476–480.
Myers, G. (1989). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific knowl-
edge. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Myers, G. (1991). Stories and styles in two molecular biology review articles. In
C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical
and contemporary studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 45–75).
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Norman, D. A. (2002). The design of everyday things. New York, NY: Basic.
Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (1994). Genre repertoire: The structuring of com-
municative practices in organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(4),
541–574.
Owen, J. S. Mackenzie. (2007). The scientific article in the age of digitization. Dordrecht,
The Netherlands: Springer.
Penrose, A. M., & Katz, S. B. (2004). Writing in the sciences: Exploring conventions of
scientific discourse (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Pearson Longman.
Schryer, C. F. (1993). Records as genre. Written Communication, 10(2), 200–234.
Schryer, C. F. (1994). The lab vs. the clinic: Sites of competing genres. In A. Freedman
& P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the new rhetoric (pp. 105–124). London, UK: Taylor
& Francis.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. London, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and meaning: Studies in the theory of speech acts.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Spinuzzi, C. (2002). Modeling genre ecologies. Paper presented at SIGDOC’02, Toronto,
Canada.
Spinuzzi, C. (2004). Four ways to investigate assemblages of texts: Genre sets, systems,
repertoires, and ecologies. Paper presented at SIGDOC’04, Memphis, TN.
ONLINE RESEARCH
/
97

Spinuzzi, C., & Zachry, M. (2000). Genre ecologies: An open-system approach to under-
standing and constructing documentation. ACM Journal of Computer Documentation,
24(3), 169–181.
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. (2002). Genre systems: Structuring interaction through com-
municative norms. Journal of Business Communication, 39(1), 13–35.
98
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 6
The Chemistry Liveblogging Event:
The Web Refigures Peer Review
Michelle Sidler
ABSTRACT
This chapter examines the connections and tensions between Web 2.0
technologies and traditional scientific peer review. Specifically, it considers
the role that the blog of British chemist Paul Docherty played in the global
critique of an article accepted by the well-respected Journal of the American
Chemical Society (JAC). Questioning the article’s claims, Docherty and
others replicated a key experiment, and Docherty liveblogged his experi-
ment, uploading photographs and data in real time. This public, interactive,
and visual refutation ultimately led to the paper’s withdrawal. The Docherty
case shows that digital technologies can blur the line between manuscript
and published work, resulting in a disruption of the established peer review
process. This controversy also demonstrates that even publications in the
most prestigious journals are vulnerable to the near-instant access and
scrutiny afforded by the Internet.
On August 17, 2009, Carmen Drahl began a story in Chemical & Engineering
News (C&EN) with the following passage:
On July 21, the Journal of the American Chemical Society published new
papers online. That was nothing out of the ordinary. But within 24 hours,
something extraordinary happened. Chemists from around the world
converged online, at an organic chemistry blog, to discuss one of those
manuscripts, repeat its experiments, and examine its conclusions. The story
is a particularly vivid example of how the Web is changing communication
in science and should encourage more chemists to tune in to online dis-
cussions. (p. 47)
99

The incident Dahl describes is the online reaction to a peer reviewed article
in the Journal of the American Chemical Society (JACS), “Reductive and
Transition-Metal-Free: Oxidation of Secondary Alcohols by Sodium Hydride,”
by Wang, Zhang, and Wang (2009). The chemical reaction reported in the article
was
extraordinary—even
unbelievable—to
many
chemists,
prompting
a
worldwide informal peer review that demonstrated how powerful online
communications have become in the scientific community. Leveraging the speed
and connectivity of blogging, scientists—most notably Paul Docherty, who
liveblogged the experiment in his Totally Synthetic blog—challenged X. Wang et
al.’s findings in a flurry of discussion and reporting over a period of just a few
days.
This
controversy
demonstrates
that
even
publications
in
the
most prestigious journals are vulnerable to the near-instant access and scrutiny
afforded by the Internet. This chapter will explore the connection between
Web 2.0 technologies and the demise of X. Wang et al.’s article, tracing the
manuscript progression from initial online publication on the JACS website to
its eventual withdrawal from the journal. The Docherty case shows that digital
technologies increasingly blur the line between manuscript and published work,
resulting in a disruption of the established peer review and reception process
that has traditionally been central to scientific discourse.
Drahl’s (2009) reporting of Docherty’s liveblog in C&EN adds another
rhetorical layer to this story as well: C&EN is the weekly magazine of the
American Chemical Society (ACS), the flagship organization for chemists and
the world’s largest scientific society, with more than 164,000 members and
39 journals (ACS, 2012). All ACS members have access to C&EN, so Drahl’s
article reflects ACS’s recognition of the growing impact of online scientific
communication, including discourse published outside the mainstream of peer
reviewed journals. Such recognition is doubly significant because it comes
from ACS, whose scholarly communication and publishing practices are fairly
conservative compared to most chemistry societies. And, like many science
journals, the process of maintaining JACS has been something of a black box:
peer review is secretive, material production is a private enterprise, and access
to the published work is reserved for those with costly subscriptions. Conse-
quently, scientists who advocate for more open online publishing practices have
encountered resistance from the ACS.
Increasingly, the Internet is loosening the tight grip of publishers like the
ACS, offering scientists the opportunity to both publish new findings and
respond to others’ findings without the sanction of proprietary publishing
entities. Docherty’s liveblogging event, for example, is a salient example of
what Michael Nielsen (2012) calls “networked science,” the 21st-century turn
from scientific discourse in its “inert, passive state” to a “unified system that
brings that information alive” (p. 207). In Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of
Networked Science, Nielsen presents a manifesto for science and society, arguing
that digital tools have the potential to change the way all knowledge is constructed
100
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

and alter the way science works. Networked science catalyzes the process of
discovery, rhetoric, and reception in ways that print-based publishing practices
cannot. Nielsen argues that knowledge production is happening in spaces outside
of traditional journal publications with unprecedented speed and innovative
multimodal tools. By following the trail of online discussions, rhetoric of science
scholars can capture information about the reception of scientific works in
near-real time, identifying the strategies scientists use to both support and refute
claims—and how technological tools have become a part of scientific rhetoric.
Even more significant, we have the opportunity to be virtual witnesses to—and
reporters of—a potential paradigm shift in scientific discourse practices.
PEER REVIEW AND RECEPTION STUDIES
The peer review of scientific journal articles has received substantial attention
from the rhetoric of science community (Berkenkotter, 1995; Berkenkotter &
Huckin, 1994; Gross, 2006). Gross (2006) analyzed peer review documents from
a biology journal and argues that peer review is a contentious process, producing
a series of critical negotiations between authors, editors, and reviewers. Building
from Gross’ research, Berkenkotter and Huckin (1994) performed a qualitative
study of one biologist during her submission, revision, and eventual acceptance
of a journal article. They found that positive response from reviewers often
depended on the referees’ acceptance of knowledge claims about work that
happens in scientists’ laboratories. Both studies reveal a series of argumentative
strategies steeped in conventional illocutionary acts that “get things done in the
world, either through direct or indirect means” (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1994)
and illustrate the deep professional expectations and cultural conventions sur-
rounding the peer review process.
Both studies also highlight the adversarial role of reviewers: at the core of
peer review is the science community’s trust in scholars to arbitrate quality
research. Editors are also crucial in this trust relationship because they ultimately
judge manuscripts to be worthy of publication, determining the endpoint of the
prepublication peer review process. Gross (2006) notes that once this certification
occurs and papers are sent to print, evidence of peer review exchanges is lost:
Publication obliterates all traces of the procedure by which the knowledge
it asserts is certified; as a consequence of this obliteration, publication
renews the credibility peer review undermines. The candidate knowledge in
published papers is now ready to be tested against broader consensuses
of scientists and, more importantly, again the world. (p. 109)
Once articles are published, records of the reviewers’ concerns are not
accessible, and the wider scientific community is free to draw its own conclu-
sions about the scientific research. Whereas peer review is a process of social
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
101

consensus and trust, vetting among the community involves scrutiny within the
world, including comparison to other data and even potentially replications of
the experiments.
Gross (2006) argues that the two processes—peer review and broader scien-
tific reception—are fairly distinct, separated by the official recognition that
accompanies an article’s publication. This distinction has been implicitly invoked
by advocates of reception studies as well, who recommend more studies to
examine the impact of scientific works after their publication. Paul, Charney,
and Kendall (2001) most vehemently critique the rhetoric of science community
for concentrating too much on processes like peer review that occur before or
during “the moment,” which is “when an article is accepted for publication by a
journal and the history that leads up to that acceptance” (p. 372). They contend
that to understand how scientists receive the work of others, long-term studies of
published works that follow the reception of texts after the “moment” are needed.
To achieve this, Paul et al. advocate a multimethodological approach, which
recognizes a range of empirical and hermeneutic methods intended to explore
the reactions of both individuals and the larger scientific community. Harris
(2005) and Ceccarelli (2005) maintain that reception studies are already occurring
in rhetoric of science scholarship, but they also call for more research that
employs a variety of methods for tracking the long-term impact of scientific
publications. Harris (2005) in particular notes that the field has already laid
the groundwork for this research with its original focus on the “production”
of scientific discourse (p. 253).
In short, scholars of scientific peer review and those who advocate reception
studies of scientific discourse are two sides of the same critical coin. Scholars
of peer review concentrate on the certification of scientific knowledge before
and during “the moment” and advocates of reception studies call for studies
of impact long after it, but both imply “the moment,” a distinct time when that
research is accepted and published. Using “the moment” as a focal point, both
peer review scholars and advocates of reception studies share several goals: to
illustrate the life cycle of scientific discourse, to discover the expectations and
practices that lead to accepted research, and to understand the ways in which
rhetorical strategies and generic conventions impact the perceived quality of
scientific works.
Largely missing from both camps are discussions about the discourse tech-
nologies involved in the publication process and their resulting impact on peer
review, long-term reception, and even the certainty of a distinct “moment” of
publication. Karen Lunsford (2007) argues that digital technologies facilitate
what she calls “distributed publication systems,” wherein “information necessary
to support a specific claim may be scattered among different resources” and that
information may be released and certified at different times using a variety of
digital media. Moreover, I would add that peer review and reception of scientific
works create distributed review systems, involving various genres, time frames,
102
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

and technologies to understand the quality and impact of scientific research.
Nowhere is the distribution of scientific discourse more noticeable than in the
controversy involving X. Wang et al.’s (2009) article, wherein several groups
of chemists interpreted the authors’ reported lab findings through the larger
body of chemistry research—even citing older studies not mentioned in the
original work—and then took that narrative into their own laboratories in order
to re-create it. The case is one example of technologies’ tendency to disrupt
scientific discourse practices, calling into question both the peer review process
and the division between prepublication review and long-term reception itself.
Other chapters in this volume explore the ways in which digital technologies
are breaking down the time distinction between peer review and print publi-
cation. Gross (2006) describes Retraction Watch, a blog dedicated to exposing
and discussing cases of plagiarism and fraud. Although the journalist-authors of
this blog generally report on cases that occur after official publication, these
papers are often retracted from publication, calling into question the prepubli-
cation peer review process itself. Gross contends that no other medium could
accommodate the rhetorical parameters of Retraction Watch: appealing to a small
but dedicated readership while at the same time both maintaining a large archive
of past cases and reporting on current cases as they occur. Christian Casper’s
chapter in this volume reports on postpublication peer review encouraged by
online journals like PLOS One, which allows public comments in the same space
as published research. The editors argue that this process allows the scientific
community to more quickly and accurately vet published research. In addition,
the editors encourage publication of preprint referee comments alongside pub-
lished works, hoping “to make the review process more transparent as well as
stimulating informed debate about published papers” (PLOS One, 2012) Rather
than “obliterating” the process of peer review, PLOS One opens it up to scrutiny.
The editors use the space and speed afforded by the journal’s online-only status
to create ecologies of discourse surrounding articles that span both prepubli-
cation and postpublication review. The article itself is only one text—and one
genre—among many, enacting Nielsen’s (2012) culture of networked science
as part of the formal editorial process.
PAUL DOCHERTY’S BLOG
In the Introduction to this volume, Jonathan Buehl describes the blog of Rosie
Redfield and its impact on the Mono Lake project; Paul Docherty’s Totally
Synthetic blog is well known in the chemistry community for performing similar
critiques (see Figure 6.1). Primarily moderated and authored by Paul Docherty,
a medicinal chemist, Totally Synthetic is a blog written by and for organic
chemists; its purpose is to summarize and critique published research about
chemical syntheses. The blog’s title, Totally Synthetic, is a reference to total
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
103

synthesis, the process by which smaller compounds are combined to create
complex organic compounds. From 2006 to 2012, Docherty wrote in his blog
about twice a month, each time discussing a recently published article. He
critiqued articles for their accuracy, effectiveness, and eloquence when reporting
syntheses. His critique of individual articles often led to broader comments about
the editorial decisions of the host journals. The website has other features,
including an editorial page and a section for news updates. However, the journal
article review pages are by far the most populated areas of the site.
In addition to his own critiques, Docherty invited comments from other
chemists about the articles he reviewed. Over the course of 6 years, Totally
Synthetic gathered a community that included about a dozen regular commenters
plus hundreds who left only one or two comments. Blog entries averaged about
20 comments each, but the average was much higher during the blog’s most
active period in 2008 and 2009. Most entries and comments are informal, but
they are written to other chemists who perform similar work, as evidenced by the
nomenclature, which is generally unfamiliar to lay readers and often written in a
truncated style. This dense, shorthanded discourse reinforces the commenters’
ethos, allowing them to reference complex information in what often appears to
be a rapid-fire discussion format.
The participants’ ethos also rests in their ability to reference other scien-
tific research or scientists as well as the major journals in which they publish.
For example, Docherty’s (2009a) blog post from March 30, 2009, entitled
“Vincorine,” is a critique of the paper, “Total Synthesis of the Akuammiline
104
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 6.1. The homepage of Totally Synthetic (Docherty, 2012).
Copyright © 2009 Paul Docherty. Reproduced with permission.

Alkaloid (±)-Vincorine” by Zhang, Huang, Shen and Qin (2009), which purports
to describe the first total synthesis of this compound. Docherty is not convinced of
its novelty and ends his critique by stating that the published synthesis is not new:
From here, the synthesis is fairly unremarkable (and I must say I’m sur-
prised that it was deemed JACS worthy—though all the total syntheses
seem to be going into Angewandte [sic] these days . . . ). Nice stuff in some
ways, but there’s nothing very new here.
Docherty is surprised that this research, which seems to replicate previous pub-
lished work, would be accepted for a prestigious journal like JAC. The first
commenter to respond to Docherty’s post, whose login name is 9-BDH, dis-
agreed: “Actually, it is the first synthesis of this target. Vollhardt and Levy
only completed the tetracyclic core, while Overman’s work on this particular
molecule is unpublished.” This brief correspondence is rich with expert knowl-
edge of the field and its major players. First, 9-BDH refutes Docherty’s conten-
tion that this paper replicates others, showing gaps in the published research
and identifying scientists who research vincorine, including those who have
unpublished work, which may not be as well known. Second, and more sig-
nificant to discussions about the future of scientific publishing, is Docherty’s
side commentary about the place of publication. He critiques JACS for pub-
lishing this article and then notes that another journal, Angewandte Chemie
(the flagship journal for the German chemical society which Docherty shortens
to Angewandte), has been publishing more total syntheses than JACS. This
critique is one of many that Docherty applies to JACS throughout the blog.
Indeed, both Docherty and several of his commenters use Totally Synthetic as
a space to scrutinize JACS for what they often believe are problematic
publishing standards and practices. In the process, these scientists not only hold
the published works up for critique, but the major journals as well. Such
discussions offer a rich opportunity for rhetoric of science scholars to understand
the reception of not only research articles but the also the journals who publish
them. Throughout the Totally Synthetic blog, comments, questions, and insights
about the peer review process are evident as well, providing a written record of
the ways in which scientists negotiate publishing practices and knowledge
construction.
LIVEBLOGGING AND SCIENTIFIC RECEPTION
Increasing disappointment in the publishing practices of JACS set the stage
for the X. Wang et al. (2009) controversy, catapulting Docherty and his blog
into an international discussion about publishing and peer review within
chemistry. On July 21, 2009, Docherty (2009b) posted a fairly routine blog entry,
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
105

summarizing and complimenting an article from JACS entitled “Total Synthesis
and Structural Revision of (±)-Tricholomalides A and B” by Wang, Min, and
Danishefsky (2009). However, within hours of posting the entry, regular readers
of Docherty’s blog left comments about the X. Wang et al.’s (2009) paper. X.
Wang et al.’s article describes the oxidation (loss of electrons) of benzylic
alcohol, turning it into a ketone compound. Ketones are important compounds in
organic chemistry because ketones are prevalent in humans (and other mammals)
and because of their usefulness as solvents. As a result, organic chemists often
look for more efficient and effective syntheses for converting common alcohols to
ketones. The authors claim to have used NaH (sodium hydride) as an oxidant,
which would be a breakthrough in this process because NaH is a hydride and
should not combine to make ketones. As Docherty commented in an interview for
Chemistry World, “A quick inspection of Wang’s results astounded me, as he
seemed to suggest that black was apparently now white” (Hadlington, 2009).
Implicit in this skepticism is the conventional scientific understanding that
counterintuitive, paradigm-shifting results should have received intense scrutiny
throughout the peer review process. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing ran a story
about this case in its newsletter that sums up the community’s concerns about the
peer review process:
Here, something had gone wrong with pre-publication review—the paper
had got past the reviewers and the editors at this journal, which seems
quite extraordinary when the results being reported were surprising and the
potential flaws so obvious to many in the chemistry community immediately
on publication of the article. (Hames, 2010)
The extraordinary nature of this publication prompted many scientists to
question not only the results of the experiment but also the peer review process
itself. And this scrutiny began almost immediately after the ASAP publication
of the article, further casting doubt on the quality of its peer review.
Figure 6.2 is a screenshot of the first comments regarding X. Wang et al.’s
(2009) article that appeared below Docherty’s original post. The commenters
almost exclusively ignore Docherty’s discussion of Wang, Min, and Danishefsky’s
(2009) article; instead, they link to, and then question, the X. Wang et al. piece.
The discussion begins with Liquidcarbon’s comment, “WTF is going on
here? —> http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ja904224y.” This short entry per-
forms two distinct tasks while exploiting several technical and cultural devices.
First, Liquidcarbon employs the truncation “WTF” in all caps to get the attention
of blog readers, pulling them away from the discussion of Z. Wang et al.’s (2009)
text and toward the link for X. Wang et al.’s (2009) article (hence the arrow).
With his use of WTF to indicate extreme concern about the article, Liquid-
carbon’s comment disrupts the broader conversation and power dynamic of
Docherty’s blog entry. Like other chemists who have written about the article, he
106
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

recognized immediately that the reported result “goes completely against received
chemical knowledge” (Murray-Rust, 2009). Although it was not uncommon for
commenters on Totally Synthetic to veer off the topic of the article to which they
were responding, it was extraordinary for a commenter to utterly ignore the article
and introduce a completely new topic in the Comments section. In Docherty’s
own words, the commenters “hi-jacked” his post (Docherty, 2009c).
In addition to his overt disruption of Docherty’s post, Liquidcarbon’s comment
includes a link to the article in question. The anatomy of this link is worth
describing, because it is the result of a series of what Bowker (2008) calls
protocols: agreements and standards that facilitate digital archiving and memory
practices (pp. 23–24). Included in the link are two pieces of information: first is
the place of publication, ACS, as indicated by pubs.acs.org, and second is the
Digital Object Identifier (DOI), encompassed by the sequence of numbers,
10.1021/ja904224y. DOIs act as stable identifiers for online artifacts such as
individual journal articles. Most science blogs, including Totally Synthetic, use
DOIs to easily locate and retrieve journal articles that are available through online
databases and portals. Many times, as is the case with the X. Wang et al.’s (2009)
manuscript, articles are available online well before they appear in a print volume,
in a process often called As Soon as Publishable (ASAP). ASAP papers are
usually available on journals’ websites before they are even assigned volume,
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
107
Figure 6.2. Comments from Docherty’s blog post “Total Synthesis
and Structural Revision of (±)-Tricholomalides A and B.”
Copyright © 2009 Paul Docherty. Reproduced with permission.

issue, and page numbers (and in some cases they even appear in draft form rather
than print-ready copy). Articles can exist in this pseudo-published state for weeks
or even months, so DOIs substitute for other citation information and allow easy
online linking. The DOI system, a seemingly mundane identification tool, is in
reality another indication that the linear scientific publishing process has become
dispersed and recursive. Traditionally, the moment when an article is “published”
has been constructed as a pivot point of knowledge production, the time and space
when an article is officially made available to the larger scientific community. For
most scientific journals, this easy distinction is no longer applicable: by publish-
ing manuscripts as soon as they are accepted, editors have exposed the drafting
process of journal articles and made them available for review and critique before
they are finalized. The publication cycle is sped up, and scientific reception can
occur almost instantaneously.
Referencing scientific papers through DOI linking is a commonplace occur-
rence in online scientific discourse, but as the X. Wang et al. (2009) case
unfolded, this DOI protocol became a reminder that scientific publishing prac-
tices have accelerated scientific reception. Within a few hours after Liquidcarbon
posted his comment on Totally Synthetic, another commenter, J., suggested that
the community test X. Wang et al.’s findings: “Does anyone want to pull a few
things off the shelf and see if this actually works?” Docherty agreed to replicate
a crucial element, which he was able to do because the experiment involved
standard chemicals found in his Arrow Therapeutics lab and took less than a
couple of days to perform. Along with Docherty, at least five other scientists
attempted to recreate X. Wang et al.’s experiment—each using slightly different
conditions to try out different oxidation scenarios—but Docherty’s attempt drew
the most attention because he actually performed a liveblog, recording the events
of his experiment as they unfolded. Scientists from around the world followed
Docherty and others as they reported results in near-real time online.
Docherty used both textual descriptions and visual images to relay data at
each stage of the experimental process, further exposing the black box inner
workings of both peer review and laboratory practices. Textually, Docherty
described each stage of the process in detail and included a timeline to verify the
length of the experiment. Unlike formal scientific publications, which generally
employ second person or even passive voice (Gross, Harmon, & Reidy, 2002),
Docherty’s blog reads like a first-person narrative account, including a conver-
sational tone, personal details, informal speech, and typos:
10.30 – Took the dried flask out from the oven, flushed it with nitrogen and
vacuum. Added (dry) THF, and cooled with ice water. Also, found the big ice
scoop I’ve been looking for ages on the biology floor. Thieving bastards . . .
10.40 – Added the alcohol (626 mg, 4 mmols), left it for a couple of minutes
and then stuck in the sodium hydride (60% dispersion in oil, 320 mg,
8 mmols) in one go. Cue fizzing.
108
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Although informal, these passages authenticate Docherty as an expert in organic
chemistry, displaying sophisticated knowledge of the field through dense
shorthanded terminology. His expert credibility is heightened by his atten-
tion to true-reporting detail: exact measurements are recorded and detailed
preparations are described. Less predictably, the playful language Docherty
employs, like the phrase “Cue fizzing,” permeates the liveblog (and Docherty’s
site as a whole). In many ways, the liveblog served as an open lab notebook
along the lines described by Wickman in this volume, facilitating informal
recordkeeping for Docherty, describing a protocol for others to replicate and
supplying
primary
data
for
further
analysis.
Like
open-lab
notebooks,
Docherty’s goal is to share and compare his results with others, hastening
the speed of scientific reception and destabilizing the traditional black box
of closed peer review as well as the linear process of print publication. The
X. Wang et al. (2009) case illustrates that the temporal space between draft
manuscript and final publication of an article is increasingly nebulous, and
scientists in the online community often spontaneously colonize that space,
crowding the conversation while article manuscripts are still in the ASAP
publication stage.
Along with social networking tools, Docherty employed several other digital
media to report his results in near-real time, including mobile technologies and
digital inscription devices (Latour & Woolgar, 1986). Docherty took pictures
on his iPhone to upload in near-real time, affirming the authenticity of both
his liveblog and the results he reports. Figure 6.3 and 6.4 are photographs of the
reaction taken on Docherty’s iPhone.
In addition, Docherty uploaded digital renderings of the liquid chromatography–
mass (LCM) spectrometry and the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometry to show primary data results as they were produced, in near-real
time. He accessed all of these communication devices—including the blog
itself—in the space of the physical lab, allowing him to record and publish his
results in near-real time. Such devices serve as Latourian “plug-ins,” various
applications and abilities that create a discursive assemblage of information,
more diverse and distributed than traditional scientific genres (Latour, 2007,
p. 207). Such plug-ins also allow Docherty to circumvent the traditional
print publication process by self-publishing his replication results and his
evaluation of X. Wang et al.’s (2009) article. Rather than follow the prescribed
genres of postpublication peer review (such as submitting a response letter to
the journal), Docherty leveraged digital, open access, and interactive discourse
tools to speed up the process of postpublication peer review, create a multi-
media collection of supporting information, and provide space for other
comments as the experiment unfolded. Here, Docherty implicitly critiques
mainstream publishing practices, offering a proof of concept for the notion that
Web 2.0-enabled science is more efficient, accurate, and collaborative than the
print-based journal model.
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
109

110
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 6.4. The orange color reaction resulting from the Docherty’s
liveblogged experiment, which demonstrates the synthesis.
Copyright © 2009 Paul Docherty. Reproduced with permission.
Figure 6.3. The fizzing reaction from the Docherty’s liveblogged experiment.
Copyright © 2009 Paul Docherty. Reproduced with permission.

PROOF OF CONCEPT FOR ONLINE
PEER REVIEW
The efforts of Docherty and other scientists quickly affirmed most skeptics’
suspicions that X. Wang et al.’s (2009) results were probably caused by an
oxygen contaminant in the experiment. Within weeks after the online post-
publication peer review began, X. Wang et al. responded by posting supporting
information on the JACS website that included experiment protocol descriptions
and spectra printouts, but generally, the scientific community dismissed this
data. Meanwhile, JACS editors were silent about the controversy, and the online
manuscript remained conspicuously in its ASAP form without going to print.
On December 23, 2009, a correction note was added to it, and then on January 20,
2010, the correction was replaced with a formal retraction statement. Sometime
shortly after that, the original manuscript was pulled completely off the JACS site,
and now only one sentence is available to anyone who searches for the article:
“This manuscript has been withdrawn for scientific reasons.”
In the end, the fate of this one individual manuscript is less important than
the proof-of-concept it demonstrated. Many in the online science community
praised the work of Docherty and others, arguing that this case establishes blog
review as another element of the review process (Hames, 2010; Murray-Rust,
2009), and as of August 2012, Docherty’s liveblog entry had accumulated over
128,000 views and more than 200 comments. Shortly after the liveblogging
event, Chris Smith (2009) interviewed Docherty for a Chemistry World podcast.
Smith described Docherty’s work as a
stage beyond peer review, we’ve now got blog level peer review, which is
putting researchers like you [Docherty] onto interesting things and then
getting you looking at them in a new way and finding novel things about
them, even catching people out.
Docherty tacitly agreed with Smith but emphasized the importance of speed
and ethos to the success of the review:
I think one of the most useful things is we are able to draw some new
conclusions very quickly, I think within 40 hours, the reactions were all
done, the results were there, but I think very important to this was everybody
knew who I was. If I had been anonymous at this point, I could have been
saying anything, even if it affected my career. The fact that the blog is
identified as being owned by me brings some credibility to the results.
Like Smith, Docherty argues that blogs provide a new space and time for
peer review that occurs much sooner than response outlets in peer reviewed
journals. However, Docherty adds that this process depends on bloggers’ willing-
ness to forego anonymity and establish their credibility through quality laboratory
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
111

work and extensive online interactions. Blogs and other social networking
tools are often critiqued for their accommodation of anonymity, supporting the
proliferation of potentially false or misleading information (Peer Pressure,
2009; Waldrop, 2008). Ironically, the increased awareness of online anonymity
calls into question traditional peer review practices, which are performed mostly
through anonymous blind peer review. Like the Totally Synthetic community,
many in the online science community openly critique blind peer review as
counterproductive and inefficient (Giles, 2007; McCabe, 2012; Neylon, 2011).
One notable critic of blind peer review and champion of Docherty’s blogging
efforts is Jean-Claude Bradley, a chemist and blogger at Drexel University.
Bradley is well known within the online science community for his advocacy of
open peer review practices and open-lab notebooks (His open-lab notebook,
UsefulChem, is considered an exemplar.) Soon after Docherty’s liveblogging
event, Bradley discussed the X. Wang et al. article in his chemistry class, prompt-
ing researchers in his lab, Khalid Mirza and Marshall Moritz, to attempt the
replication. They posted several short YouTube clips depicting their experiment
on UsefulChem’s OpenNotebook and logged each step of the 6-hour experiment
(Mirza & Moritz, 2009), offering both a visual and textual chronology that further
supported the findings of other scientists. On his own blog, Bradley summarizes
the experiment and presents NMR spectra showing that none of the benzene
alcohol converted to acetophenon. He concludes the blog entry by referencing
other online conversations about the manuscript and making another pointed
statement about the value of online scientific discourse:
In a comment on Carbon-Based Curiosities, European Chemist points to a
1965 paper where oxidants on the surface of NaH are likely responsible for
oxidative behavior (Lewis JOC). This would certainly explain why some
researchers are reporting some oxidation products but with widely divergent
yields. For example, Totally Synthetic reported a 15% NMR yield for the
conversion of the 4-chloro derivative to the corresponding ketone while
Wang isolated the product in 86% yield. (Bradley, 2009, underlined phrases
were hyperlinks in the original text)
The first paragraph in this quote references a blog post in Carbon-Based
Curiosities, another organic chemistry blog written by three graduate students
(Excimer, 2009). Like Totally Synthetic, blog postings in Carbon-Based Curi-
osities often focus on recently published journal articles. One commenter on
this blog found a journal article published in The Journal of Organic Chemistry
(Lewis, 1965) that offers a reason for the oxidation of the benzene alcohol:
surface contamination containing oxygen. Bradley uses this example to critique
X. Wang et al. (2009) for not performing adequate background research. To
illustrate this point, he links seamlessly through several texts in different mediated
spaces, including older journal articles and the current article under discussion.
112
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

The final paragraph of Bradley’s blog entry elevates his discussion to a broader
commentary on scientific publishing: “As many have pointed out, this is a
very good example of the way Web2.0 [sic] tools and community can comple-
ment traditional publishing to move science forward” (Bradley, 2009). Bradley’s
own blog post demonstrates this principle as well, collecting laboratory work,
classroom experiences, previously published research, and online discussion in
one discursive space to further elaborate on both the particulars of this case and
the greater implications of online scientific discourse. Like many other scientists
who leverage online tools for greater openness and collaboration in science,
Docherty and Bradley are well aware that they must perform two roles: they
are chemists first and foremost, but they are also advocates for a new way to
understand scientific publishing practices.
Docherty, Bradley, and other advocates of networked science are also richly
technologically literate, exploiting laboratory equipment and emerging digital
tools to further proliferate both scientific knowledge and the cause of networked
science. These scientists reflect Latour’s (2007) description of the emancipated
actor, one who is “well-attached” (p. 218, his emphasis) to a collection of
mediators, including, among other things, inscription devices and plug-ins.
Latour contends that mediators enable associations and lead to action: “The
more attachments it has, the more it exists. And the more mediators there are
the better” (p. 217). It was just such an ensemble of mediators that propelled
Docherty’s liveblogging event. He employed myriad attachments, including
laboratory equipment, blogs, DOIs, inscription devices, and iPhone images to
replicate X. Wang et al.’s (2009) experiment, report on the results, critique
their manuscript, and question the efficacy of JACS’s peer review process. As
Bradley’s blog post demonstrates, advocates of networked science believe that
the more scientists leverage such tools, the faster and more completely it can
address problems of the natural world.
WITNESSING THE (R)EVOLUTION
The future of networked science is by no means certain, and the long-term
impact of projects like Totally Synthetic and Bradley’s lab notebook are not
yet known. Even in his manifesto for networked science, Nielsen admits that
many hurdles exist, not the least of which is time (2012, p. 198). Most networked
science projects are initiated from the bottom up by scientists who perform this
work while simultaneously negotiating the professional pressures of research,
publications, and grant applications. Docherty often admitted in his blog that he
simply did not have the time to post entries for the many total syntheses he reads.
Like many technologically literate science bloggers, Docherty initiated a Twitter
feed in August 2011 to complement his blog writing and circulate information
about a greater number of research articles. Unlike his critical work on the blog,
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
113

the tweets are strictly informative, with each tweet consisting only of the research
article’s title and author as well as a retrieval link. Soon after he started tweeting,
the frequency of Docherty’s blog posts declined, and it appears that he ceased
blogging altogether in January 2012. Docherty continues to tweet regularly—
about every other day on average, which is a much greater number of articles
than he covered in the blog—but his transition was disappointing for the Totally
Synthetic community, who noted his absence in comments on his final blog post.
The cessation of blog posts also ended the extensive, rich discussion that came to
constitute the Totally Synthetic community, which is also unfortunate for scholars
of scientific communication. The Totally Synthetic community is now dormant,
and the dynamic exchange of ideas, critiques, and celebrations that accompanied
the community’s reception of scientific works has ended.
Nielsen argues that new technologies and revised incentives for scientists will
solve at least some of these time constraint problems, but the extent to which
networked science will revolutionize discourse practices like peer review and
reception is still uncertain. Digital publishing is destabilizing the traditional
publication cycle and offering spaces for disruption; the open access movement
offers a more transparent framework for certifying and owning knowledge. Many
(but by no means all) scientists recognize the value of making this transition, but
no consensus about the best way forward has been reached. Even Nielsen admits
that change will come in increments before a major cultural shift can occur
(2012, p. 206). In the meantime, rhetoricians of science have an opportunity to
observe, analyze, champion, and inform members of the scientific community
throughout this process as well. Online discourse offers new windows for rhetori-
cians of science to glimpse the inner workings of scientific research practices,
publishing conventions, and laboratory work. Through online genres like blogs,
we can witness the movement of what Paul et al. call “the microcosm of lab
findings” to the “macrocosm of the discipline and its accumulated knowledge”
(2001, p. 384).
REFERENCES
American Chemical Society (ACS). (2012). Homepage. Retrieved from http://www.acs.org
Berkenkotter, C. (1995). The power and the perils of peer review. Rhetoric Review, 13(2),
245–248. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/465828
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. (1994). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication:
Cognition/culture/power. London, UK: Routledge. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.
org/psycinfo/1995-97008-000
Bowker, G. (2006). Memory practices in the sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT University
Press.
Bradley, J. (2009, August 5). Our attempt to reproduce an oxidation by NaH. Useful
Chemistry [Blog post]. Retrieved from http://usefulchem.blogspot.com/2009/08/our-
attempt-to-reproduce-oxidation-by.html
114
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Ceccarelli, L. (2005). A hard look at ourselves: A reception study of rhetoric of science.
Technical Communication Quarterly, 14(3), 257–265. doi: 10.1207/s15427625tcq
1403_3
Docherty, P. (2009a, March 30). Vincorine. Totally Synthetic [Blog post]. Retrieved from
http://totallysynthetic.com/blog/?p=1605
Docherty, P. (2009b, July 21). Tricholomalides A & B. In Totally Synthetic [Blog post].
Retrieved from http://totallysynthetic.com/blog/?p=1896
Docherty, P. (2009c, July 22). NaH as an oxidant—liveblogging! Totally Synthetic [Blog
post]. Retrieved from http://totallysynthetic.com/blog/?p=1903
Docherty, P. (2012). Totally Synthetic [Blog]. Retrieved from http://totallysynthetic.
com/blog
Drahl, C. (2009). Communication dot com. Chemical & Engineering News, 87(13), 5160.
doi: 10.1021/ja904224y
Excimer. (2009, July 22). NaH: Magical oxidizing pixie dust. Carbon-based Curiosities
[Blog post]. Retrieved from http://www.coronene.com/blog/?p=842
Giles, J. (2007, January 4). Open access journal will publish first, judge later. Nature,
445, 9. doi: 10.1038/445009a
Gross, A. (2006). Starring the text: The place of rhetoric in science studies. Carbondale,:
IL Southern Illinois University Press.
Gross, A., Harmon, J., & Reidy, M. (2002). Communicating science: The scientific
article from the 17th century to the present. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Hadlington, S. (2009). Peer review by live blogging. Chemistry World. Retrieved from
http://www.rsc.org/chemistryworld/News/2009/July/27070901.asp
Hames, I. (2010). Live blogging and collaborative community review. Wiley-Blackwell
Publishing News. Retrieved August 31, 2012, from http://blogs.wiley.com/publishing
news/2010/02/18/live-blogging-and-collaborative-community-review/
Harris, R. A. (2005). Reception studies in the rhetoric of science. Technical Communi-
cation Quarterly, 14(3), 249–255. doi: 10.1207/s15427625tcq1403_2
Latour, B. (2007). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lewis, G. E. (1965, July). The reaction of sodium hydride with p-Nitrobenzaldehyde.
The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 30(7), 2433–2436. doi: 0.1021/jo01018a080
Lunsford, K. J. (2007). Remediating science: A case study of socialization. Kairos, 11(3).
Retrieved August 31, 2012, from http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/11.3/topoi/prior-
et-al/lunsford/index.html
McCabe, T. (2012, June 20). Why academic papers are a terrible discussion forum.
In Less Wrong [Blog post]. Retrieved from http://lesswrong.com/lw/d5y/why_
academic_papers_are_a_terrible_discussion/
Mirza, K., & Moritz, M. (August 4, 2009). Exp243. Usefulchem. Retrieved from http://
usefulchem.wikispaces.com/Exp243
Murray-Rust, P. (2009, July 28). Junk science? The blogosphere thinks so. Petermr’s
Blog: A Scientist and the Web [Blog post]. Retrieved from http://blogs.ch.cam.ac.uk/
pmr/2009/07/28/junk/
CHEMISTRY LIVEBLOGGING EVENT
/
115

Neylon, C. (2011, January 25). What is it with researchers and peer review? or; Why
misquoting Churchill does not an argument make. Science in the Open [Blog post].
Retrieved from http://cameronneylon.net/blog/what-is-it-with-researchers-and-peer-
review-or-why-misquoting-ch/
Nielsen, M. (2012). Reinventing discovery: The new era of networked science. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Paul, D., Charney, D., & Kendall, A. (2001). Moving beyond the moment: Reception
studies in the rhetoric of science. Journal of Business and Technical Communication,
15(3), 372–299. Retrieved from http://jbt.sagepub.com/content/15/3/372.short
Peer Pressure. (2009). Nature Chemistry, 1(8), 585. Retrieved from http://www.nature.
com/nchem/journal/v1/n8/full/nchem.434.html
PLOS One. (2012). PLOS One guidelines for reviewers. Retrieved from http://www.
plosone.org/static/reviewerGuidelines.action
Smith, C. (Host). (2009, September). Chemistry world podcast—September 2009 [Podcast
transcript]. Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC). Retrieved from http://www.rsc.org/
chemistryworld/podcast/Transcripts/2009/September.asp
Waldrop, M. (2008). Science 2.0. Scientific American, 1–8. Retrieved from http://www.
nature.com/scientificamerican/journal/v298/n5/full/scientificamerican0508-68.html
Wang, X., Zhang, B., & Wang, D. Z. (2009). Reductive and transition-metal-free: Oxi-
dation of secondary alcohols by sodium hydride. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 132(2), 890. doi: 10.1021/ja910615z
Wang, Z., Min, S., & Danishefsky, S. (2009). Total synthesis and structural revision of
(±)-tricholomalides A and B. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 131(31),
10848–10849. Retrieved from http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ja9049433
Zhang, M., Huang, X., Shen, L., & Qin, Y. (2009). Total synthesis of the akuammiline
alkaloid (±)-vincorine. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 131(16),
6013–6020. Retrieved from http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ja901219v
Note: Since the writing of this chapter, the Totally Synthetic website has been completely
removed
and
subsumed
into
the
Organic
Chemistry
Portal
at
http://www.organic-chemistry.org/totalsynthesis/totsyn03/majusculone-taber.shtm.
Links to Totally Synthetic will redirect to that site. Sadly, Jean-Claude Bradley passed
away in 2014. His open data is still open and accessible at UsefulChem:
http://usefulchem.wikispaces.com/.
116
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 7
Controversies on the Web:
The Case of Adult Human
Neurogenesis
Jeanne Fahnestock
ABSTRACT
Controversies in science are common, and they may be resolved by further
evidence, by mitigating claims, or simply by loss of interest in the absence of
new data. A recent controversy over whether the adult human brain exhibits
neurogenesis in the neocortex offers a case study in how the resolution of
scientific controversies can be affected by the Internet. With its ability to
reach and even create audiences, the Internet spread claims about brain
renewal from the original research reports to news outlets, to disease
advocacy sites, and to health and wellness sites, with inevitable distortions
along the way. With its speed, the Internet allowed the creation of new (and
sometimes fake) online journals, quickly proliferating less vetted research.
With its interactivity, the Internet has amplified uninformed responses to
various research reports, impeding the creation of an informed public.
Because overall it obscures chronology and makes superseded materials
easily available, the Internet can give disputed claims a purchase they do not
have among experts and retard the resolution or even the simple fading away
of a controversy.
Can the adult human brain grow new neurons and, if it could, would these new
neurons repair or even enhance its powers? These questions fascinate most
people because they concern human beings and the most distinctive organ
in humans, the brain. Unfortunately, they can be answered in multiple ways
depending on what is meant by “adult,” “brain” and “neurogenesis.” Over the
past two decades, whether and where the brain can show new growth has been a
117

source of controversy among brain researchers who have disagreed over the
evidence for claims of neurogenesis and over their implications and medical
applications. But in the popular media, expanded in online niches, the potential
for growing new brain cells is asserted enthusiastically, with chatty advice on
how to stimulate mental renewal and bright promises of cures for devastating
brain diseases.
This chapter examines the adult human neurogenesis controversy and identi-
fies features of its public airing on the Internet through a process that could
be called refraction, the skewed reflection of a topic through different media
and outlets. Some features of refraction also occur in print media since, whenever
a subject travels through different genres to different audiences, it undergoes
inevitable changes in its presentation. So a further attempt is made in this chapter
to identify affordances and consequences unique to the Internet as they impact
a scientific controversy. Of course whether in print or on the Web, the spread of a
controversy also engages the general and still curiously neglected issue of what
constitutes an acceptable version, summary, or paraphrase of an argument as it
moves through other texts. But this chapter focuses on how the Web, with its
extended speed, reach, and interactivity, can affect the dynamics of controversy
resolution in the sciences as it refracts a subject through different sites.
DEFINITIONS OF CONTROVERSY
The sense of controversy used here first requires some clarification. For pur-
poses of this study, a controversy is not synonymous with any disagreement or
with the presence of conflicting views on a topic. For instance, the label contro-
versy does not really fit when a new phenomenon stimulates different explana-
tions. At that stage, researchers offer plausible, tentative theories, and there is
a period of testing and discussion, as in the 1950s over the “genetic code,” until
eventually the less productive explanations fall away. Nor does a controversy
occur when nonexperts resist a consensus among experts, as in the case of the
vaccine/autism link, or when there is overwhelming agreement in a field but
one credentialed expert continues to object, as in the case of Emilio Golgi’s
insistence on a reticular theory of brain organization (Raviola, 2006) or Peter
Duesberg’s continuing denial that HIV is the cause of AIDS (Corbyn, 2012).
A controversy, as stipulated here, requires a disagreement among participants
with the stature to command a hearing in a field, and it has to be recognized as a
controversy. It may involve two or more incompatible theories (characterizations
or causal explanations), or it may involve a salient and unanswered refutation
to a claim. The controversy over the nature of the Flores “hobbit” fits the first
definition with its two conflicting accounts of the diminutive remains found
on an Indonesian island: either those skeletons represent a distinct miniature
species of humans, or they represent a population of Homo sapiens dwarfed by
118
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

disease or malnutrition (Culotta, 2006; Kaplan, 2011). A controversy in the
second sense involves a claim and its refutation, as in the case of arsenic metab-
olizing bacteria mentioned in the introduction to this volume, a claim refuted
within 2 years of its much-touted assertion (Schiermeier, 2012). Clearly, burden
of proof is an issue in the difference here. A controversy from incompatible
claims, more likely to be called a debate, leaves the burden with both parties
either to refute the other and/or to generate further support. But a contro-
versy generated by a cogent refutation, which can seem more damaging to the
threatened position, switches the burden back to the originators. The precise
issues fueling either kind of controversy can involve the available evidence
(how it was collected or what it actually signifies), or the reasoning from that
evidence, or even who has the expertise to generate evidence or reason about it.
Controversies should not, however, involve a free-for-all of standards. Instead,
there should be agreement on what would end the controversy, even if that
“what” is unattainable. The controversy over adult human neurogenesis fits
the second sense of controversy stipulated here when it first erupted 12 years
ago. It involved major figures in neuroscience on both sides, it pitted a claim
against a refutation, participants shared a sense of what should count as evidence
pertinent to the case, and they referred to their own disagreement as a contro-
versy (e.g., Gage, 2005; Gould, 2007).
Scholars in ethics and social science have suggested several ways that
controversies can resolve or merely end. Among the means of resolution are
(a) sound argument creating a consensus, (b) adjudication or negotiation directed
from a recognized institution, and (c) natural death through loss of interest
(see Engelhardt & Caplan, 1987, pp. 28–35). The first method would be preferred
in science: reasoning from evidence accepted by all parties yields a resolution.
The second method of closure, an adjudication as in a court proceeding or a
negotiated settlement as in a labor dispute, is not really available in scientific
controversies. Formally, there is no court of appeal, though the closest thing to
adjudicatory boards in the sciences, namely, granting agencies or peer reviewers,
do deny funding and exposure to less popular views. And informally, parties in
a controversy may “negotiate” by mitigating their claims, in effect giving in on
some things to the other side. The third ending, a natural death through declining
interest, certainly does occur in science, especially when a challenging finding
receives no reinforcement from further work. Whether and how the adult neuro-
genesis controversy was resolved will be discussed below.
ADULT HUMAN NEUROGENESIS
There is a firm and long-established consensus that neurogenesis, the formation
and growth of neurons in the brain, occurs during fetal and neonatal development
in all species. From the late 19th century and the first histological mappings of the
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
119

brain by Cajal and others, prevailing opinion held that the neurons formed
before and just after birth constitute an unchanging, lifetime population. Brain
tissue never regenerates itself the way epithelial or muscular tissue does,
and a fixed number and articulation of neurons in a brain appears to be an
evolutionary adaptation to make the storage of learned routines and long-term
memories possible.
Challenges to this view emerged through new techniques of labeling and
assaying cells in general and brain tissue in particular, most of the latter devel-
oped in work on rodent brains. In 1962, Joseph Altman tentatively offered
evidence of adult neurogenesis in a Science article aptly titled, with a question,
“Are New Neurons Formed in the Brains of Adult Mammals?”1 Altman,
then at MIT, created lesions and simultaneously injected radioactively labeled
thymidine into rat brains. Since the thymidine could be incorporated into nuclear
DNA, it was taken as a test for DNA synthesis and hence of cell division.
Altman exposed sections of labeled brain tissue to photographic plates for two
months and reported seeing labeled glia cells in the area of the lesions as well
as the “labeled nuclei of some neurons” (p. 1128). Altman speculated at the time
that although neurons were never observed to undergo mitosis, it was possible
that “new neurons might arise from non-differentiated precursors” (p. 1127).
Experiments like Altman’s were repeated in the 1970s by Michael Kaplan and
James Hinds, who added electron microscopy to examine the labeled tissue,
thus addressing uncertainties in Altman’s identification of the cells involved
(Kaplan & Hinds, 1977). In the 1980s, Shirley Bayer, who had worked with
Altman, demonstrated a linear increase in granule neurons in rats between 30
and 365 days old (Bayer, 1982).
This early work on rodent brains was reinforced by a series of papers in the
1980s from Fernando Nottebohm and colleagues who studied the seasonally
changing volume of songbird brains. Female canaries given testosterone also
showed this growth and developed the ability to sing like male canaries. Seeking
the underlying brain changes, the researchers discovered through radioactive
120
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 Altman’s work is characterized in a review article by Charles Gross (2000) as “ignored or
dismissed as unimportant for over two decades.” According to Gross, who was a co-author on
controversial papers with Elizabeth Gould, “The neglect of Altman’s demonstration of adult
neurogenesis is a classic case of a discovery made ‘before its time’” (p. 68). He characterizes
Altman as a self-taught post doc working on his own in a psychology department at MIT and
then says he was denied tenure there and switched his research to more conventional issues.
Some 15 years later, according to Gross, Altman was “vindicated.” Gross finds another victim
in Michael Kaplan, who did his research as a graduate student and post doc but eventually
left academia for medical school. Kaplan used the same methods of H-thymidine labeling
but added electron microscopy for a more careful identification of neurons as the cells
labeled with H3-Thymidine. The lone forerunner producing early and perversely neglected
work is a common theme in the history of science. The citation histories of Altman’s articles
do not suggest neglect.

thymidine labeling that while the treated birds did show a proliferation of glial
and endothelial cells, both the treated birds and, surprisingly, the controls showed
signs of persisting neurogenesis from, the researchers inferred, “ventricular
zone precursor cells” (Goldman & Nottebohm, 1983, p. 2394). The researcher
most responsible for knowledge of fetal neuronal development in primates,
Pasco Rakic, was prompted to investigate and to report that a similar phenomenon
did not occur in the macaque brain (1985).
But later research with mice, rats, and even tree shrews did confirm neuro-
genesis in the hippocampus, part of the brain’s limbic system associated with
short-term memory and spatial orientation (LeDoux 2002, pp. 100, 113), and in the
subventricular zone (SVZ), a layer of cells under the ventricles, the mid-brain
cavities. Researchers in the 1990s, including a group working in Bruce McEwen’s
lab at Rockefeller University, took advantage of a new labeling technique with
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporated into replicating DNA and detectable with
an antibody assay rather than autoradiography, and they confirmed the previously
reported neurogenesis. Versions of these findings have often been repeated, and
the results are now widely cited and referred to as established. Thus, if “brain”
means the hippocampus or the SVZ, if “neuron” means a granule neuron or
interneuron rather than the prototypical projection neuron, and if “adult” means a
laboratory animal that has reached full growth, then the claim that neurogenesis
occurs in the adult mammalian brain is uncontroversial and has been for over 10
years (Rakic, 2002c; Sierra, Encinas, & Maletic-Savatic, 2011).
But steps beyond this consensus came in several papers at the end of the
1990s, the “decade of the brain,” establishing striking new claims about adult
neurogenesis. In 1997, Fred Gage of the Salk Institute and his colleague Gerd
Kemperman, following up on similar studies of stress-related changes to the
brain, reported research on adult rats placed in an “enriched” environment who,
unlike similar rats kept in small cages, grew new granule neurons in the hippo-
campus. This result circulated widely in the media, immediately yielding a moral
easily applied to humans that an “enriched environment means a better brain”
(Kemperman, Kuhn, & Gage, 1997). A year later, Gage and colleagues took advan-
tage of a special population of patients with brain cancer who had been injected
with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) to test for tumor growth. Under normal circum-
stances, humans cannot be given BrdU because it is itself carcinogenic. Autopsies
of the brains of these patients revealed BrdU antibody staining in the same brain
areas
showing
neurogenesis
in
birds
and
rodents
(Eriksson,
Perfileva,
Bjork-Eriksson, Alborn, Nordborg, Peterson, & Gage, 1998). Here was the first
evidence that the adult human brain exhibited neurogenesis.
Also in 1998 and again in 1999 came striking reports under lead author
Elizabeth Gould of Princeton University. In the first paper published in PNAS
with her mentor from Rockefeller University, Bruce McEwen, Gould reported
the presence and reduction of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult marmosets, a
primate species, as a result of “stress,” operationally defined in this case as being
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
121

placed in the cage of another monkey: “A single exposure to this stressful
experience results in a significant reduction in the number of these proliferating
cells” (Gould, Tanapat, McEwen, Flügge, & Fuchs, 1998, p. 3168). The next
year, collaborating with Charles Gross of Princeton, Gould and colleagues
claimed to find neurogenesis not only in the hippocampus and subventicular
zone but also migrating from the latter source to the neocortex of adult macaques.
(It is an unusual and amazing feature of perinatal neurogenesis that new neurons
form deep in the brain and migrate in streams to their final destination.) Gould,
Reeves, Graziano, and Gross’s paper (1999), which included electron micro-
graphs labeled as streams of migrating neurons, offered the first evidence that
an adult primate could presumably incorporate new neurons into the intricate
architecture of the neocortex.
Perhaps because of the high profile news coverage given the Gould papers
(Blakeslee, 2000; Kolata, 1998), there was pushback the following year, pri-
marily from two established neuroscientists: Pasko Rakic, noted above as the
discoverer of the mechanics of developmental neuron generation and migration,
and Richard Nowakowski, pioneer in the use of BrdU labeling on brain cells.2
Nowakowski and his collaborator Nancy L. Hayes sent a lengthy letter, “New
Neurons: Extraordinary Evidence or Extraordinary Conclusion?” to Science,
where the original Gould and Gross article appeared. It was published in May
2000 as a “Technical Comment” and was followed by a detailed “Response”
from Gould and Gross. (Both the Comment and Response are grouped as the
“New Neurons Debate” and all pages are numbered 771a.) Rakic published
two refutative review articles in 2002 with less challenging titles, “Neurogenesis
in Adult Primate Neocortex: An Evaluation of the Evidence” in Nature Reviews
Neuroscience (2002a) and “Adult Neurogenesis in Mammals: An Identity
Crisis” in The Journal of Neuroscience (2002b).
Nowakowski and Hayes’s (2000) first criticism involved complications in
interpreting BrdU data. Nowakowski, who had introduced BrdU assays, and
Hayes pointed out that its labeling is not “stoichiometric,” that is, its detection
does not correlate with the amount of a dose and that, furthermore, it can be taken
up in cells only undergoing repair rather than replication. They also puzzled over
the reported result that multiple injections of the same monkey did not yield a
detectable increase in labeled cells. (Since BrdU is incorporated into replicating
cells within minutes after injection, each subsequent injection should affect a new
cohort of cells and animals sacrificed at different times should show differences.)
Nowakowski and Hayes also noted that the Gould results required extremely fast
122
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
2 Of interest are the differing disciplinary locations of the contending parties. Elizabeth
Gould and Charles Gross are both in the Psychology Department at Princeton. Rakic and
Nowakowski are neuroscientists in medical schools, the first in Yale’s Department of
Neurobiology and the second, at the time, in the New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson School
of Medicine.

neuron migration and that the three labels used to identify the BrdU cells as
neurons and not glia cells or astrocytes did not in fact exclusively label neurons.
The critics also wondered why there were no standard histological and imaging
data of the new neurons in the neocortex.
Gould and Gross’s (2000) follow-up letter accused their critics of misreading
and failed logic. Since Nowakowski and Hayes (2000) numbered their criti-
cisms, Gould and Gross numbered their responses, but they did not answer
quite the points raised. They argued that the time lag between BrdU labeling in
subcortical areas and then in the cortex provided evidence of the labeling of
new neurons, created in one place and migrating to another, rather than the
labeling of those undergoing repair. They claimed not to have seen a larger
population of neurons, as their critics thought they should, because the critics
misread a particular diagram. And they claimed, on the basis of new evidence not
yet published, that in fact the new neurons do not survive for long, thus
discounting the problem of finding them in any numbers in the neocortex. In a
sense, they “negotiated” by mitigating their claim: the cells do appear, but not for
long. This compromise confirmed their reported findings and at the same time
preserved cortical neuronal architecture from the complications of intrusive
newcomers (for the new data, see Gould, Vail, Wagers, & Gross, 2001).
Rakic’s rebuttal pieces in 2002 were harsher in their criticism of BrdU as
evidence of neurogenesis. He pointed out that DNA replication occurs not only
in repair and mitosis, but it can also precede cell death. Hence, BrdU is a fallible
label of cell proliferation. He also noted that the visual evidence provided by
Gross and Gould did not include images through a sufficient number of layers
in the microscopic field, so they were likely detecting glia cells associated with
neurons and not BrdU labeled neurons. He discounted the electron micrographs
of streaming neurons as in fact the endothelial cells of capillaries. Overall,
Rakic’s refutation creates a quantitative impression of significant uncertainty
given the many things that might go wrong with the available evidence. Over
the next few years, attempts to replicate the Gould and Gross results failed
or were at best ambiguous.3 But the later criticisms and negative evidence did
not receive the popular coverage that the original sensational findings received.
Another source of evidence was recruited into the controversy in a 2006 paper
by Bhardwaj, Curtis, Spalding, Buchholz, Fink, Bjork-Eriksson et al., which
counted as a refutation. These researchers used the fact that 14C levels in the
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
123
3 The debate over neocortical neurogenesis had the effect of reinforcing consensus on
hippocampal neurogenesis according to Fred Gage. A classic concession structure stepped in.
In the context of discussing the resistance to his own first papers on hippocampal inducement
through stress, Fred Gage wrote, “There was also a controversy about the cortex, and whether
neurogenesis was going on there. By virtue of everyone looking at that very, very carefully
to see whether or not it occurred in the cortex, it became clear that it certainly did occur in
the hippocampus” (Gage, 2005).

atmosphere doubled during the time of above ground nuclear testing (roughly
1955–1963) after which it returned to previous levels. Children born in those
years, and the neuronal population in their brains, incorporated this isotope,
reflecting the ambient concentrations. DNA is stable after cell division, so the 14C
level in DNA serves as “a date mark for when a cell was born and can be used to
retrospectively birth date cells in humans” (Bhardwaj et al., 2006, p. 12564). If
neurons in the brain turned over during their lifetimes, those new cells would
show later 14C levels. The Bhardwaj group sampled brain tissue from people born
during those years and others and concluded that “whereas nonneuronal cells turn
over, neurons in the human cerebral neocortex are not generated in adulthood at
detectable levels but are generated perinatally” (p. 12564). This result was
aggressively promoted by the same two researchers who had weighed in against
the earlier Gould papers. The issue of PNAS carrying the carbon brain dating
paper also contained a preview piece by Nowakowski (2006) with a title (“Stable
Neuron Numbers from Cradle to Grave”) overstating the Bhardwaj paper, which
did admit other areas of neurogenesis. That same month, Rakic published a
“Perspectives” piece in Science (somewhat unusual in that it did not concern an
article in that issue) touting the Bhardwaj results under a title showing that
everyone watches too many Seinfeld reruns: “No More Cortical Neurons for
You” (2006). Here, the subtitle claims that the “contentious question” of new
neurons in the cortex of the adult human brain has been answered in the negative.
The researcher whose work was challenged did not remain silent. Elizabeth
Gould was allowed or invited to write a Perspectives piece in Nature Reviews
Neuroscience labeled “Opinion” (2007). In it, she deftly defended her
research program. Among her skillful tactics is a reminder of consensus
on neurogenesis in the hippocampus and SVZ and then of “evidence” for
neurogenesis
elsewhere—“neocortex,
striatum,
amygdala
and
substantia
nigra”—a list that places her own findings among a cohort (p. 416). Gould does
report on failures to repeat the detection of neurogenesis in the cortex, but
she then raises a series of technical concerns about the refutations, not unlike
those that had been aimed at her. What is obscured in her paper, thanks to the
conventions of in-text citation lacking dates in scientific publishing, is that
the positive findings she cites are all dated between 1999 and 2003, while the
rebuttals come afterwards.
Elizabeth Gould’s riposte appeared in 2007. Over the next few years, no
further evidence for adult neurogenesis in the neocortex of primates, or in
other mammals, appeared. Gould’s Princeton Web presence and CV lists
subsequent studies on the hippocampus. The web page for “Research” in
“The Gould Lab” describes work focusing on the hippocampus and lists neuro-
genesis in the neocortex as a last item of interest and as controversial. In the
same venues, Charles Gross, an aggressive proponent a decade ago (2000),
describes his work as involving spatial orientation and, down the list, the con-
tinuing study of cortical neurogenesis with Gould. Thus, the controversy over
124
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

cortical neurogenesis in 2006–2007 could fade through lack of attention, and
perhaps among researchers it has.4
However, neurogenesis anywhere in the brain remains a high-interest issue,
in part because it has been pulled into the vortex of interest in stem cell research.
The source of the new neurons became the focus. Since neurons apparently do
not undergo mitosis, they must proliferate from other less differentiated cells
that do divide. Altman had labeled these “nondifferentiated precursors” (1962,
p. 1127). In 1983, Goldman and Nottebohm did use the term “stem cells” once,
but preferred the synonymous terms “neuronal precursors” or “precursor cells.”
In 2000, researchers reported growing neurons in vitro from what they called
“neuronal progenitor cells” (Roy, Wang, Jiang, Kang, Benriass, Harrison-Restelli
et al., 2000). In fact, for decades the cells giving rise to a particular line were
called progenitors or precursors, that is, immature versions of the cells eventually
derived. But by 2005, “undifferentiated progenitors” were relabeled “neural stem
cells” (Watts, McConkey, Anderson, & Caldwell, 2005). When the public thinks
of stem cells, they tend to think of embryonic stem cells that are pluripotent,
capable of differentiating into any cell in the body. But under a precise definition,
a stem cell is actually any cell capable of replicating itself and also of differentiating
into other cells types, though not necessarily into any other cell type. Thus, the term
has been extended to immature but already specialized cells (e.g., neural stem
cells), a usage that still invokes associations with pluripotent stem cells and thus
with high-profile and highly fundable research and novel therapies. Studying
uncontroversial neurogenesis in the hippocampus and SVZ or controversial
neurogenesis in the neocortex can readily be presented as stem cell research.
CONTROVERSIES ON THE INTERNET
The primary literature in the controversy over cortical neurogenesis, sum-
marized above, can be identified and accessed on the Web, largely from PubMed
or from journal websites (through a university portal or by fee). The possibility
of someone not in a field accessing its disciplinary literature, and doing so
with ease and speed, has been so facilitated by the Internet that the situation
before could almost be described as no access. The Internet indeed, as often
noted, offers its users three affordances so different from other media quanti-
tatively as to be different qualitatively: reach (the extended population addressed
through a variety of websites), speed (an accelerated rate of access), and finally,
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
125
4 Another pair of papers illustrates the quick fate that some claims could have. In 1998 in
the Journal of Theoretical Biology, Shankle et al. claimed that neurons doubled in number
in the human cortex in children between 15 months and 6 years of age. This paper was
aggressively refuted in the same journal the following year as a physical impossibility (Korr
& Schmitz, 1999), but it is still sometimes cited as evidence of human cortical neurogenesis.

interactivity (the ability to respond to and not just consume sources). The
question here is how these affordances influence or alter the representation and
resolution of controversies like that over cortical neurogenesis.
Reach: The Proliferation of Online Niches
Part of the affordance of “reach,” as defined here, is the number of interested
parties and special groups who can amplify an issue online and the new audiences
that can be addressed through this expansion of web niches. The list of online
genres or sites that can feature discussions of adult human neurogenesis to
reach selected audiences includes the following:
1. Scholarly articles not available without special access accounts (through
subscriptions or libraries) or without paying a fee per article; e.g., Nature,
Science, Journal of Neuroscience.
2. Scholarly articles in open access journals, such as the PLOS ONE
and Frontiers series and others available through PubMed and other
databases.
3. Foundation and institute websites, such as the Dana Foundation, the
Riken Brain Institute, and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke.
4. Scientific organization websites, such as the Society for Neuroscience,
offering news, member profiles, and bibliographies.
5. Websites of specific labs and researchers.
6. Wikipedia and Scholarpedia entries.
7. Science news available on the Web; some also available in print ver-
sions (NYT Science Times, Science News) and some only online, such as
esciencenews.com.
8. Disease/health issue websites, such as the Alzheimer’s Reading Room.
9. Blogs such as Neuroskeptic or Neurophilosophy, some individually initi-
ated and others sponsored by publications such as Discover Magazine’s
Not Exactly Rocket Science.
10. Wikis from interested groups, such as the neurowiki and neurowiki2012.
11. Course websites, postings, and wikis.
Any browser prompted with “adult human neurogenesis” will produce a
mixture of these sources depending on its search algorithm. While searches can
be inflected by a user’s geographical location and past search history, topic-based
searches usually list sites based on frequency of hits. Search terms such as
“new brain cells” will of course produce a different selection. But in any search,
the order in which sites are retrieved can mask the date of their posting. Of the
array of sites that may discuss neurogenesis, many have print analogues, but a
126
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

handful are worth further attention as examples of reach because of their special
online presence: first, the web-unique encyclopedias, second, the news sites
that spread press releases, which feed in turn, third, the disease advocacy and
health/wellness sites that repackage this news to groups with common medical
interests. Though disease advocacy groups existed long before the Internet (e.g.,
cancer, heart disease, infantile paralysis), the Web has facilitated the creation
of virtual discourse communities coalescing around a shared interest not only
in the major health threats but also in rarer conditions and diseases. Each of
these areas of reach to nonexpert audiences exhibits inevitable but problematic
language changes that are worth reviewing first.
Language Complications
Potential misunderstandings, like those created by slightly altered paraphrases,
always emerge in the accommodation of expert discourse to nonexpert audiences.
These happen whenever arguments are passed along in a textual chain, and they
can occur in print as well as on the Web. Distortions may, however, be magnified
when consensus is absent. For example, the precise point at issue in a highly
technical controversy is often not passed on to nonexpert audiences. These
practitioner issues may be explainable, but not in the space constraints typical
in news reports and not in their nondiscursive aspects. In the case of the adult
cortical neurogenesis controversy, the problems with BrdU and other neuron
labeling techniques are complex, as are the technical problems with imaging
through a deep field microscopically. These are “matters of art,” areas where the
experienced may disagree. Not acknowledging these details in a news report on a
controversy is a repairable problem of omission.
Problems of commission occur through other inevitable language habits such
as substitution with hypernyms when carrying a notion across a text (Fahnestock
2011, pp. 63–67). The obvious and overwhelming problem in this case study is
using the word “brain” instead of labels for the specific structures of the brain that
are involved in neurogenesis. For most nonexpert readers, the “brain” is a single
organ, and prototypically it refers to the human neocortex, the external “shell”
of the brain most frequently imaged. But in the current consensus on adult
neurogenesis, new cell growth appears primarily in a part of a part of a part: the
subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Yet in an article
reporting on Gould’s 1998 research on the hippocampus, the headline in the
respected Science Times claimed, “Studies Find Brain Grows New Cells” (Kolata,
1998). The text does go on to limit this claim, but such stipulating is not the norm,
and for readers sampling only headlines, the damage is done.
There are also problems with inclusive terms for organisms. Results from
studies with rodents are typically taken to indicate conclusions about “the
mammalian brain,” a hypernym in relation to the mouse, monkey, or human brain.
Rodents, however, are not the prototypical mammal, nor in most contexts where
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
127

the term is used does “mammal” suggests a human being. Yet conclusions about
the “mammalian brain” derived from studies of mice and monkeys are routinely
applied to humans. In another case, promising early studies of neurogenesis in
songbirds (Goldman & Nottebohm, 1983) was characterized as involving the
“vertebrate brain,” a hypernym with considerable extension including mammals
and therefore humans. The terms used to characterize inclusion can be organized
on the following “ladder” of abstractions (Hayakawa, 1978, p. 155).
Brain
Vertebrate brain (includes work on birds, amphibians, and all other vertebrates)
Mammalian brain (includes work on mice and all other mammals)
Primate brain (includes work on monkeys and other primates)
Human brain
By default protocols of language use, all the higher terms on this list seem
to include the lower, though in popular usage, “brain” at the top usually means
“human brain” at the bottom. But in animal studies, the logic of inclusion built
into the language can be misleading. Species often represent niche special-
izations, and the species under a genus are not quite the same as the members of
a set. Nottebohm’s work on songbirds, for example, is referred to in the citation
of his award of the Benjamin Franklin Medal in Life Science as “his dis-
covery of neuronal replacement in the adult vertebrate brain” (Franklin Institute,
2006), but the specializations in bird brains to learn seasonal songs are not
likely to apply to all vertebrates.
Another language problem not unique to but common in web texts is the use
of words in their general rather than discipline-specific senses. For example, the
term “adult” in “adult neurogenesis” is used in the research literature to refer
to experiments on mice or monkeys that are adult in senses quite different again
from common usage where “adult” presupposes a mature human. Aside from
the problem of how “adult” is read by nonexpert readers, there can be a problem
in how it is applied to other species, as Rakic pointed out in 2002:
Results obtained in 4- to 6-week-old rats or monkeys <3 years old should
not be generalized to the adult brain. Sometimes juvenile animals are clas-
sified as adults. The common use of weight as an index of an animal[’]s
age is also not a sufficient criterion. (2002b, p. 616)
Rakic suggested defining adulthood as reaching the midpoint of the average
lifespan of a species—3 years for a rat and 10 for a macaque (Rakic, 2002b,
p. 617). That stipulation would invalidate most of the published research. To
put this issue in perspective, human adolescents would be defined as adult
in most research protocols because they have typically reached adult height and
128
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

weight. But the human adolescent brain is widely acknowledged to differ in
significant ways from the adult human brain (Luciana, 2010).
Wikipedia and Scholarpedia
Nonexperts looking for information are first likely to investigate an unfamiliar
subject through a Wikipedia entry. When they read the Wikipedia entry on
“Neurogenesis,” exclusively on its occurrence in adults, they will find an
incoherent and skewed pastiche that receives low ratings from WikiProject
overseers in medicine and neuroscience (though these ratings are not obvious
without a little digging).5 From sentence to sentence, the language careens from a
formal and disciplinary to a less specialized register, statements are made and
then immediately contradicted or doubted, and the topics covered in subheaded
sections lack a rationale. A history of the edits to this article reveals a continual
accretion of insertions and citations, some apparently provided by the researchers
themselves. Shirley Bayer, for example, made 10 edits, placing herself in
an overview of research on the topic of adult neurogenesis as someone who
sparked its renewal. Michael Kaplan then added his own work, and others
added a section on the “Role in behavioral sensitization,” citing articles actually
on fibroblasts and synaptogenesis. Inevitably, it seems, there is a section
on the “Effects of Marijuana,” which has one citation claiming stimulation of
neurogenesis and a subsequent sentence citing nullifying research. The specific
issue of neocortical neurogenesis is characterized as a stalemate based on
citations to research 10 or more years old:
Further, some authors (particularly Elizabeth Gould) have suggested that
adult neurogenesis may also occur in regions within the brain not generally
associated with neurogenesis including the neocortex.[14][15][16] How-
ever others[17] Others [sic] have questioned the scientific evidence of these
findings, arguing that the new cells may be of glial origin. (Wikipedia,
2012; footnotes 14–16 are to papers 1999–2003 and footnote 17 is to Rakic
in 2002b).
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
129
5 The Medicine WikiProject rates the entry a “C,” assessing it as “substantial” but “still
missing important content or contains a lot of irrelevant material. The article should have
references to reliable sources, but may still have significant issues or require substantial
cleanup.” It is described under “Reader’s Experience” as “Useful to a causal reader,
but would not provide a complete picture for even a moderately detailed study” and
under “Editing suggestions” as “Considerable editing is needed to close gaps in content
and address cleanup issues.” The WikiProject Neuroscience rates it lower as “Start,” an
“article that is developing but that is quite incomplete and may require further reliable
sources.” Furthermore, “It needs references to reliable sources and substantial improvements in
content and organization.”

The much-touted democratic project that is Wikipedia often produces such
entries marred by a chaotic voice-address situation overall and written from
no controlling perspective for no controlling purpose. In this sense, Wikipedia
will never replace the genuine encyclopedia entry or textbook explanation that
has a single editorial voice that constructs a consistently located reader. The
Scholarpedia page on “Adult Neurogenesis” does not have the deficiencies of
the Wikipedia entry. But then it has named and credentialed authors (Aimone,
Jessberger, & Gage, 2011). Its register features a consistent “expert author to
highly informed reader” address, indistinguishable from a review article, and its
arrangement has a principle of organization, moving from established evidence
on neurogenesis in the hippocampus and subventicular zone to research
attempting to explain its effects. It makes no mention of neocortical neuro-
genesis. A comparison of the Wikipedia and Scholarpedia entries suggests that
Einstein’s “accommodation paradox” has not been overcome: explanations are
either clear but incomplete, or complete but unclear.
News and Health Websites
Science “news,” ferrying new findings to interested publics, long antedates
the Internet, but its presence on the Internet is especially rich. Older print
sites, both dedicated publications like Scientific American and more general
publications like Newsweek, which occasionally feature science news, have
a significant Web presence and offer easy access to even recent issues. In
addition, there are multiple Internet-only sites offering science news, such as
escience.com and sciencenewsdaily.com. The typical path to published news
on such sites starts with a press release from a university, institute, or corporate
research center. News websites often merely copy and paste from such sources,
sometimes with slight alterations, sometimes not. For example, the following
claim about a possible facilitation of neurogenesis occurred in a press release
issued on the 10th of August, 2011, from the University of Virginia, home
institution of the authoring researchers (see Lu, Elliott, Chen, Walsh, Klibanov, &
Ravichandran, 2011): “Until now, scientists have not fully understood how this
process [phagocytosis] works, which phagocytes are unique in the brain and how
removal of dead neurons influences the production of new ones” (UVAToday,
2011). On the 12th of August, the website Medical News Today offered this
version: “Researchers have not completely understood how this process works,
which phagocytes are unique to the brain and how the removal of dead neurons
influences the creation of new neurons, until now” (Rattue, 2011). This deft
paraphrase (with its dramatic final adverb until now) represents the slight
refractions that occur in news reports. For the most part they are harmless, but
they can be amplified on the Internet into refractions of refractions in a funhouse
of mirrors.
130
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Disease Advocacy Sites
In addition to increasing readership overall, the notion of “reach” involves
access to and even the creation of audiences with special interests. Beyond news
sites, the websites extending the reach of the Internet have a more complicated
set of goals tied to their intended audiences. The goals of websites devoted
to particular diseases, for example, include promoting awareness of the disease,
raising funds for research, and providing information and support for patients
and their families. These sites will report on apparently relevant research, but
it is not usually in their interest to report controversies about that research.
Neurogenesis is a promising topic for sites devoted to diseases that compromise
brain function since in these conditions some form of regeneration seems
desirable: for example, stroke, Huntington’s disease, schizophrenia, depression,
Parkinson’s disease, and all forms of progressive dementia as well as Alzheimer’s
disease. Patient advocacy sites that have featured neurogenesis research include
the Multiple Sclerosis Research Centre (mrsc.com.uk) and WrongPlanet.net,
“The online resource and community for Autism and Asperger’s.” (This site
posted a typically titled article, “Myth Busted: Adults DO Grow New Brain
Cells,” summarizing research actually on nerve cells growing dendrites.) To
take another advocacy site as typical, the Alzheimer’s Reading Room, started,
according to the site, by a caregiver, is now the main site (as least as far as Google
is concerned) for advice through postings, archived articles, and further links.
In a page posted on August 14, 2011, this site reported on the press release
from the University of Virginia, discussed above. The third paragraph of the
press release contained a potential medical application of the reported research
on the ability of some neurons to engulf and digest dead cells. According to
the UVA spin doctors, this “pivotal discovery . . . could one day help scientists
devise novel therapies to promote neurogenesis in the adult brain. This could
re-establish brain function in patients suffering from depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder and other mental disorders in which adult neurogenesis is
impaired” (UVAToday, 2011). This claim is amplified in the Alzheimer’s
Reading Room posting and expressed in a way that makes it relevant to the site’s
concerns: “These findings raise the possibility that this newly discovered process
could be manipulated to rejuvenate the brain by regulating the addition of new
neurons” (Alzheimer’s Reading Room, 2011). Neither this statement, tweaked
from the press release, nor the wording of the release itself, are warranted by
the original research report, whose farthest claim of application restrains itself
to “Identifying phagocytosis as an unexpected further property of neuronal
cells may have a significant impact on further understanding adult neurogenesis
in physiological and pathological conditions” (Lu et al., 2011, p. 1083). In an
interview with his university’s public relations office, the lead author did suggest
medical applications, a standard gesture in such accommodated reports. There
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
131

is however no consensus that impaired neurogenesis is a causal agent in mental
disorders and certainly none to the step beyond of controlled therapeutic neuro-
genesis in any part of the brain. But because patient advocacy sites serve an
overall claim—“things can improve”—and assume as an unstated cause for that
improvement—“thanks to us”—material is invariably inflected toward a hopeful,
attainable future. No one contributes to hopeless causes.
Health and Wellness Websites
Sites offering lifestyle advice could be described as bottom feeders catching
the detritus floating down from science news sources. Pedaling products from
supplements to online courses, many offer “scientific” ways to improve the
brain. At the more respectable end are sites like The Wellness Advisor,
sponsored by the Cargill Corporation—its posting “Yes, You Can Grow
New Brain Cells!” was written by an MD who, among other good habits for a
healthy brain, advises eating fish oil and flossing (Keenan, 2012)—and the
Livestrong.com site, associated with the Lance Armstrong Foundation, which
suggests that exercise stimulates a brain protein driving “the production of
neurogenesis and stem cells” (Garvin, 2011). At the less respectable end, the
blog “4 Mind 4 Life”, created by “Drew,” describes itself as “offering health
tips to help you improve your physical and mental health.” This blog features
information on “brainwaves, brainwave entrapment experiments, and the
latest brain research news” and suggests that “to help get you started with
brainwave entrapment, check out my ‘recommended products’ section” (Drew,
2008). A further posting titled “7 Scientifically Proven Ways to Stimulate Brain
Cell Growth” actually specifies that neurogenesis occurs in the hippocampus,
but then generalizes the results:
Though thousands of new brain cells are formed and produced via the
hippocampus each and every day, many die quickly after birth. When
we can keep them alive for this crucial period after birth, we are able to
effectively boost the power of the human brain by adding new brain cells
to the bank of existing cells. (Drew, 2008)
The seven ways include exercising and living in an enriched environment,
advice derived from Gage’s work a decade earlier with rats in larger cages,
but Drew also recommends eating blueberries and wearing an “infared [sic]
light helmet.” On these “wellness” sites, an undifferentiated neurogenesis is
an uncontested fact. In this way, fragments of legitimate science are annexed
to dubious enthusiasms, an effect more likely to occur in the case of research
with potential medical relevance.
132
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Speed: The Eruption of Authorizing Sites
Speed remains the premier asset of the Internet. Research reports accepted
in journals with print versions are now typically published online before they
appear in print. Open source or online journals post articles quickly after
acceptance, and indeed the rationale for “periodical” publication with its cyclic
delays has disappeared. Everything is available more quickly, especially the
initial reporting of “discoveries.”
In the following discussion, “speed” will, however, be given a special inter-
pretation as the speed with which an authorizing “publication” can come into
being on the Web. This Internet-enabled facility is crucial because a containing
“publication” suggesting institutional authority and peer review is still a neces-
sary warrant in legitimating scientific research. A case illustrating the ease of
creating online publications is the Frontier Journals enterprise.6 These web pub-
lications advertise themselves as a new type of academic journal following a
“4th generation publishing model.” The sponsors promise an expedited review
process and transparency in listing reviewers on publications. But the main
feature of this open access model is its system of tiered journals, tier 1 for a
specialty, tier 2 for a field, tier 3 for a domain. So under the domain of “Science”
is the field journal Frontiers in Neuroscience and under that is the specialty
journal Frontiers in Neurogenesis. (Researchers are also invited to create sites
for “hot topics” within a specialty by collecting at least 10 submissions. These
are then bundled and made available as an ebook.) The site also describes
higher tier 3 publications for a domain (e.g., Science, Medicine) and tier 4 for
“the ultimate distillation of the most relevant and excellent research written
for public understanding,” but no tier 3 or 4 publications were available on the site
in mid-2012. The Frontier tier 1 specialty journals are created by contributors
themselves, and these narrowly titled journals clearly solidify the identity of
a research area. Such specialty journals are presumably maintained so long as
there is a “healthy” number of submissions. The Frontiers journals require
authors to pay for publication (as do many science journals) and 2012 fees for a
regular submission were a hefty €1,600.
Once an article or review is published in a tier 1 specialty journal, the Frontiers
system tracks its viewings and downloads to, as they put it, “democratically
assess” the article’s importance. The top 10% of articles measured by this
method are then advanced to the next tier. Thus, a review article on adult human
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
133
6 Frontiers in Neuroscience was in fact the first of the Frontiers journals. It was founded
by Henry and Kamila Markram, researchers at the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
in Switzerland. Markram, something of a media star, is known for his current high profile
“Blue Brain” project, attempting to reconstruct a human brain on IBM supercomputers, a
multiyear project that is also being filmed along the way.

neurogenesis originally appearing in Frontiers in Neurogenesis received enough
hits to advance it to Frontiers in Neuroscience, an elastic publication without a
limiting physical size. The Frontier site brags that access and download counting
shows the social importance of research and frees it from “interests.” But this
automatic bibliometry is not a substitute for citation history as a sign of impor-
tance since an article may be accessed but then dismissed. And while the
Frontier journals may have some credibility and staying power, there is little
barrier to any interested party representing a research field who wants to start
an online journal, thereby in effect creating that research field. In fact by 2012,
“counterfeit journals” exploiting open access and the author-pay model may
account for, according to one expert, 5% to 10% of all open access publishing,
endangering the entire enterprise (Beall, 2012a; Butler, 2013). The creators
of ersatz journals have apparently gone as far as fabricating whole issues to
forge a legitimating track record (Beall, 2012b).
Irrespective of how quickly they get into circulation, once in circulation,
articles invite responses. Print media allow such responses in subsequent
issues (as in Nowakowski and Hayes’s [2000] response to Gould and Gross
[2000]). But the speed of response is facilitated by the Internet, not only in
comments posted on journal sites, but also through the work of bloggers who
echo “interesting” articles quickly. For example, in a July 2009 posting, the
blogger known as “Neuroskeptic” summarized, just 2 days after its appearance,
a much-noticed article linking antidepressants with increased hippocampal neuro-
genesis (Boldrini, Underwood, Hen, Rosoklija, Dwork, Mann, & Arango, 2009).
Also unique to the Web are the quick “responses to responses” in the Comment
sections to postings and blogs, a space that may or may not be policed. So within
hours of Neuroskeptic’s summary of the article on antidepressants, the first
comment, from someone who reports not being able to access the full article,
draws attention to anomalies in the article’s data as reported by the blogger.
The original article reported counting neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in post-
mortem samples from three populations: people neither depressed nor on anti-
depressants, those depressed and not on antidepressants, and those depressed
and on antidepressants. (The total sample size was 19.) The control group’s
population of NPCs numbered 360, the untreated depressed people 1,119, and
those on antidepressants 17,229. The implication of this study was that anti-
depressants were having a good effect by increasing neurogenesis, yet those
labeled normal in the sample had very low neurogenesis. Furthermore, of the
sample on antidepressants, 5 out of 7 committed suicide. The comment to Neuro-
skeptic’s blog summary pointed out that it would be worth asking whether
neurogenesis, if induced by antidepressants or even by the underlying disease
process, was really therapeutic. Neuroskeptic responded by noting the com-
mentator’s “excellent question”: “The authors don’t even try to explain the
finding that depressed people have more NPCs than controls. Which is the
opposite of what you’d expect if you think ‘depression = low neurogenesis.’”
134
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

And he concludes that the news is not good for neurogenesis theory “if
some people can get by with much lower rates of neurogenesis than others.”
In this case, demonstrating the affordance of speed, the posted summary,
and the comment and response raised a valid criticism within 3 days of the
article’s publication.
Interactivity: The Facility of Feedback
The third and most distinctive affordance of the Web is its interactivity.
Interactivity, as in the case just cited of blogs and comments, means that readers/
responders can publicly post their perspectives, sometimes along with the
original, in venues subjected to varying degrees of control. In the case of
responses to the link between hippocampal neurogenesis and antidepressants,
however, while the contribution discussed above did engage the substance
(but perhaps never reached the original authors), all the remaining comments
to the original posting wandered off point, musing on whether antidepressants
work at all, on whether standards for licensing psychiatrists have declined,
and on whether anyone still believes in monoamine theories of depression
or schizophrenia (Neuroskeptic thinks “few serious people do”). Finally, a self-
proclaimed “layman,” who describes himself as having asymptomatic bipolar
disorder, reports liking the idea of antidepressants as a fountain of youth but
wonders if neurogenesis could just take place while people experience
antidepressant-induced sleep. In short, the comments are mostly tangential, and
on their evidence, the blog’s refraction of this article to nonexpert audiences
is of doubtful value.
Furthermore, the interactivity afforded to users is sometimes detrimental.
For example, in the aftermath of the 14C study and its coverage, the blog
Not Exactly Rocket Science, sponsored by Discover Magazine, picked up on
the Seinfeld allusion in the Rakic (2006) paper with the posting “No new
brain cells for you—settling the neurogenesis debate” (December 7, 2006). The
blogger, Ed Yong, identified as an award-winning British science writer with a
considerable list of publications, introduces the issue as “one of the most hotly
contested questions in neuroscience,” over how the neocortex adapts throughout
life and whether it does so through neurogenesis. Referring to Gould’s work
without naming the source, he writes, “A reported sighting of newly-made
neurons in primate brains fanned the flames of debate but could not be con-
firmed.” He then gives a credible summary of the Bhadwaj et al. (2006) paper.
Among the 13 posted comments is one that claims there are “a ton more articles”
and “tons of research” on the issue showing that “cells move to whatever part
of the brain needs repaired." When asked by the blogger Yong to cite references,
none were forthcoming. Another posting, from someone claiming to be at
the “Center for Neural Science” stated outright that “neurogenisis” [sic] in the
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
135

neocortex merely slows during adulthood, that the study was invalidated because
it took dying cancer patients (actually it did not) and it ends with the accusation
that “if you are a scientist what you say is almost outrageous—remember A
cornerstone of biology is that for every problem there is a good experimental
system or task paradigm to exploit the answer. This was not one of them.” These
comments provoked a sharp response from the blogger about the elitism and
arrogance in the post and the nonsense of its final point. In short, the exchange
amounted to little more than name-calling.
The facility for commenting and responding in the “webverse” brings up
again the potential problems with refracting specialists’ discourse to the
uninitiated and the soliciting of their voices in return. Such interactivity
has perhaps been the most celebrated affordance of the Web, leading to visions
of a democratized science with citizen-scientists contributing to research. The
typical Comments sections sampled in this case raise doubts about such
visions. Substantive responses do occur. But these would probably have been
made in venues that would have reached the original researchers. Instead,
the “net” result of the comment/response affordance seems to be a display of
immediate reactions to and free associations on a topic. These are no doubt
personally satisfying to the responders, but the enabling of what is essentially
consumer feedback in the “marketplace of ideas” is something less than citizen
participation in science.
Another interactive affordance created by the Internet comes from a special
population. These are the postings or wikis generated by students, and they have
a special role in the case of scientific controversies. Two contributions are
representative. The first is a paper posted by a student in a course called Great
Controversies in Neurobiology, offered at Brown University in 2008, a themed
course no doubt reflecting the “teach the debate” principle of course design that
has caught hold in academics. The student was evidently assigned Elizabeth
Gould’s 1999 article for analysis and critique. In 2010, this student posted a
detailed summary for anyone to access. His conclusions about the paper’s
methods and reasoning were largely positive, giving the paper currency 11 years
after publication and in spite of contrary evidence (Brown University, 2008).
While this assignment is an excellent one for developing a student’s ability
to understand and paraphrase an extended disciplinary argument, its status
as a public document is surely problematic. A second and more impressive
student-generated performance is the course wiki produced by an Advanced
Neuroscience class at Lafayette College in 2010. This entire course was devoted
to the then-current Neurogenesis Debate, and the wiki produced has separate
pages, a video interview with a professor, and clarifications of research methods
using BrdU and confocal microscopy. The Lafayette students produced a
professional, image-rich site on the topic of neurogenesis, with attention to
its controversial aspects. But overall, such course postings, though furthering
laudable academic goals, can keep controversial topics current.
136
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

WEB REFRACTION:
PROLONGING CONTROVERSIES
Complaints and concerns are often expressed about the Web’s imperma-
nence. Servers crash or cease to be maintained; links fail. But so long as links
and servers remain accessible, the parties to a controversy do not go away,
even when the consensus goes against them. Of course parties in controversies
conducted in print also remain available, if documents survive. But they do
not have the atemporal currency that comes from being listed among browser
links. Nor are old papers in bound volumes always sitting on open shelves
in public libraries.7 So by simply prolonging access, the Internet can defeat
closure on a controversial issue. Articles subsequently refuted or reviews of
a field replaced by more recent ones remain in a suspended state of currency
by virtue of their appearance in browsers, typically out of chronological order
and apparently dated “now” in every download.
The specific controversy examined here, over the location and extent of neuro-
genesis in the adult mammalian neocortex, had a unique history on the Web.
Though its initial spread from the research literature to science news sources
was predictable, its further refraction to disease advocacy or health and wellness
sites was due to its potential crossover with high-interest health issues, not
a feature of a controversy like that over the Flores “hobbit.” Once in circulation
on these sites, the claims grew larger and less precise, due in part to inevitable
patterns of language use but also to the pressures on these sites to meet their
audience’s expectations, whether for hopeful medical news or self-improvement
advice. Once “out of the bottle,” the diffused message that the “brain” has overall
regenerative powers is difficult to recall.
Whether this case should lead to a positive or negative overall assessment of
the Internet as a medium for scientific controversies depends on initial assump-
tions. Prolonging a controversy and keeping a refuted view in circulation are
not necessarily unfortunate consequences. No one believes that research on
neural progenitor cells should cease, and access to the entire body of research
on the subject is important. Furthermore, the medical exigence for this line of
inquiry is undeniable. However, once outside the primary literature, as the subject
refracts through Wikipedia, blog entries and comments, course postings and
websites with narrower agendas, the content becomes unreliable. The Internet
carries an enormous undertow of gunk, and its chaotic refractions can confuse
the state of knowledge in a field. Given the further dangers of ersatz open access
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
137
7 The problem of apparent currency is illustrated by a PDF on “The Life and Death of
a Neuron,” posted by the National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS;
2002), which makes promising references to adult neurogenesis and Gould’s work. It was
written 10 years ago but a still-available early version shows that versions updated to 2012
do not change the wording referring to the promise of a generalized adult neurogenesis.

journals and of voting on the importance of research by accessing rather than
citing it, the assessment turns negative. But then again, a positive or negative
assessment is moot for a medium that is beyond any single agent’s control.
REFERENCES
Aimone, J. B., Jessberger, S., & Gage, F. H. (2011, October). Adult neurogenesis. Scholar-
pedia. Retrieved from http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Adult_neurogenesis
Altman, J. (1962, March 30). Are new neurons formed in the brains of adult mammals?
Science, 135, 1127–1128.
Alzheimer’s Reading Room. (2011). Researchers help explain how the adult brain cleans
out dead brain cells and produces new ones. Retrieved from http://www.alzheimers
readingroom.com/2011/08/researchers-help-explain-how-adult.html
Bayer, S. (1982, May 21). Neurons in the rat dentate gyrus granular layer substantially
increase during juvenile and adult life. Science, 216, 890–892.
Beall, J. (2012a, September 13). Predatory publishers are corrupting open access. Nature,
489, 179.
Beall, J. (2012b, October 18). New journal publishes seven issues of bogus articles
to appear successful. Scholarly Open Access [Blog]. Retrieved from http://
scholarlyoa.com/2012/10/18/bogus-articles/
Bhardwaj, R. D., Curtis, M. A., Spalding, K. L., Buchholz, B. A., Fink, D., Björk-
Eriksson, T., et al. (2006, August 15). Neocortical neurogenesis in humans is
restricted to development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(33),
12564–12568.
Blakeslee, S. (2000, January 4). A decade of discovery yields a shock about the brain.
New York Times [Science Times]. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2000/
01/04/science/a-decade-of-discovery-yields-a-shock-about-the-brain.html?page
wanted=all&src=pm
Boldrini, M., Underwood, M. D., Hen, R., Rosoklija, G. B., Dwork, A. J., Mann, J. J., &
Arango (2009, 15 July). Antidepressants increase neural progenitor cells in the human
hippocampus. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 2376–2389.
Brown University. (2008). Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult primates. Great Con-
troversies in Neurobiology [Course wiki]. Retrieved from https://wiki.brown.edu/
confluence/display/BN0193S04/Neurogenesis+in+the+Neocortex+of+Adult+Primates
Butler, D. (2013, March 28). Investigating journals: The dark side of publishing. Nature,
495, 433–435.
Corbyn, Z. (2012, January 5). Paper denying HIV-AIDS link secures publication. Nature.
doi: 10.1038/nature.2012.9737. Retrieved from http://www.nature.com/news/paper-
denying-hiv-aids-link-secures-publication-1.9737
Culotta, E. (2006, August 25). Skeptics seek to slay the “hobbit,” calling Flores skeleton
a modern human. Science, 313, 1028–1029.
Drew. (2008). 7 scientifically proven ways to stimulate brain cell growth/neurogenesis.
4 Mind 4 Life [Blog]. Retrieved from http://4mind4life.com/blog/2008/08/18/7-
scientifically-proven-ways-to-stimulate-brain-cell-growth-neur/
138
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Engelhardt, H. T., Jr., & Caplan, H. L. (Eds.). (1987). Scientific controversies:
Case studies in the resolution and closure of disputes in science and technology.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Eriksson, P. S., Perfilieva, E., Björk-Eriksson, T., Alborn, A., Nordborg, C., Peterson,
D. A., et al. (1998, November). Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature
Medicine, 4(11), 1313–1317.
Fahnestock, J. (2011). Rhetorical style: The uses of language in persuasion. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Franklin Institute. (2006). Fernando Nottebohm, Ph.D. Retrieved from http://www.fi.edu/
winners/2006/nottebohm_fernando.faw?winner_id=4385
Gage, F. H. (2005, November). Salk’s Fred H. Gage on neurogenesis in the adult brain.
Science Watch, 16, 6.
Garvin, S. (2011, March 28). How does exercise help the brain? Livestrong.com. Retrieved
from http://www.livestrong.com/article/410524-how-does-exercise-help-the-brain/
Goldman, S. A., & Nottebohm, F. (1983, April). Neuronal production, migration, and
differentiation in a vocal control nucleus of the adult female canary brain. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 80, 2390–2394.
Gould, E. (n.d.). The Gould Lab. Princeton University. Retrieved from http://www.
princeton.edu/~goulde/research.html
Gould, E. (2007, June). How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals?
[Perspectives/Opinion]. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 481–488.
Gould, E., & Gross, C. G. (2000, May 5). Response [following Nowakowski & Hayes,
New neurons: Extraordinary evidence or extraordinary conclusion]. Science, 288,
771a.
Gould, E., Reeves, A. J., Graziano, M. S. A., & Gross, C. G. (1999, October 15).
Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult primates. Science, 286, 548–552.
Gould, E., Tanapat, P., McEwen, B., Flügge, G., & Fuchs, E. (1998, March). Proliferation
of granule cell precursors in the dentate gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by
stress. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 95, 3168–3171.
Gould, E., Vail, N., Wagers, M., & Gross, C. G. (2001, September 11). Adult-generated
hippocampal and neocortical neurons in macaques have a transient existence.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98, 10910–10917.
Gross, C. G. (2000, October). Neurogenesis in the adult brain: Death of a dogma
[Perspectives/ opinion]. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1, 67–73.
Hayakawa, S. I. (1978). Language in thought and action (4th ed.). New York, NY:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Kaplan, M. (2011, August 8). “Hobbit” just a deformed human? Nature. doi: 10.1038/
news.2011.466. Retrieved from http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110808/full/
news.2011.466.html
Kaplan, M. S., & Hinds, J. W. (1977, September 9). Neurogenesis in the adult rat: Electron
microscopic analysis of light autoradiographs. Science, 197, 1092–1094.
Keenan, J. (2012). Yes, you can grow new brain cells! Here’s how to protect and nurture
them. The Wellness Advisor. Retrieved from http://www.thewellnessadvisor.com/
2012/01/yes-you-can-grow-new-brain-cells-heres-how-to-protect-and-nurtur/
Kempermann, G. H., Kuhn, G., & Gage, F. H. (1997, April 3). More hippocampal neurons
in adult mice living in an enriched environment. Nature, 386, 493–495.
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
139

Kolata, G. (1998, March 17). Studies find brain grows new cells. New York Times [Science
Times]. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/17/science/studies-find-
brain-grows-new-cells.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm
Korr, H., & Schmitz, C. (1999). Facts and fictions regarding post-natal neurogenesis
in the developing human cerebral cortex. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 200,
291–297.
Lafayette College. (2010). Neurogenesis. Neuroscience 401 [Advanced neuroscience
wiki]. Retrieved from http://sites.lafayette.edu/neur401-sp10/
LeDoux, J. (2002). The synaptic self: How our brains become who we are. New York,
NY: Penguin.
Lu, Z., Elliott, M. R., Chen, Y., Walsh, J. T., Klibanov, A. L., Ravichandran, K. S., &
Kipnis (2011, September). Phagocytic activity of neuronal progenitors regulates
adult neurogenesis. Nature Cell Biology, 13(9), 1076–1083.
Luciana, M. (2010, February). Adolescent brain development: Current themes and future
directions. Brain and Cognition, 72(1), 1–5.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2002). The life and death
of a neuron. Retrieved from http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/brain_basics/
ninds_neuron.htm
Neuroskeptic. (2009, July 17). Antidepressants and neurogenesis in humans [Blog].
Retrieved from http://neuroskeptic.blogspot.com/2009/07/antidepressants-and-
neurogenesis-in.html
Nowakowski, R. S. (2006, August 15). Stable neuron numbers from cradle to grave.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(33), 12219–12220.
Nowakowski, R. S., & Hayes, N. L. (2000, May 5). New neurons: Extraordinary evidence
or extraordinary conclusion. Science, 288, 771a.
Rakic, P. (1985, March 1). Limits of neurogenesis in primates. Science, 227, 1054–1056.
Rakic, P. (2002a, January). Neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex: An evaluation of
the evidence. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 65–71.
Rakic, P. (2002b, February). Adult neurogenesis in mammals: An identity crisis. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 22(3), 614–618.
Rakic, P. (2002c). Neurogenesis in adult primates. In M. A. Hofman, G. J. Boer,
A. J. G. D. Holtmaat, E. J. W. Van Someren, J. Verhaagen, & D. F. Swaab (Eds.),
Progress in brain research (Vol. 138; pp. 3–14). Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier Science.
Rakic, P. (2006, August 18). No more cortical neurons for you. Science, 313, 928–929.
Rattue, G. (2011, August 12). Ridding brain of dead cells and creating new ones, How
it’s done discovered. Medical News Today. Retrieved from http://www.medicalnews
today.com/articles/232685.php
Raviola, E. (2006, November 16). A complex mind. Review of Paolo Mazzarello, Il nobel
dimenticato: La vita e la scienza di Camillo Golgi. Nature, 444, 273.
Roy, N. S., Wang, S., Jiang, L., Kang, J., Benriass, A., Harrison-Restelli, C., et al. (2000,
March). In vitro neurogenesis by progenitor cells isolated from the adult human
hippocampus. Nature Medicine, 6(3), 271–277.
Schiermeier, Q. (2012, July 9). Arsenic-loving bacterium needs phosphorus after all.
Nature. doi: 10.1038/nature.2012.10971. Retrieved from http://www.nature.com/
news/arsenic-loving-bacterium-needs-phosphorus-after-all-1.10971
140
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Shankle, W. R., Landing, B. H., Rafil, M. S., Schiano, A., Chen, J. M., & Hara, J. (1998).
Evidence for a postnatal doubling of neuron numbers in the developing human
cerebral cortex between 15 months and 6 years. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 191,
115–140.
Sierra, A., Encinas, J. M., & Maletic-Savatic, M. (2011, April 4). Adult human neuro-
genesis: From microscopy to magnetic resonance imaging. Frontiers in Neuroscience,
5(47). Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3075882/
UVAToday. (2011, August 10). U.Va. research helps explain how the adult brain cleans
out dead cells and produces new ones. Retrieved from http://news.virginia.edu/
content/uva-research-helps-explain-how-adult-brain-cleans-out-dead-cells
Watts, C., McConkey, H., Anderson, L., & Caldwell, M. (2005, September). Anatomical
perspectives on adult neural stem cells. Journal of Anatomy, 207(3), 197–208.
Wikipedia. (2012). Neurogenesis. Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Neurogenesis
Yong, E. (2006, December 7). No new brain cells for you—Settling the neurogenesis
debate. Not Exactly Rocket Science [Blog]. Retrieved from http://notexactlyrocket
science.wordpress.com/2006/12/07/no-new-brain-cells-for-you-settling-the-
neurogenesis-debate/
CONTROVERSIES ON THE WEB
/
141

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 8
Radiolab and Parasites:
Podcasting Horror and Wonder
to Foster Interest in Science
Sarah Wardlaw
ABSTRACT
Podcasts—digital media content you can download from the Internet—offer
a novel means to communicate science. Radiolab, a one-hour radio broadcast
from WYNC and NPR that is available online, employs creative narrative to
communicate science to a general public. Episodes organize around a theme
and loosely address scientific questions with an interdisciplinary approach.
Thus far, the majority of rhetorical analyses regarding science popular-
izations have been limited to textual works. This chapter will evaluate the
strategies used to popularize science in text versus podcast by comparing
the popular science book Parasite Rex (Zimmer, 2000) to Radiolab’s episode
Parasites (2009b). I find that both sources employ strategies articulated by
Fahnestock (1986) and Myers (1990), including wonder appeal and
narratives of nature. However, Radiolab’s audio production privileges
emotional appeals to horror and wonder over scientific content to make the
case for parasites and invoke curiosity. Listener feedback left on Radiolab’s
blog supports the success of emotional appeals to generate interest in science.
These findings complicate foundational works in the rhetoric of science by
challenging the idea that science popularizations primarily exist to relay
factual scientific information to its audience.
In his 2008 commencement speech at the California Institute of Technology,
Robert Krulwich, science reporter, urges pending graduates to discuss science
with nonscientists. Krulwich makes the case that “scientists need to tell stories
about science because science stories have to compete with other stories about
143

how the universe works and how the universe came to be.” Krulwich claims
that scientific narratives can tell stories about nature that, while still true and
complicated, can awe, excite, and draw people in. Krulwich’s call for compelling
scientific narratives is reflected in the program he co-hosts, Radiolab.
Radiolab, a one-hour radio broadcast from WNYC and NPR, embraces a
narrative structure meant to invoke curiosity and inspire a general audience.
Producers describe Radiolab as a show “where sound illuminates ideas, and the
boundaries blur between science, philosophy, and human experience” (Radiolab,
2013). While each episode is organized around a theme that explores scientific
and philosophical questions, this content is not bounded by any single
discipline at a given time. Radiolab’s hosts, Jad Abumrad and Robert Krulwich,
engage a given theme with scientists, doctors, science writers, and journalists, and
also members of the public who present unique perspectives or experiences.
Episodes, in addition to 5- to 30-minute shorts, are available online at their
website for download via podcast and are played on local radio stations all over
the country.
Radiolab provides an interesting opportunity to evaluate scientific narratives
in the digital age. Radiolab revitalizes an old media format, radio, via a new
technology, podcasting, to foster interest in science. While work in the rhetoric
of science, including foundational publications by Fahnestock (1986) and Myers
(1990), has addressed strategies to popularize science, these analyses are
restricted to textual works. Myers (2003) addressed the problems in establishing
boundaries for what constitutes popularization and assumptions regarding the
purpose of science popularization. He also notes that few analyses consider
modes of communication beyond words. My examination of an episode of
Radiolab and its reception will use the rhetorical framework provided by
Fahnestock and Myers to consider how audio communication and digital
distribution affect the popularization of science as distinct from textual works.
I will first compare a segment entitled “In Defense of Cheats” from Radiolab’s
Parasites (2009b) episode to Carl Zimmer’s popular science book Parasite Rex
(2000). The Radiolab segment is directly inspired by Zimmer’s book, and
even has had Zimmer on as a guest, thus this comparison will provide a means
to access the unique features of audio communication. To address the listeners’
response to the episode, I will examine comments left at Radiolab’s website.
I find that Radiolab’s primary purpose is invoking a feeling over conveying
accurate scientific information by appealing to its listeners’ emotions. Radiolab’s
audio environment reinforces stories that emotionally resonate. While Radiolab
still uses strategies discussed by Fahenstock (1986) and Myers (1990), such as
wonder appeal and a narrative of nature, its emotional appeals complicate their
analyses of textual scientific popularization by challenging the idea that the
sole purpose of a scientific popularization is to impart knowledge.
Since Radiolab is a radio broadcast and podcast, its discussion first requires
a meditation on what distinguishes radio from podcast and how the features of
144
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

each might benefit science communication. Berry (2006) discusses the innovation
of podcasting as possibly revolutionizing radio. While both podcasts and radio
broadcasts consist of audio content, are freely available, are commonly listened to
in solitude, and travel with us, commercial radio has become predictable and
familiar in its attempt for mass appeal and advertisement sales. Podcasting
presents the opportunity to explore and create new kinds of content that will
appeal to niche audiences. Since the technology to produce and subscribe to
podcasts is free, anyone can create and distribute a podcast. Berry notes that even
large corporate broadcasters, such as BBC and NPR, have embraced podcasters to
reach new and younger audiences. Though podcasts have been a growing cultural
trend since 2004, they have not usurped the role of traditional radio broadcast.
Edison Research’s 2012 national phone survey shows that 45% of people are
familiar with the term “podcast,” compared to 22% in 2006, and that 29% of
people have listened to an audio podcast, compared to 11% in 2006. However,
Arbitron’s March 2012 RADAR 112 National Radio Listening Report shows that
radio listening remains strong, with 93% of the population listening to radio at
least once a week. While podcasts have not replaced traditional radio broadcasts,
they have reinvigorated the medium and given listeners even more ways to
connect to audio content.
Audio content, regardless of distribution, poses its own advantages to com-
munication. Reports indicate that the structural features of sound can foster
increased engagement with the material at hand. Potter and Choi (2006) find
that when radio messages are more complex, containing more voice changes,
production effects, sound effects, and music onsets, their subjects report more
arousal, attention, and can recall more features of the message. Rodero (2010)
finds that when sound effects and sound “shots,” environmental information
connoting distance, are added to a radio story, subjects pay more attention to
the story and experience more mental imagery. These reports demonstrate that
listening to audio content is an active process and that the listener becomes
more mentally engaged with increasingly complex auditory information. These
features of sound would certainly benefit science communication by holding
an audience’s attention and making the content more memorable.
How listeners consume scientific information may prove just as important as
the information itself. Due to wireless technology, podcasts can now be accessed
remotely on mobile devices and listened to at any time. Listeners are freed from
the constraints of scheduled programming and can listen on their terms.
As a result, podcasts are often consumed when people are involved in other
activities, like exercising or commuting. MacDougall (2011) entertains the idea
that listening to content while mobile changes how we interact with the material.
MacDougall postulates that listening to podcasts while out in the world and
wearing headphones creates a highly personalized auditory zone where visual
perception serves as a backdrop. This visual perception can integrate auditory
information in complicated ways, serving not just as a reminder of what a listener
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
145

heard, but also informing how ideas get applied to their world. Listening to
scientific narratives while mobile might invite listeners to become more curious
about their surrounding environment and perpetuate the act of questioning and
investigation.
Podcasts also harbor the potential for making science more approachable to
the public. Picardi and Regina (2008) have discussed that the specialization of
podcasts is well suited for science communication. Podcasts can tailor
information to different audiences, thus listeners can find scientific material that
suits their varied interests. Furthermore, since podcasts are simple to produce and
distribute, there are several instances of researchers, concerned for the public’s
awareness of science, embracing digital media as a means to discuss and critique
research projects within their fields. Picardi and Regina specifically call out This
Week in Science, The Naked Scientists, and Scientificast as examples of
scientists reaching out to the public via podcast. More than scientists talking
at people, podcasts can play a crucial role in providing the space for open
communication about science. Picardi and Regina posit that rather than passively
passing information along, podcasts create interactive dialogues by encouraging
participation from listeners online in the form of forum posts or blog comments.
Radiolab is able to utilize all of these novel aspects of podcasting while keeping
a traditional radio format.
Radiolab attempts to make radio relevant in the digital age. Radiolab possesses
the resources of a traditional radio broadcast station and also benefits from
the innovation of podcasting. With WYNC and NPR’s resources, Radiolab is
able to employ a full staff to extensively research and edit their episodes, which
are then broadcast nationally. These highly produced episodes reach a larger
audience with the added contribution from digital distribution. In 2011, Rob
Walker reported in the New York Times that about a million people listen to
Radiolab on air while another 1.8 million listeners download the podcast.
With its solid listener base, Radiolab is free to experiment with scientific
popularization by returning to a traditional form of radio, storytelling.
These stories take place in a rich audio environment in order to hold the
listeners’ attention, while Radiolab’s online presence fosters interaction with
its listeners.
Radiolab’s Parasites episode, released on September 7, 2009, initially invokes
a visceral disgust for parasites only to later instill wonder and admiration for
their complexity. The tension between disgust and wonder for parasites is articu-
lated as a debate between Carl Zimmer, a popular science writer, and Radiolab’s
hosts. Zimmer attempts to convince Abumrad and Krulwich that parasites are
impressive creatures worthy of appreciation by telling stories about them. When
comparing Radiolab’s Parasites (2009b) to Carl Zimmer’s book Parasite Rex
(2000), I find that both utilize the strategies articulated by Fahenstock (1986) and
Myers (1990) in making scientific content accessible to a general audience.
However, this comparison also reveals that Radiolab consistently deemphasizes a
146
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

rational engagement with the episode’s content and instead relies on inciting
an emotional response to foster interest in science.
In “Accommodating Science,” Fahnestock (1986) observes that accommoda-
tions of science reports for a general audience employ an epideictic discourse
that judges whether science deserves praise or blame. Both Parasites (2009b)
and Parasite Rex (2000) judge whether parasites deserve our interest, though
“In Defense of Cheats” (2009a) is more explicit in framing the segment as
a trial. However, to sell parasites, they first acknowledge how parasites are
commonly perceived.
In Parasites (2009b), Jad Abumrad introduces the topic of parasites by
exploring a typical visceral reaction to the idea. He introduces Robert Krulwich
to the scene in Alien, where an alien larva suddenly bursts out of a man. Listeners
hear Krulwich exclaim in horror as the scene progresses. In defining this
horror, Abumrad speculates, “It’s not that the little creature is disgusting . . .
it’s that it was there all along.” Abumrad describes parasites as “little creatures
that live inside us” that are “wiggling around and doing more or less what
that alien was doing and I can’t even see them in you.” Part of what scares
us about parasites is their otherness, like an alien, co-inhabiting our bodies
and escaping our notice.
By contrast, in Parasite Rex (2000), Zimmer rationally approaches the
common prejudices against parasites by explaining their historical origins,
comparing the Victorian notion of parasites as weak degenerates to the more
modern notion of parasites as a horrific evil. Zimmer first cites Ray Lankester,
a nineteenth-century zoologist who argued that parasites, by depending on
others to live, are devolved; they drop out of the tree of life in order to simplify.
Zimmer then explores how modern science fiction has cultured a horror of
parasites by reflecting on the significance of the fear of parasites depicted
in science fiction:
But all these works do have something in common: they play on a universal,
deep-seated fear of parasites. This horror is new, and for that reason it’s
interesting. There was a time when parasites were treated with contempt,
when they stood for the undesirable, weak elements of society that got in
the way of its progress. Now the parasites have gone from weak to strong,
and now fear has replaced contempt. (p. 116)
Zimmer articulates that science fiction focuses on the control parasites exercise
over their host to inspire “not just a fear of being killed; it’s a fear of being
controlled from within by something other than our own mind, being used
for something else’s end” (Zimmer, 2000, p. 116). We see parasites as evil
because of the calculating manipulation they exert over their hosts. Our fear of
being controlled in such a fashion cements parasites as evil others.
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
147

Both Radiolab’s Parasites (2009b) and Parasite Rex (2000) recognize that
we might have a cultural aversion to parasites. Radiolab explores this aversion
by actually experiencing the horror with us, while Zimmer instead explains
the horror in Parasite Rex. Radiolab continues to abandon reason “In Defense
of Cheats” (2009a) when characterizing the debate.
In the segment, Zimmer serves as a “lawyer” and “defender” for parasites to
argue that parasites are not degenerate. Radiolab frames this trial as “Parasites:
Are they evil or are they awesome?” which actually involves the interaction
of two different arguments: parasites as degenerate and worthy of contempt and
parasites as evil and worthy of fear. While in Parasite Rex, Zimmer (2000)
distinguishes the Victorian idea of parasites as degenerates from the modern
notion of parasites as evil, Radiolab does not make the distinction clear and
melds the two into a debate that makes no sense. Framing parasites’ worth as a
debate serves to foment drama and captures the listener’s attention. The precise
issue being debated is less important than the fact that there is a controversy to
witness. Historical distinctions between arguments that parasites are degener-
ates or evil are not necessary to the development of that emotional response,
so the two arguments can be merged without loss of audience interest.
Fahnestock (1986) distinguishes two kinds of appeals used in praising
science: a “wonder appeal” and an “application appeal.” Both Parasites (2009b)
and Parasite Rex (2000) make the case for parasites by appealing to wonder
and telling stories about parasites to bring creatures that are generally invisible,
unappreciated, and misunderstood into focus. Their narratives are consistent
with Myers’ (1990) observation that science popularizations tend to focus on
narratives of nature, where “the plant or animal, not the scientific activity, is
the subject.” Zimmer tells similar stories in “In Defense of Cheats” (2009a) and
Parasite Rex to make the case for parasites, ultimately anthropomorphizing
parasites. However, the audio production in the Radiolab segment privileges
emotional tone over scientific fact.
When Zimmer describes the parasitic wasp in Parasites (2009b), he illuminates
the skill involved in parasites’ survival strategies. The parasitic wasp demon-
strates calculated use of a host by first hijacking the nervous system and then
using its body as a food reserve for its young. The Radiolab segment dwells on
the host’s experience, thus continuing to inspire horror and disgust for parasites.
Our pity for the cockroach host is pitted against admiration of the parasitic
wasp. Lulu Miller, a Radiolab producer, helps tell the story with Zimmer. Her
contribution invokes sympathy for the cockroach, introducing the cockroach
character by telling listeners, “for those of you that never thought you’d feel
sorry for a cockroach, keep listening.” When the cockroach has lost its fight
with the parasitic wasp and “lost its will,” Miller provides the cockroach’s
voice, providing the thought “I’m awake, but can’t move.” In effect, the parasitic
wasp turns the cockroach into its “puppet,” recalling the science fiction horror
of being controlled from within. Radiolab emphasizes this puppet imagery by
148
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

playing circus-like music after the cockroach is attacked. As a puppet with no
will of its own, the cockroach has no choice but to be led and kept as food. It is
kept alive long enough for the larvae to grow to adulthood and leave their host.
Abumrad reacts to this anecdote as “the purest description in nature of evil that
I can imagine” and empathizes with the cockroach’s experience in its plight.
In contrast, Zimmer offers admiration in the segment for the skill required in
the parasitic wasp’s hijack. Zimmer emphasizes the precision required for the
parasitic wasp to “insert its stinger into one specific part of the cockroach’s brain
and inject a precise little cocktail of drugs that then turns the cockroach into its
slave.” He makes the comparison to human skill with his comment, “I know
that the wasp didn’t get a PhD in neurobiology.” Miller agrees the parasite’s
attack is “a kind of brain surgery.” The metaphor of the parasite’s attack as a
complex experimental procedure or surgery praises the wasp’s survival strategy
and invites the comparison to a human expert. Zimmer’s observation of the
wasp’s technical skill acknowledges the extensive training a human would
require to master such a precise manipulation and yet the parasitic wasp requires
no training. Zimmer states, “There’s a complexity there that you can’t deny.”
In Parasite Rex (2000), Zimmer solely focuses on the parasitic wasp’s com-
plexity rather than belaboring a comparison to evil. He uses the parasitic wasp
story as evidence that parasites are not degenerates but clever survivors. While
Zimmer does call their strategy “vicious and unneighborly” (p. 48), he spends
more time illustrating the parasitic wasp’s complexity rather than identifying
with its hosts. When describing the wasp’s infection of a caterpillar, he keeps
the focus on the wasp. He describes, “The wasps keep their host alive for as
long as they need to develop, sparing the vital organs. After a few days or weeks,
the wasp larvae emerge from the caterpillar” (p. 48). This explanation illuminates
the cleverness of the wasp in precisely utilizing the caterpillar to benefit the
developing larvae instead of invoking sympathy for the caterpillar host. His
descriptions also introduce technical language such as the “ovipositor” (p. 48)
when explaining how the parasitic wasp injects its eggs.
For the Radiolab segment, Zimmer must make an appeal beyond complexity
to build the case for why parasites should be appreciated. Anthropomorphizing
parasites allows Zimmer to instill wonder by appealing to their skill but also
casts parasites as evil by bringing their actions into the human realm and
inspiring horror. Zimmer must empathize with parasites to balance the horror
they inspire. While Zimmer tells the same story of blood flukes in Parasites
(2009b) and Parasite Rex (2000), his book continues to focus on the complexity
of the parasite, while the Radiolab segment romanticizes blood flukes, serving
as contrast to the horrific first impression of parasites.
Romanticizing blood flukes is an impressive feat, since they are parasites that
target humans. Parasites’ (2009b) story focuses on blood flukes’ journey to find
and stay with a mate and deemphasizes the host’s experience. Once blood flukes
find each other in a human, they physically attach and stay together. Zimmer
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
149

describes their mating as “monogamous and loyal . . . animals to reinforce your
family values” in the segment. This arrangement extends beyond a single repro-
duction event, as the blood flukes will stay attached for decades.
As bizarre as the blood fluke’s arrangement is, Radiolab utilizes sound and
music to pacify its listeners at the thought of blood fluke companionship in the
human circulatory system. The story begins with a gentle overlay of water
moving and it ends with calm music. The last thing Zimmer says before the
music begins is “It’s heaven. I mean, you’re going to spend the rest of your
life together.” Perhaps because of the description of “heaven,” the music almost
feels ethereal and awe inspiring, signaling to the listener that blood fluke com-
panionship is a phenomenon worthy of wonder. We are sympathetic for the
creatures that have struggled to find their mate and relieved at the calm when
their search ends. The blood flukes narrative makes an emotional appeal, bringing
the hosts to actually feel sympathy for the parasites. The segment romanticizes
blood flukes to such a degree that they are referred back to later in the episode
as “pretty nice” and “good.”
In Parasite Rex (2000), Zimmer gives much more detail about blood flukes,
including their scientific name, how they sense their environment, and how they
enter and survive in their human hosts. These details emphasize the struggle
blood flukes face and illuminate the differences between blood flukes and the
listener rather than romanticizing them. In entering the skin, the blood fluke
loses its tail. Once it makes its way to the capillaries, it must “use a pair of suckers
to inch forward” as the capillaries are “barely wider than the blood fluke itself”
(p. 25). Even after the blood fluke gets past the capillaries, it is faced with the
challenge of “a torrent of blood so powerful it carries the fluke away” (p. 25)
and then must endure the “perpetual menace and attack” from the human immune
system (p. 56). The blood fluke’s journey in Radiolab (2009b), in contrast,
sounds like a leisurely water park attraction. Once the blood flukes find each
other in the human circulatory system, Zimmer’s discussion of their companion-
ship is more grotesque than romanticized. He comments, “They may be the
most monogamous couples in the animal kingdom,” as he mentions in Radiolab,
but then continues to elaborate that “a male will clasp onto its female even after
she has died” (Zimmer, 2000, p. 25). Zimmer builds a case for blood flukes by
emphasizing their bizarre biology that is so fascinatingly complicated, yet distinct
from us. If Radiolab had emphasized the blood fluke’s struggle to enter the
human host, it would distract from our sympathetic identification with it. The
blood fluke faces challenges foreign to the listeners and poses solutions even
more alien. As a result of focusing on the struggle of finding a mate rather than
the struggle of entering the host, Radiolab keeps the focus of the blood flukes on
their monogamy, not their lives as parasites.
While music and sound contribute to the emotional states integral to the
parasites’ stories, the informal dialogue structure reinforces the story by holding
the listener’s attention and signaling that the material is interesting. In Parasite
150
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Rex (2000), Zimmer mostly speaks in his own voice, but can quote others
to provide information or reinforce a point. In contrast, Radiolab provides
a parasite’s narrative with many voices. “In Defense of Cheats” (2009a) is
produced such that Carl Zimmer’s telling is interwoven with producer
Lulu Miller’s version. They do not directly speak or respond to each other,
but the segment is produced such that they finish each other’s sentences. In
Parasites (2009b), Zimmer and Miller set up the entry of the blood fluke into
the human host thusly:
ZIMMER: Blood flukes are related to flatworms, tapeworms, so their eggs
start out in the water. Fresh water in Africa, Asia, parts of South America . . .
MILLER: And in the first part of their life they go into a snail and they
come back out into the water.
ZIMMER: And they’re swimming around and they start looking for a human.
KRULWICH: So imagine a foot going into the shallow end of the pond.
I see toes, I see bottom of feet, I see ankle.
ZIMMER: Well, if you’re a blood fluke, you don’t see anything. You don’t
have any eyes.
KRULWICH: Oh, sorry.
MILLER: But eventually you find a foot, secrete a little enzyme . . .
ZIMMER: Basically turn a little bit of skin into butter.
ABUMRAD: Ah.
ZIMMER: And you slip into the vein and now you’re going to swim my
circulatory system. You’re going to ride along in the blood. And now it’s
time to find a mate.
Both Zimmer and Miller are important as speakers since they convey the
information about blood flukes. Having two speakers, one an expert and the
other a member of the Radiolab production team, suggests the accessibility of
the material. Even though Miller is not an expert, she fully understands and is
engaged in the blood fluke narrative. Alternating the speaker of the story gives
the sense of telling and retelling. Not only are the stories repeated by multiple
voices, but the different perspectives vary the stories such that the listener’s
attention is constantly shifting. Retelling also suggests that this story is interesting
enough to be worth repeating.
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
151

Abumrad and Krulrich, as the audience to the story of blood flukes, provide
voices that directly interact with the speaker and the content of the narratives.
They interject to react, clarify, and question. Their ready interruption of the stories
offered by Zimmer and Miller creates the impression of a casual conversation.
Their interest in the topic is apparent in their dynamic exchanges. Abumrad and
Krulwich are excited, inviting the listener’s interest and excitement. Even a
comment as simple as Abumrad’s noncommittal “Ah” is an important contribution
to the dialogue, ensuring that the audience is following, understanding, and
responding to the story. Unlike Lulu Miller, they do speak to Zimmer and often
influence the shape of the story told. In the cited exchange from the blood fluke
narrative, Krulwich interjects with what he envisions as the blood fluke’s
perspective. While Zimmer politely corrects the scientific fact that blood flukes
have no eyes, Krulwich shapes how Zimmer and even Miller refer back to the blood
fluke. Miller repeats that “you find a foot” and Zimmer repeats that “you slip into
the vein,” so the blood fluke’s perspective becomes the listener’s perspective.
The blood fluke narrative moves Radiolab’s cohosts from an initial negative
preconception of parasites to an idealized and romantic image of parasites. In
this process, parasites are metaphorically granted an emotional life of committed
pair-bonding. The debate concludes that parasites are both evil and awesome,
often inspiring awe because of the horrifying measures they will go to in order
to ensure their survival. Abumrad and Krulwich, as nonexperts with a common
emotional aversion to parasites, represent how a general audience might react to
these narratives. Using a narrative of nature and appealing to values held by the
listeners allows Zimmer to instill an appreciation for parasites in both Parasite
Rex (2000) and Parasites (2009b). Myers (1990) explores why the public under-
stands narratives of nature over narratives of science by considering that the per-
spective of nature “minimizes expertise and emphasizes the unmediated encounter”
while also bringing scientific knowledge to the “realm of common sense.” Radiolab
makes a case for parasites not through scientific evidence but by appealing to the
stories parasites can tell. The stories bring parasites to the “realm of common
sense” through anthropomorphism so that, in feeling for the parasites, the listener
can appreciate them. The audio production in this story reinforces the emotional tone
of both horror and awe. To evaluate whether listeners actually end up appreci-
ating parasites by the end of the episode, we can turn to their online feedback.
As digital media delivered online, Radiolab episodes present opportunities for
producers to interact with listeners, for listeners to interact with content, and for
listeners to interact with each other. On Radiolab’s website, listeners can
immediately access any episode or short for free, peruse the blog, and post
comments. In evaluating how well Radiolab persuades its listeners to appreciate
parasites using emotional appeals, I turned to the comments left on the episode at
Radiolab’s website.
At the time of analysis, there were 148 comments: 136 on the page for the
entire episode and 12 comments specifically on the page for the “In Defense of
152
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Cheats” segment. Most often, listeners post to express approval (32 comments),
offer more information related to the episode (18 comments), or ask about the
music (11 comments). Some listeners use the website to post new thoughts
inspired by the episode (10 comments). There are four instances of producers
directly responding to listener comments, though this was shortly after the
episode was released. If there is interaction among comments, most often
it is a listener responding to another listener (11 comments). Seven of these
listener-to-listener comments pertain to a debate over the meaning of theory,
as the colloquial and not scientific meaning of theory was used on the episode.
Four listeners mention discussing the episode with other people. One listener
comments that she “was fascinated” and had been “telling everyone about the
intelligent, brain surgeon wasp and the loving worm all week.”
Not all listeners felt positively about the episode, as there were a handful of
comments expressing disappointment (5 comments). One particular review does
not take well to Radiolab’s production techniques, commenting, “good facts-
presentation techniques very annoying—too cute . . . the presentation methods
have become more important than scientific information.” While there were
three comments critiquing the production, six actually praised the level of
production. One comment goes as far to say that the production helped them
follow the material, commenting, “I liked how the producers were able to add
sound effects to the talking . . . that helped me pay attention.”
Two classes were assigned to listen to the podcast and leave comments on
the website. These 27 responses prove helpful since the instructors prompted their
students to write more than whether they enjoyed the episode or not. A total of
17 of the comments were from a class of unknown age and location during
October of 2009. These students were asked to provide a summary of the episode,
describe what they learned, and explain how they reacted. Of the student
comments, 10 were from students in a class from Madrid, Spain (which one
student suggests are in their teens) during September of 2012. They were asked to
list five facts that they learned from the podcast, what surprised them about the
episode, and what they would like to learn more about.
The comments from Madrid mostly reiterate talking points from the episode.
When listing facts, these students are most likely to pull phrasing directly from
the episode compared to the students asked to provide a general summary.
Two students used Zimmer’s phrasing of “turn a little bit of skin into butter” word
for word to describe how the blood fluke enters its human host. Three students
were especially intrigued by the account of the parasitic wasp and interested in
learning more about the science behind how it is able to neurologically control the
cockroach. Very few of the Madrid comments remark on an emotional reaction
to the episode beyond surprise in the information about parasites. One student
is particularly sympathetic for the host cockroach, remarking, “I felt really sad
that the cockroach, after being stung, cannot even lead a normal life until the
wasp eggs that were laid in it grow and develop and then it dies.”
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
153

Perhaps because of the nature of their prompts, the class assigned to listen in
October 2009 discusses what they thought about the episode rather than simply
relaying facts they learned. When providing a summary, most students described
a “debate” or “argument” (16 comments) to determine the value of parasites.
Surprisingly, only one student frames this decision as the choice between “evil
or awesome,” reporting the dichotomy in quotations as if to create distance
from the strange dichotomy. Instead, more than half of the students report the
deliberation as concerning parasites as “good or bad” or having “positive or
negative effects.” When forced to explain what was going on in the episode,
students choose a rational dichotomy rather than Radiolab’s irrational one.
An overwhelming amount of students (12 of the 17) comment that they found
the podcast to be surprisingly interesting. They frame this surprise by noting
that they expected an hour-long episode on parasites to be “extremely boring”
or “the most disgusting and appalling thing I had ever listened to.” Many
of the students express their complicated feelings of both awe and disgust
in reaction to parasites. Regarding blood flukes, one student cites that she was
both “amazed and scared.” Another student notes that he was “intrigued and
disgusted by this podcast.” Yet another student states, “I thought it was creepy,
but I was intrigued as well.”
Some students note the value in the information they learned, as one student
notes, “I don’t think many people realize what parasites are capable of doing,
even what parasites are. After listening to this podcast I think people should
be more educated on parasites and their ability.” Another student also com-
ments, “It gave great information about parasites which would be hard to find in
many other places.” However, most students stress how they felt after listening.
These student reactions are paralleled by some of the other unprompted
comments. Nine of the unprompted comments also express disgust or fear,
including “the idea of these things being anywhere and possibly everywhere is
creepy and exciting at the same time.”
Radiolab’s emphasis of both the horror and wonder that parasites inspire seems
to be successful in capturing most listeners’ interest, though there are some
exceptions. Many comments reiterate feeling disgust and fear yet also surprise
and interest in learning about parasites. Many listeners also seem to take notice
of Radiolab’s production efforts, especially when it comes to music. Radiolab’s
level of audio production does appear to make the content memorable, as the
listeners asked to recall facts from the episode repeated phrases word for word.
The online comments also show that some listeners are taking advantage of
the online platform to interact with others by sharing information and asking
questions, though a given listener is more likely to comment whether or not they
liked the episode than interact with another listener via comments.
Robert Krulwich’s call to tell compelling stories about science to captivate an
audience is answered in Radiolab. Radiolab is not just concerned with educating
the public about science; it also uses emotional appeals to excite its listeners and
154
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

generate interest in science. Existing rhetorical analyses of scientific popular-
izations provide a useful framework but are limited to information discussed in
print. While Radiolab does employ strategies similar to textual popularizations,
such as appealing to the wonder of science and telling narratives of nature,
communication via podcast allows novel appeals to emotion, utilizing audio
production to reinforce its emotional content and digital distribution to reach
a greater audience.
The Parasites (2009b) episode is certainly an extreme case in how emotions
inform narrative content since Radiolab must tackle what most people already
feel about parasites, yet its other episodes consistently prioritize inciting curiosity
and excitement while telling stories related to science. Many science popular-
izations, such as Parasite Rex (2000), focus on getting its audience excited about
the scientific content at hand by making information accessible, understandable,
and relatable. When comparing Parasites to Parasite Rex, I find that Radiolab
often distances itself from scientific accuracy for the sake of its emotional
message. Perhaps because of its format as podcast, which encourages inno-
vation, Radiolab has the freedom to explore a less typical means of connecting
with science: deemphasizing scientific content. Radiolab’s approach challenges
previous assumptions that the sole purpose of a science popularization is to relay
factual information. Radiolab instead connects to its audience on a very funda-
mental level by telling a compelling story that emotionally grabs its listeners.
Using the comments on Radiolab’s website as a limited sample to understand
the reception of Parasites (2000), I find that Radiolab’s emotional approach is
mostly supported by its listeners. While some listeners utilize these comments
to interact with each other and producers, the majority of comments generally
pertain to the episode itself. In the report “Podologues: Conversations Created by
Science Podcasts,” Birch and Weitkamp (2010) directly assess the assumption
that podcasts inherently foster interactive, online dialogues by tracking online
communication about science podcasts for 6 weeks and following the listening
habits of a recruited group. Regarding WNYC’s Radiolab, Birch and Weitkamp
find that users usually only posted a single comment on Radiolab’s blog and
that these comments were mostly in response to the podcast itself and rarely
interacted with other comments. Their finding is consistent with what I found
with regard to the Parasites comments.
When Birch and Weitkamp (2010) interviewed their recruited group, they
found that interviewees generally listened to podcasts while they were doing
something else and rarely contributed to online blogs and forums, even though
they were aware of their existence. Interviewees did comment that they valued
the new information they learned from science podcasts and were likely to share
with friends and family. Birch and Weitkamp’s findings challenge the idea that
because podcasts are available online it follows that listeners will interact within
an online community. Their interviews suggest that perhaps because of how
podcasts are being consumed, as people go about their lives performing other
RADIOLAB AND PARASITES
/
155

activities, listeners are connecting to podcasts in a way that encourages them
to talk to people who are in their world versus online.
My reception study has no means of accessing the listeners that are more
inclined to share the episode with people they know rather than online, though
there are a few online comments that mention sharing what they learned with
co-workers, friends, and family. Given my findings that Radiolab fosters
an emotional connection to stories about science, I would next question how
listening to podcasts (everywhere and any time) affects how listeners relate to
and interact with scientific content.
REFERENCES
Arbitron. (2012). Radio’s audience remains steady over the past year. Retrieved from
http://arbitron.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=808
Berry, R. (2006). Will the iPod kill the radio star? Profiling podcasting as radio.
Convergence, 12(2), 143–162. doi: 10.1177/1354856506066522
Birch, H., & Weitkamp, E. (2010). Podologues: Conversations created by science pod-
casts. New Media & Society. doi: 10.1177/1461444809356333
Edison Research. (2012). The podcast consumer 2012. Retrieved from http://www.
edisonresearch.com/home/archives/2012/05/the-podcast-consumer-2012.php
Fahnestock, J. (1986). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific facts.
Written Communication, 3(3), 275–296.
Krulwich, R. (2008, June). Commencement speech. California Institute of Technology.
Pasadena, CA. Retrieved from http://www.radiolab.org/blogs/radiolab-blog/
2008/jul/29/tell-me-astory/
MacDougall, R. (2011). Podcasting and political life. American Behavioral Scientist,
55(6) 714–732. doi: 10.1177/0002764211406083
Myers, G. (1990). Writing biology: Texts in the social construction of scientific knowledge
science and literature series. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Myers, G. (2003). Discourse studies of science popularization: Questioning the
boundaries. Discourse Studies, 5, 265–279. doi: 10.1177/1461445603005002006
Picardi, I., & Regina, S. (2008). Science via podcast. Journal of Science Communication, 7(2).
Potter, R., & Choi, J. (2006). The effects of auditory structural complexity on attitudes,
attention, arousal and memory. Media Psychology, 8, 395–419.
Radiolab. (2009a, September 7). In defense of cheats. Retrieved from http://www.radiolab.
org/2009/sep/07/in-defense-of-cheats/
Radiolab. (2009b, September 7). Parasites. Retrieved from http://www.radiolab.org/
2009/sep/07/
Radiolab. (2013). About. Retrieved from http://www.radiolab.org/about/
Rodero, E. (2010). See it on a radio story: Sound effects and shots to evoked
imagery and attention on audio fiction. Communication Research, 39(4), 458–479.
doi: 10.1177/0093650210386947
Walker, R. (2011). On “Radiolab,” the sound of science. Retrieved from http://www.
nytimes.com/2011/04/10/magazine/mag-10Radiolab-t.html?pagewanted=all
Zimmer, C. (2000). Parasite rex. New York, NY: Free Press.
156
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 9
Online Visualizations of
Natural Disasters and Hazards:
The Rhetorical Dynamics of
Charting Risk
Charles Kostelnick and John Kostelnick
ABSTRACT
Scientific organizations, government agencies, and private companies are
increasingly visualizing data about earth sciences (geography, geology,
meteorology) on the Internet in the form of charts, graphs, and thematic
maps. These displays visualize natural disasters and hazards—from hurri-
canes and earthquakes to fires, floods, and asteroids—in several temporal
modes (past, present, and future) and often include interactive features that
enable users to participate in their design and to assess risk to life and
property. The displays have both forensic and deliberative elements, pro-
viding the evidence for arguments and the impetus for decision-making.
Because natural disasters have huge potential consequences for users, kairos
and emotional appeals also play key roles in the rhetorical process. Also,
the certainty of predicting these events can be problematic, complicating
their visualization and raising ethical issues for designers and users.
INTRODUCTION
In the past few decades, data about earth sciences—including geography, geology,
hydrology, climatology, and meteorology—and associated natural disasters have
increasingly been visualized on the Internet, making data available to the public in
the form of interactive maps, charts, lists, and animations. In most cases, users can
organize and articulate the data according to their needs and interests, enabling
them both to see the big picture—across their state, nation, or planet—and to
157

localize the visualization in their own neighborhoods. In doing so, the public can
visualize natural phenomena that continue to shape the planet—and the ways that
we inhabit it—by posing risks that range from minor nuisances (sleet that
lengthens
a
morning
commute)
to
devastating
hurricanes,
tornados,
and earthquakes that may seriously jeopardize life and property.
The contemporary world poses a wide array of risks, many of them pro-
duced by human activity such as the consumption of processed foods, defects
in vehicles or equipment, or the consequences of polluting the environment
through chemicals, fossil fuels, or mining. Natural phenomena, however, also
continue to pose major risks around the globe, where population growth increases
our vulnerability and multiplies the risk. For example, over half of the world’s
seven billion people now live in urban areas, many of them in coastal cities,
subjecting these people to risk for hazards such as hurricanes, coastal flooding, or
tsunamis. Until recently, human vulnerability to natural disasters was extreme,
given the lack of science and technology to predict, plan, mitigate, and prepare
for them. With the advent of the Internet and digital tools for visualizing natural
disasters—those that have occurred and those that might occur—users can learn
about and prepare for events like earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, volcanic erup-
tions, tsunamis, and even asteroid impacts, among others.
In this chapter, we explore how a variety of websites feature online visual-
izations to communicate with large, amorphous audiences by deploying several
data display genres and rhetorical strategies. Although the rhetoric of data
displays, both contemporary and historical, has been analyzed extensively
(Barton & Barton, 1993b; Brasseur, 2003; Kimball, 2006), interactive displays as
a new form of digital rhetoric have received relatively little attention (Kostelnick,
2008; Mirel, 1998). Visualizing science has been examined historically (Gross,
1996), as has communicating risk, particularly in static maps (Monmonier,
1997), but critiques of hazard visualizations delivered over the Internet have
only begun to emerge (e.g., Liu & Palen, 2010; Monmonier, 2008). Moreover,
scholarship has yet to focus on the visual rhetoric of online, interactive displays
of hazard and risk data that are now widely available to the public.
RHETORICAL OVERVIEW OF THREE TEMPORAL MODES
Visualizing risk online entails assessments of data across both narrow and
wide swaths of time, ranging from the far distant past to the distant future:
• Past—looking at historical data to understand hazard events that have
already occurred, ranging from last week to millennia ago.
• Present—considering current conditions through real-time data that track
the progress of an ongoing event.
• Future—extrapolating from past and present data to project risk scenarios
of what might yet happen in a given location.
158
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

In the remainder of this chapter, we use these three temporal modes—past,
present, and future—to organize our visual, scientific, and rhetorical analysis of
earth science visualizations. The usability aspects of these three temporal modes
are very similar in terms of perception (color, scale, animation), interpreting
conventional genres (like thematic maps), and customizing the displays to match
the user’s needs. For example, visualizing information interactively enables
users to adapt the data to their own situations, to move between what Tufte (1990)
calls the “macro” level and the “micro” level, which allow users to see both big
patterns and the smaller, more localized variations within that larger picture (pp.
37–51). However, other rhetorical aspects of the three temporal modes—such as
evidence, arguments, timing, emotional appeals, and ethos—differ considerably
across modes and situations.
Visualizations of the past, for example, largely entail what classical
rhetoricians called “judicial” or “forensic” rhetoric (Aristotle, 2007, pp. 47–48)
because they are designed to supply evidence about what happened, such as
the location of known earthquakes 6.0 or greater on the Richter scale in North
America over the past century. These visualizations of the past may be generated
from data collected by scientific instruments, such as a seismometer, and pre-
sented in a form for users to grasp the spatial and temporal patterns of the disaster.
From a user’s perspective, these visualizations are typically well grounded
in factual information (i.e., what happened, where, and when) and therefore
engender a high level of credibility. Emotionally, users’ interactions with the
data remain distant and subdued because the data are highly sanitized visually
and because the user can vicariously (and safely) experience the devastation of
the disaster without facing any immediate consequences.
Visualizations of the present depict current natural disaster conditions on
the ground through real-time or frequently updated data. Rhetorically, these
visualizations must project kairos, or good timing, because the users’ inter-
actions with the data require urgency as well as accuracy, often at a very local
level. Focusing on the here and now, these visualizations inform users of the
current situation, enabling them to locate specific places they should avoid
or where to exercise caution, such as visualizations depicting severe weather
warnings and watches. These visualizations are crucial instruments for emer-
gency managers and government agencies to warn civilians in times of crisis
and to provide safety information. Users will likely be highly engaged both
perceptually and emotionally: perceptually, because they must make accurate
judgments, often in the context of their own communities; and emotionally,
because, depending on their situation, they may feel threatened and anxious about
the immediate consequences to themselves, empathy for people they know, or
perhaps intense relief for having dodged a disaster.
Finally, visualizations of projected future risk foster what classical rhetori-
cians called “deliberative” rhetoric (Aristotle, 2007, pp. 47–48): by warning
users about what might happen in the future, they induce users to consider actions
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
159

they might take—personal steps as well as public policies and procedures—to
address that risk. Predictive visualizations evoke pathos appeals by engendering
varying degrees of fear and anxiety, and in doing so pose ethical issues for
the data designers, who must walk the fine line between fostering compulsory
vigilance and inducing wasteful prevention. Users are encouraged to assess
the visualized data and scenarios to assess the likelihood that a future disaster
will strike. That assessment entails consideration of geographic and temporal
factors—the probability or likelihood that a hazard event will strike a given
location over a specified time period (e.g., hurricanes in Miami, Florida, in
early fall 2015)—as well as the consequences the hazard poses to populations,
infrastructure, property, and nature itself.
Although the audiences for these groups of visualizations are rarely specified
by the websites in which they appear, we can make some solid inferences
about users.1 Visualizations of the present, due to their timely dissemination of
ongoing events, have broad appeal to virtually anyone in the public who wishes
to stay out of harm’s way during an impending disaster. Such visualizations
may also appeal to more specialized audiences, such as emergency management
officials who rely on real-time information from multiple sources as they
coordinate disaster responses from command centers. Visualizations of the past
may, in addition to a public audience, have specific pedagogical applications for
teaching students about earth science processes or the catastrophic consequences
of natural disasters. In addition to appealing to private citizens, visualizations
of the future may attract forward-thinking urban planners, developers, local
government officials, and policymakers for planning purposes prior to signifi-
cant building or infrastructure projects. Certainly, visualizations of all three
types are used for specialized communication between scientists within and
across disciplines, such as drought visualizations that serve as a means of com-
munication between meteorologists and agronomists.
Most visualizations of natural disasters, however, attract large public audi-
ences: teachers, students, farmers, ranchers, developers, outdoor enthusiasts,
amateur scientists, and other private individuals. Because visualizations spon-
sored by government agencies often serve as the “front page” for massive expen-
ditures in sophisticated data collection endeavors, websites for these agencies
gladly promote their data displays to as many curious taxpayers as possible
in order to justify the investment. Regardless of the specific visualization, users
may or may not have the required level of subject (domain) expertise to interpret
a display fully and conventionally, a potential drawback of the easy-to-access
nature of the Internet, particularly for the large public audiences we will focus
on primarily.
160
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 See Liu and Palen (2010) for a review and analysis of several design choices, including
consideration of user issues, made by developers of crisis maps on the Internet.

VISUALIZATIONS OF PAST DISASTERS:
(OVER)SIMPLIFYING EVENTS THROUGH INTERACTIVITY
We are inherently interested in the natural world around us: to understand
it, to protect it from degradation, and sometimes to protect ourselves when it
threatens us. Interactive visualizations enable a wide array of users to understand
the earth, and its many scientific disciplines, by providing access to large sets
of existing data about climate, geography, and geology. Visualizations of past
natural events can be primarily categorized as forensic (or judicial) rhetoric
designed to supply a credible record of what occurred so that arguments can be
constructed (or inferred) from the visualization. The displays emphasize rational
and accessible techniques that often enable users to manipulate and focus the
evidence through interactivity. Although most visualizations of past disasters
operate largely on the macrolevel, many embody interactive features that
allow users to sort and filter vast historical datasets according to the users’
needs and interests. That flexibility to select and manipulate the data greatly
heightens its forensic value and its ethos, generating arguments that are multi-
faceted and discoverable.
For example, Figure 9.1 shows a treemap by the Hive Group (2012), which
visualizes the earthquakes of the world since 1901. Users can select the variables
on the treemap according to the magnitude of the earthquakes, the loss of life,
the nations in which they occurred, and specific years. By defining the variables,
users can decide which aspects of the database they want to foreground. Here,
the data are filtered to show all earthquakes since 1901 above 7.0 on the Richter
scale and resulting in more than 50 deaths, sorted by country. Chile (top left)
and Indonesia (immediately beneath) dominate the treemap, with each country
displaying events of great magnitude. To their right, Japan (top), Peru (middle),
and Ecuador (bottom) have also experienced major disasters, while deadly
earthquakes in the United States and Europe (lower right) have occurred
relatively rarely. Color indicates the deadliness of the earthquakes, with the
darker shading in many of the small rectangles, where population is dense,
showing high values. This display argues that the most severe events occur in a
small geographic area, but high-density population areas make humans more
vulnerable, even if the quake’s magnitude is less severe. The forensic elasticity
of this treemap can generate many different visual arguments, depending on
which combination of variables users choose to visualize.
More narrowly focused visualizations of natural disasters can be found at the
website of the National Weather Service’s National Hurricane Center (2011),
which provides temporal animations that thread together each storm’s historical
track, wind speeds, and associated warnings and watches along coastal areas.
Users can control the speed of the retrospective animation and stop it frame by
frame to see how a given storm developed and the threats it posed along its route.
Although the fast-moving parts of animations can sometimes pose perceptual
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
161

162
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.1. Treemap visualizing earthquake size and deadliness by country since 1901 (Hive Group, 2012).
Retrieved from http://www.hivegroup.com/gallery/earthquakes/. Treemap interface created by
The Hive Group (www.hivegroup.com) © 2014 The Hive Group, Inc. Used with permission.

challenges (Fisher, 2010), and evaluations of the effectiveness of animated
maps in particular have yielded mixed results (see Johnson & Nelson, 1998;
Kostelnick, Land, & Juola, 2007; Patton & Cammack, 1996; Slocum, Blok, Jiang,
Koussolakou, Montello, Fuhrmann, & Hedley, 2001), user controls of the
animation, like in the hurricane display, can greatly enhance interpretation. Figure
9.2, for example, shows one frame of an animation documenting the trek of
Hurricane Irene as it traveled through the Caribbean and up the U.S. coast in
August 2011, threatening virtually every coastal area. In its entirety, the
animation creates a macrolevel historical narrative of the disaster as it unfolded
over 10 days, while at the same time it enables users to control that narrative by
studying microlevel snapshots along the way.
A longer narrative appears in Figure 9.3, an animation by the U.S. Geological
Survey/National Drought Mitigation Center (2012) showing the 2012 drought
conditions across the United States in 2-week intervals. Users can run the entire
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
163
Figure 9.2. Animated visualization of the path of Hurricane Irene (National
Weather Service/National Hurricane Center, 2011). Retrieved from
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/archive/2011/graphics/al09/loop_3W.shtml.
Figure courtesy of NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration).

164
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.3. Frame from an animation displaying the drought (U.S. Geological Survey/National Drought Mitigation
Center, 2012). Retrieved from http://vegdri.unl.edu/TimeSeries.aspx. The Vegetation Drought Response Index (VegDRI)
is produced by the National Drought Mitigation Center at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, in collaboration with
the US Geological Survey’s Center for Earth Resources Observation and Science, and the High Plains
Regional Climate Center at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

animation to see the macrolevel patterns as they unfolded over the year they
select, from 1989 to the present. Users can also view drought conditions at any
2-week interval, offering them microlevel flexibility at the temporal level. The
image in Figure 9.3 shows the situation in late July and early August 2012, when
several areas of the country were experiencing drought (or predrought) conditions
(e.g., Wyoming, Illinois, Georgia). The conventional color spectrum runs from
dark red/brown (extreme drought) to dark green (extreme moisture), with white
representing normal conditions. As we’ll see in other examples, this conventional
color coding is deployed to show natural disasters in many different forms.
A longer-term narrative is visualized in Figure 9.4, an animation by NASA
(2011) to show forest and other wildfires that have occurred globally over the past
decade, with each fire represented by a red dot (here mostly in southern Malaysia,
Indonesia, and northern Australia), which is displayed on a vegetation backdrop
derived from satellite imagery. Users can view a macrolevel animation of the
entire globe or zoom in (at the relative microlevel) to a single continent. The
animation focuses not on specific disasters but rather on the broader geographic
distribution of the collective whole, enabling users to detect large-scale temporal
and geographic patterns in the data unavailable at closer range.
As Figures 9.1–9.4 show, natural disaster visualizations employ a wide range
of temporal scales to depict the passage of time, ranging from hours and days to
years, decades, or even centuries. For visualizations of an isolated event such as the
path of a hurricane, the temporal scale of the visualization is often quite short and
precise, influenced by the longevity of the specific natural disaster narrated from
start to finish. In this case, the temporal scale may cover the period of a few weeks,
spanning a typical life cycle from when a tropical storm emerges, strengthens as a
hurricane, and weakens and disappears. Other visualizations that display
historical trends in natural disaster events, on the other hand, require a much more
extended and coarse temporal scale, such as a map-based visualization of
earthquakes in a region over the past century. Here, the visualization illustrates
geographic trends over time for similar natural disaster occurrences so that users
can grasp these patterns and contemplate their meaning for future events.2
Subdued Pathos Appeals
When we see visualizations that depict the animated storm paths of hurricanes
or the legions of tornadoes spawned throughout the country each spring, we can
comprehend the macrolevel physical and logistical effects of such events with
remarkable clarity. Over the past decade, these displays have enabled most users
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
165
2 Temporal scales measure the time between disasters as well as the time that a disaster
occurs. An earthquake chart might show many years between events, but the earthquakes
themselves may have lasted just seconds. Several hurricanes may hit the same place several
times in a season, with a short duration between each one.

166
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.4. Frame from an animation displaying active fires (red) in Australia, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Oceania in
September 2006 (NASA 2011). Retrieved from http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/fires/main/modis-10-overview.html.
Figure courtesy of NASA Goddard Scientific Visualization Studio.

to lurk comfortably from afar, unaware of the death and destruction these events
cause, unless abstractly invoked, as in the earthquake treemap (Figure 9.1). In
these ways, historical visualizations narrating stories about the loss of life and
property sanitize the data by excluding the gruesome effects on the ground, which
are merely implied. As we watch the inexorable track of an Irene or a Katrina,
we see the graphical macrolevel abstractions of the storm data rather than its
microlevel effects at ground level. The focus is entirely on nature and its physical
movements and patterns rather than on the human damage that they incur.
Historical visualizations, then, display forensic evidence dispassionately and
objectively, curbing the emotions of the audience. These displays often afford
user access to microlevel details, visualizing the magnitude of the earthquake
precisely where it struck, the height of the flooding river, or the wind speed of the
passing hurricane. Because users experience the terror of the event through the
subdued
lens of physical distance and abstract graphical forms, these
visualizations fail to “humanize” the data, as Dragga and Voss put it (2001,
p. 269). Focused on the natural phenomena themselves, the displays eschew
explicit pathos appeals and remain almost entirely within the realm of logos: of
highly usable, rational, and abstract representations of natural events.
Visualizing Current Disasters in Real Time:
The Kairos of Exigency
In tracking current natural disasters, the Internet disseminates visualizations
based on timely data that can be updated seamlessly and frequently as conditions
change—daily, hourly, even minute by minute. Timely data constantly feed
these visualizations so users can assess the current situation and adapt their
daily activities as needed. In this way, kairos (or good timing) drives the rhetoric
of visualizations that represent current conditions, as users focus their attention
on images that matter in the moment. In generating such a wide array of timely,
real-time displays that demand our immediate (and sometimes unrelenting)
attention, the Internet has become a kairotic machine—technology that rivets
audiences to natural exigencies.3
Perhaps the most popular of these types of visualizations are interactive,
animated weather maps available from local and national news media as well as
government agencies such as the National Weather Service. Such visualizations
include maps layered with current data on variables such as temperature, cloud
cover, precipitation, or wind conditions, often updated several times an hour.
In many cases, data sources for natural disaster visualizations feed directly from
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
167
3 Of course, users are riveted by moment-to-moment variations in other real-time Internet
visualizations, such as stock market indexes, gas prices, commodities trading, and the move-
ment of cars and airplanes, all of which create their own sets of exigencies.

scientific sensors or instruments from the natural environment, with little or no
direct human mediation. One particularly appealing and effective example of
such a real-time visualization is the animated wind map of the United States
(Figure 9.5), designed by Viégas and Wattenberg (2012). Current prevalent wind
patterns (direction and speed) are represented by the smooth-flowing vectors,
updated on an hourly basis, that users can enlarge to examine microlevel
conditions. In this particular map, strong southerly winds gust through the
Chicago area, light westerly winds fan the Northern Great Plains, and the
Mid-Atlantic enjoys relative calm.
Other real-time data maps visualize far more serious conditions. The real-time
maps of stream gauge levels by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and the National Weather Service (2012c) enable users
in the United States to assess local conditions and take necessary precautions.
Figure 9.6 shows the locations of near (yellow) or minor (orange) flooding on
the map of Florida in mid-July 2012 after Tropical Storm Debby had passed along
168
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.5. Animated wind map, updated hourly, for an early spring
day in the continental U.S. (Viégas & Wattenberg, 2012).
Retrieved from http://hint.fm/wind/gallery/mar-27.js.html.
Reprinted with permission of Fernanda Viégas and Martin Wattenberg.

ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
169
Figure 9.6. National Weather Service visualization of stream gauge readings for Florida, indicating locations of near
(yellow) or minor (orange) flooding (NOAA 2012c). Retrieved from http://water.weather.gov/ahps/region.php?state=fl.
Image provided courtesy of NOAA/National Weather Service.

the Gulf Coast a few weeks earlier. At this point, a recently soggy Florida had
drained quite well, and for most Floridians the kairos of the display probably
plummeted. Not so for users of Figure 9.7, in which the U.S. Geological Survey/
Earthquake Hazards Program (2013) shows the epicenters for recent earthquakes
around the world, reminding inhabitants of coastal areas that seismic activity
continues unabated, an uncomfortable reality around the Pacific “Ring of Fire.”
The size of the circle represents the earthquake’s magnitude and the color the
time of the event (red = within the past hour; orange = within the past day;
yellow = within the past week). Users can access microlevel data by zooming
in and by scrolling over earthquakes 2.5 or greater on the Richter scale, events
often followed by numerous aftershocks.
Accessing Macro/Micro Data:
Visualizing My Own Backyard
Unlike risk in other aspects of life—health, finance, consumer products—risk
from natural disasters is typically correlated with place, with a specific geo-
graphical location. Focus on place at the microlevel is particularly important
for visualizations that depict ongoing natural disasters as they occur, as users
assess the immediate danger for their own locations. However, the precision
and accuracy of the geographical location may hinge on various sources of
uncertainty inherent to the natural disaster, such as challenges related to pin-
pointing exactly where a tornado touched down in the immediate aftermath
of the storm, or the precise size and location of an earthquake. Like Figure 9.7,
Figure 9.8, by the California Institute of Technology Southern California Earth-
quake Data Center (2013), displays real-time data about earthquakes, but at a
much finer microlevel—here focusing on California and Nevada, with even tiny
1.0 tremors visualized. Progressively larger squares represent the magnitude of
each quake, and again color reveals time (red = last hour; blue = last day; yellow =
last week). To see how close a quake has come to their own backyards, users can
zoom into the map to locate a quake’s precise location within a kilometer.
That microlevel precision can also be experienced through the National
Weather Service website, which enables users to visualize local conditions
through conventional radar as well as through rain and river gauges around the
United States. At any given moment, a hydrogram chart (Figure 9.9) shows
the water level at a local river or stream—here for Squaw Creek in Ames, Iowa,
at Lincolnway, a key city street (NOAA/National Weather Service, 2012b).
Users can then zoom in to their local situations to see the levels of rivers
and streams in their areas on a display that plots time and depth at a given
measuring station, allowing users to localize their views of the water conditions.
The hydrogram in Figure 9.9 fosters kairos by displaying the creek’s extremely
low water level in summer 2012, when users were confronted with severe drought
170
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
171
Figure 9.7. Visualization displaying locations of earthquakes 2.5 or greater on the Richter scale over seven days
(U.S. Geological Survey/Earthquake Hazards Program, 2013). Retrieved from http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/map/.
Courtesy: U.S. Geological Survey Earthquake Hazards Program.

conditions that stifled crops, dried up gardens and lawns, and caused unbearable
heat. The low water levels visualized on the hydrogram quantified the severity
of the conditions, heightening anxiety and uncertainty.
Social Media and the Citizen-Scientist:
Cooperative Interaction in the Displays
Given the time-sensitive nature of some earth science visualizations, the public
is invited to pitch in and assist with the disseminated data. Indeed “participation”
and “creative collaboration” have been identified by James Zappen (2005, p. 321)
172
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.8. Visualization displaying locations of earthquakes in California
and Nevada over seven days in real-time (California Institute of Technology,
2013). Retrieved from http://www.data.scec.org/recenteqs/. Reprinted with
permission of SCEDC (2013): Southern California Earthquake Data Center.
Caltech.Dataset.doi:10.7909/C3WD3xH1

as key elements of digital rhetoric, and interactive displays of natural disasters
often invite users to become actively engaged in shaping and communicating
information. Because government (or government-funded) agencies maintain
many of the websites about earth science data, accountability to the public plays
a role in their design, dissemination, and evolution. Unlike static displays that
appear off-line, online visualizations often allow users to provide feedback to
the designers or to engage in blog conversations about the data. Through crowd-
sourcing and citizen-science activities, some websites encourage users to submit
actual data (or provide frequent, regular updates) utilized in constructing the
visualizations. In these ways, users can contribute data, participate in the design
process, and interact with other users. Goodchild (2007) has coined the term
“Volunteered Geographic Information” (VGI) to describe the rapidly increasing
trend of user-contributed information for map-based visualizations. In particular,
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
173
Figure 9.9. Water level on Squaw Creek in Ames, IA, at Lincolnway
(NOAA/National Weather Service, 2012b). Retrieved from
http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=dmx&gage=amwi4.
Image provided courtesy of NOAA/National Weather Service.

social media and other forms of public participation have emerged as key com-
ponents of web-based map visualizations for crises, given their conduciveness
to support rapid emergency response (Liu & Palen, 2010).
Examples of natural disaster visualizations incorporating VGI are the real-
time interactive disaster response maps published by the Environmental Systems
Research Institute (ESRI). Figure 9.10, for example, shows one such ESRI
map (2012) that focuses on wildfires in the western United States in summer
2012. Here, users can track the status of ongoing wildfire locations and wildfire
potential in the continental United States, as well as ancillary map layers for
current precipitation and wind patterns. In addition to having the option to explore
the geographical extent of the wildfire perimeters by navigating the map at
different scales and customizing it with overlays such as satellite imagery, users
can also access information fetched from social media sources on the map, such as
Twitter feeds, YouTube videos, and Flickr images. The social media information,
added to the map as hyperlinked pushpins at the location where the information
was captured or submitted, then becomes available to other users, providing a
174
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.10. ESRI’s US Wildfires Map, displaying locations of active
wildfires in the American West, July 2012 (Environmental Systems Research
Institute, 2012). Retrieved from http://tmappsevents.esri..com/Website/
index.html. Used by permission. Copyright © 2012 Esri, NOAA, USGS,
GeoMac. All rights reserved.

more personalized visualization where individuals can share their observations
and experiences and tell their own stories about a given wildfire.
The National Weather Service utilizes social media in a related manner,
allowing users to log comments via email and Facebook as well as to read
Twitter posts by the Director. Upon request, the National Weather Service also
provides email alerts or text messages via mobile phones to users when hazardous
conditions arise. These interactive features commonly appear on websites of
U.S. agencies. For example, the website of the U.S. Geological Survey’s
Earthquake Hazards Program (2013) enables users to report any earthquake
activity they have experienced. The website also features a “Did You Feel It?”
map on which they invite users’ comments: users can report on their experiences
with a specific earthquake, or they can even report tremors that do not appear
already on the map. In these ways, users participate in constructing, altering,
and commenting on the digital visualizations.
VISUALIZATIONS OF FUTURE DISASTERS:
THE RHETORIC OF UNCERTAINTY
Visualizations of future probabilities are highly deliberative in that they warn
users about what might happen in the future and prod them to consider what
actions they might take to address the risk, however short or long term. Of course,
visualizations showing past or present data often have a bearing on future events,
given that users can extrapolate future patterns from the display and in this
way infer what lies ahead. However, many visualizations focus specifically on
the future—to predict, as explicitly as possible and with varying degrees of
certainty, impending natural disasters. If the prediction has immediate conse-
quences—say, in the next week or year, or even the lifetime of the user—the
kairos (timing) of the prediction and its associated warnings and commands
evoke pathos appeals for the stakeholders by engendering emotions ranging from
concern and anxiety to fear or panic. However, if the prediction visualized is
more long term, distant, and cosmic, it can evoke a more subdued pathos or even
arouse feelings of the sublime. Because predictive visualizations affect users’
decisions about how to respond to natural threats—where to live, precautions
to take—these displays also raise ethical issues about their degrees of certainty
or uncertainty. According to Monmonier (1997), persuasion is a primary purpose
of risk maps due to their social construction, and the inevitable sources of
uncertainty that abound in future projections may be manipulated by the designer
and not readily conveyed to the map user.
These predicted events have varying levels of immediacy and consequences
for the public, ranging from an imminent event to one not likely to occur for
decades or even centuries or millennia, from an event that’s merely a minor
nuisance (a rainstorm) to one with long-range and perhaps catastrophic results
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
175

sometime in the future (an asteroid impact). In short, these visualizations have
varying levels of kairos. We might plot these variables as a scatter plot (Figure
9.11), with immediacy on the X-axis, here spanning a mere 140 years, and
consequences on the Y-axis, on a scale from 1 to 100, with 1 being a minor
inconvenience to 100 being total devastation.
So for example, a flood warning would be a very short-term and imminent
event that might have serious consequences, depending on the location of the
Internet user. Blizzards, ice storms, and other weather events would have a similar
profile. An asteroid approaching Earth, on the other hand, might be a longer-
term event (occurring decades or centuries in the future) and have huge con-
sequences for some or all Internet users across the planet. The measurement of
consequences, then, can be quite variable, ranging from no effect on some users
to catastrophic consequences for others. If the users reside in the path of the
lava flow of a predicted volcanic eruption, the risk to those users is infinitely
higher than for someone living on another continent. On the other hand, over
time, the plume of the volcano could affect virtually everyone on the planet in
one way or another. Moreover, with the distant prospect of a galaxy collision
or the solar system encountering a black hole, every living thing would be
threatened in such a rare and (we hope) unlikely event.
176
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.11. Plot showing potential consequences of predicted natural
disasters. Circle size indicates relative impact on human lives.

So the number of users for which each datapoint on the scatter plot has
consequences has to be qualified in some way. We do that here by enlarging the
point to reflect the potential consequences to many users (the whole planet)
and shrinking it to reflect the consequences to only a few (people experiencing
a local flood), though by doing so, we do not wish to diminish the devastating
impact of the event on those few who actually experience it.
Hedging the Future:
Certainty and Uncertainty of Predicting
Risk level for natural disasters varies with the type and by location: For
example, we can envision hurricane or tropical storm risk along the coast near
Miami, Florida, to be high not only due to the elevated likelihood of such
storms forming there late each summer and early each fall, but also due to the
potentially devastating consequences on the large populations living in the paths
of these storms. A hurricane bearing down on the U.S. East Coast presents a
real and imminent threat, yet one that can be tracked and allows adequate time
for preparation in advance of the destruction. Earthquakes and droughts, on
the other hand, are much more elusive to predict, the result of inference and
extrapolation from data. And predictions of asteroid impacts are often informed
guesses, based on tracking data from a limited number of previous sightings,
with the probability fluctuating as new data accumulate, which can heighten
or diminish the odds—and with them, public concern.
What risk pictures do data visualizations paint, and how accurate is it or
can it possibly be? The water level predictions for Squaw Creek visualized in
the line graph in Figure 9.12 seem to have a high level of accuracy, showing the
probability of water rising to a given level over the next 3 months. Figure 9.12
by NOAA/National Weather Service (2012a) shows the overall likelihood of
water levels, and an accompanying bar graph shows the likelihood in weekly
intervals. The line graph emphatically predicts that Squaw Creek will not likely
rise very much in the near future, with the probability of it reaching flood stage
virtually nil. Reading the line graph (and accompanying bar chart), however, can
be challenging for laypersons unfamiliar with this kind of statistical modeling,
unlike flood or water specialists who use these charts regularly and can compare
them with previous displays. Users who live in the area and understand these
charts, however, can have a high degree of confidence in these predictions
because they span a fairly narrow time zone in the immediate future and are based
on a wide range of percentages, which allows some wiggle room and hedging.
On a much longer-term and consequential scale, the U.S. Geological Survey’s
Geologic Hazards Science Center (2012) offers Internet users the option to create
“probability” maps that show the likelihood of an earthquake in a given location.
By entering a zip code or latitude/longitude coordinates, the magnitude of a
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
177

178
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.12. Prediction of water level in Squaw Creek in late summer and early fall 2012 (NOAA/National
Weather Service 2012a). Retrieved from http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/period.php?wfo=dmx&gage=amwi4.
Image provided courtesy of NOAA/National Weather Service.

possible quake, and a time span (1 year, 100,000 years), users can generate a map
that shows the percentage probability of an event occurring in the surrounding
area. In Ames, Iowa, for example, the chances of a severe quake (e.g., magnitude
6.0) occurring in the next millennium are very slim, not surprising because
that part of the Midwest experiences very little seismic activity. However, not
surprisingly, the same parameters yield a very different story for Los Angeles,
where the probability is virtually certain at 100%. By entering a specific location
(latitude/longitude or zip code), a time horizon (1 year to 10,000 years), and
a magnitude on the Richter scale (5.0 and up), users can generate a color-coded
map that indicates the level of risk for those variables (the darker the shading, the
higher the risk). In this way, users can customize the prediction at the microlevel
to see what’s likely to happen in their own neighborhoods. Obviously, though,
kairos diminishes with each zero added to the time scale: users may experience
considerable anxiety with a 10- or 20-year time frame, but they may be unfazed
(or even amused) by events predicted over a span of 10,000 years, however likely.
Still, even though their persuasive power diminishes with time, the earthquake
hazards maps are compelling and therapeutic, and their short-term predictions
may be able to provoke action.
The predictive variations based on place can be instructive (and sometimes
surprising). Figure 9.13 shows probability of an earthquake striking the Los
Angeles area over the next 100 years. The dark shading indicates an extremely
high risk in these places, 100%, which we might expect. A similar map gener-
ated by the website for Normal, Illinois, is entirely white, indicating that an
earthquake 6.0 or greater in the next 100 years is extremely improbable, even
though central Illinois lies in the realm of the potent New Madrid fault. These
predictions, of course, are fairly easy for users to anticipate, given the geological
histories of these two very different places. However, even the 100-year pre-
diction map for a place like New York City, which is rarely associated with
earthquakes, shows a slightly higher risk than Normal, Illinois, and also shows
a slightly higher risk than Philadelphia (which appears on the New York City
map because of its close proximity), realizations that can either be reassuring
or unsettling. Even so, given the temporal span and the low probability of an
earthquake, this map will hardly induce insomnia in the Bronx.
The exact level of risk can elude scientists, especially with long-range weather
forecasts that predict temperature and precipitation. In North America, those
forecasts are often driven by Pacific Ocean events known as La Niña and El Niño,
which represent a cooling or warming of the ocean waters and which profoundly
influence weather patterns and have serious consequences for agriculture, com-
modity prices, and land use generally. The effects of La Niña and El Niño are
measured by the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), which typically registers
a positive value for La Niña events and a negative value for El Niño events, both
of which can cause flooding or drought in certain areas. In general, the more
distant the prediction, the less risky the assessment. Figure 9.14 by the National
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
179

Weather Service’s National Centers for Environmental Prediction (2012) shows
the prediction for precipitation for 3 months into the future. The dark values
represent a prediction of above-average dryness, and the darker the value the
more severe the dryness predicted. The lighter values represent a prediction of
above-average wetness, with the remainder of the country equally divided among
higher, lower, or normal precipitation. Another map from the same website with
exactly the same variables extends the predictions to 12 months into the future.
Unlike the certainty expressed in the heavily colored 3-month map, the 12-month
version contains large unshaded areas that have equal chances of higher, lower, or
normal precipitation and consequently has less predictive value for users.
The level of certainty visualized in the display varies depending on the nature
of the risk and the time horizon, though users may have to infer these varying
levels of certainty because the visualizations do not always readily confess them.
Only by inference do we suspect, for example, that the certainty in Figure 9.14
wanes in its longer-term version. The U.S Geological Survey’s earthquake maps
180
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 9.13. An earthquake probability map for Los Angeles, CA,
generated from the U.S. Geological Survey’s interactive website
(U.S. Geological Survey/ Geologic Hazards Science Center, 2012).
Retrieved from http://geohazards.usgs.gov/eqprob/2009/index.php.
Courtesy: U.S. Geological Survey Geologic Hazards Science Center.

use the same graphical display for a 10,000-year prediction that they do for a
10-year prediction, which results in greater certainty with time but which can
also erase the differences among locations, which over a long period of time
may share the same levels of risk. For vulnerable places like Los Angeles, for
instance, a long time horizon colors the map evenly, homogenizing it visually
and sacrificing the gradations of shorter-term maps, whose apparent precision
conceals the lower level of certainty. From the user’s perspective, however, the
certainty of a 10,000-year map may have little bearing on the present, so as
deliberative rhetoric, it may provide less impetus than the short-term map for
users to ponder future plans or policies.
Assessments of risk and the certainty of predictions change as new data
become available, in the process heightening or weakening the deliberative
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
181
Figure 9.14. Short-term drought predictions for the U.S.
for July 2012 (National Weather Service/National Centers
for Environmental Prediction, 2012). Retrieved from
http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/predictions/tools/edb/sbfinal.gif.
Figure courtesy of the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Prediction.

function of the displays that visualize them. For example, asteroids striking Earth
pose a remote, but potentially devastating, aspect of risk that NASA’s Near Earth
Object Program website (2012) constantly monitors, cataloguing asteroids
according to their size, orbit, and potential risk, measured on both the Palermo
scale and the Torino scale. The Palermo scale measures risk mathematically
according to several physical variables, while the Torino scale records gradations
of risk on a 10-point color-coded scale, ranging from a 0 (white—no real risk) to a
10 (red—great potential for a major impact). Asteroids with “close approaches”
to earth are measured in LDs, or lunar distances (the distance between the moon
and the Earth), and the predictions of their possible impact constantly change,
based on new data and observations.4 NASA’s Near Earth Object Program
website (2012) visualizes dozens of asteroids and their predicted values in a
detailed, interactive table that enables microlevel searching and analysis about the
size of each asteroid, its time horizon, and its probability of Earth impact,
including both the Torino and Palermo scales. Users can click on the probability
rating to see a more detailed analysis and explanation as well as visualize the path
of each asteroid in an animated solar system diagram. Although the chances of a
given asteroid impacting the Earth are exponentially small, NASA does not
visualize the actual risks graphically—perhaps because the possible trajectories
are too complex, uncertain, and changeable and because lay audiences may too
easily misinterpret such visualizations and find them potentially alarming. So as
the risk profile of each asteroid evolves, so does its deliberative status, ranging
from obscure and inconsequential to planetarily existential.
In most visualizations of risk, the level of certainty remains ambiguous and
undisclosed, probably to reassure users and not to undermine the ethos of the
visualization. Figure 9.15 by NOAA (2012), however, visualizes the level of
certainty explicitly. Here, the flooding effects of sea level rise from climate
change are mapped along the Gulf and Florida coasts, and users can control
key prediction features (water depth, from 1 to 6 feet; frequency of flooding), and
they can also visualize the level of confidence in these predictions. Blue areas
indicate a high level of confidence and light orange high uncertainty. Figure 9.15
shows a close-up of the south Florida coast: the dark blue indicates that severe
flooding would certainly occur in the Keys and the southern Everglades, with
a low level of confidence in its severity in the Miami area. Given that this
map is intended for “coastal managers and scientists,” the uncertainty scale
may bolster the ethos and value of the visualization for these users, who expect
precision and full disclosure. On the other hand, private individuals with little
182
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
4 This assessment of risk, obviously, is entirely Earth-centric, whereby all of the measure-
ments and risk analyses are conducted relative to impacts with the Earth, as other planetary
impacts will have no immediate consequences to lay users, even though they might fixate
users who are scientists.

scientific knowledge or experience with such data might find the different confi-
dence levels disconcerting and confusing.
Predictions and the Rhetoric of Fear
and Equanimity
Internet users who can master the interactive displays of looming natural
disasters and glean precise information will feel a sense of control, masters of
their data universe and empowered to respond, if necessary. Still, visualizations
of natural disasters are inherently worrisome, engendering anxiety, distress,
and fear. Computer models showing many divergent paths of a hurricane in a
spaghetti diagram of crisscrossing paths running hither and yon may intrigue
scientists in the audience, who value complexity and predictive detail; at the same
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
183
Figure 9.15. Predictions of sea level rise for south Florida (NOAA, 2012).
Source: NOAA Coastal Services Center (Digital Coast),
http://csc.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/tools/slrviewer

time, however, that diagram will increase the angst of public users over a wider
geographical area than a simpler diagram plotting the storm’s most likely path.
The more data-rich the visualization, the more likely it might engender anxiety
and confusion—and turn empowerment into provocation.
How risk data are visualized can heighten or diminish that anxiety. Risk maps
for natural disasters typically show the most dangerous areas in bright red
or purple—colors in Western cultures that are associated with passion and
emotion—and lesser areas of danger in lighter, cooler colors. On the earthquake
prediction maps, darker colors represent greater chances of earthquakes and
the lighter colors lesser chances. Clearly, these design conventions are intended
to emphasize and focus users on the key risk data. So depending on the
user’s location, these visualizations may instantaneously engender a sense of
foreboding or relief.
Variations of some of these color conventions appear on the map in Figure 9.16
(U.S. Department of Interior, 2004), which creates a vivid and alarming
microlevel look at a future natural event—a volcanic eruption. Created by the
U.S. Geological Survey (Hoblitt, Walder, Driedger, Scott, Pringle, & Vallance,
1998), the static map in Figure 9.16 visualizes prospective flow of lava and lahars
(mudflows) that will occur with the next major eruption of Mt. Rainier in
Washington State, with the range of the devastation depending on the magnitude
of the eruption. Gray on the map indicates the area affected by lava in the
immediate vicinity of Mt. Rainier, where population is very sparse, and shades of
orange and yellow represent areas likely affected by lahars, where population is
denser and which extends all the way to Tacoma. The level of certainty about the
timing of major lahars—about every 500 to 1,000 years, with the last one
occurring perhaps 500 years ago—is ambiguous enough to reduce immediate
anxiety but specific enough to give pause to developers, homeowners, and others
in their path. And given the eruptions at nearby Mount St. Helens in recent
decades, the kairos and persuasiveness of this map remains strong if not urgent
among area users.
So visualizations of potential natural disasters evoke a rhetoric of fear
and anxiety for those users or for their friends and relatives who live in
harm’s way. The visualizations may deploy much of the same graphical coding
that appears in historical versions, but users’ interpretations are situated very
differently because the visualization is oriented toward what might happen
in the future—in the next few hours, days, or years. And that short-term
imminence and a level of uncertainty foster emotional responses from users
who are stakeholders, though they may not know exactly how to interpret
the uncertainty (e.g., sometime in the next 500 years), which may not even
be acknowledged on the display to protect its ethos. The visualizations can
also engender a state of equanimity for those users who lurk from afar, have
no stake in the probable event, and experience it only vicariously through
the display.
184
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

The Cosmic Rhetoric of the Sublime
Although visualizations predicting future events have only recently been avail-
able, natural disasters have occurred for thousands of years, with the assump-
tion that they would repeat themselves. Visualizations enable us to see how,
where, and when those re-occurrences might take place. Contemporary science,
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
185
Figure 9.16. Predicted lahars (mudflows) and lava flows for Mount Rainier
in Washington State (U.S. Department of the Interior, 2004, Figure 3;
source for map is Plate 1 from Hoblitt, Walder, Driedger, Scott, Pringle, &
Vallance, 1998). Retrieved from http://nationalatlas.gov/articles/geology/a_volca
nicrisk.html. Courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey.

however, has discovered additional threats with more far-reaching consequences,
creating new avenues of uncertainty and anxiety. Only in the past half century,
for example, has the impact of asteroids been increasingly known—and along
with that knowledge, the daunting certainty of future such events, leaving us
to wonder not if but when another might occur—and what we might do in the
meantime to avert these looming catastrophes.
On an even broader scale, images from the Hubble telescope are visualizing the
stunning and beautiful violence of the evolving universe and fostering speculation
about how similar events might shape our own destiny. That speculation is mostly
reduced to mathematical calculations (a three in a million chance of such and
such happening in the next billion years), happily abstracting the data into
forms that most of us can’t possibly comprehend, spatially or temporally. So from
the standpoint of visualization, such terrifying prospects are visualized vicari-
ously at the macrolevel with amazing clarity and brilliance, but they remain
visually and existentially (and perhaps hopelessly) ambiguous at the microlevel.
The ambiguity and incomprehensible size of such phenomena, along with the
relative safety of their distance in space and time, are engendering—perceptually
and emotionally—the sublime of Edmund Burke (2008) on a cosmic scale.
The Ethical Fine Line of Visualizing Predictions
The ethical responsibility to persuade users, by warning them and provoking
them to action to a sufficient degree, always accompanies risk assessment, par-
ticularly when potential disasters are visualized. In predicting future risk, govern-
ment agencies bear some responsibility for influencing the material conditions
of their constituents—for example, land and home values, regulations for
constructing buildings, zoning policies, as well as where people are willing to
live and work and what kind of life they envision for themselves, say, near an
active seismic fault. By visualizing these assessments and predictions, the Internet
can profoundly affect users’ decision-making in the present, long before an actual
event occurs. Given the physical risks that users may foresee to themselves
and their property, the visualizations may prompt them to protect themselves
by taking certain actions—for example, boarding up windows for hurricanes,
retrofitting buildings for earthquakes, purchasing flood insurance, or moving
somewhere else. All data design has an ethical component (Kienzler, 1997), espe-
cially visualizations of risk, which can have such far-reaching consequences.
The Internet’s position of authority, then, entails an ethical fine line between,
on the one hand, adequately alerting users so they can protect themselves, and
on the other hand, hyping up risk and causing users to overreact and squander
precious resources on needless remedies. So the designers of online visual-
izations have the ethical responsibility to balance user safety with overly dire
predictions that might create panic and distrust and cause the unnecessary
expense of preventative measures.
186
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

That responsibility, however, can sometimes be confounded by entrenched
visual and social conventions. To give a simple example, emergency weather
outlets on the Internet typically visualize warnings by counties, which come in all
shapes and sizes. However, weather phenomena rarely follow the exact contours
of (largely artificial) county borders: while a tornado, hailstorm, or high winds
may seriously threaten the southeast corner of a given county, users living in the
northwest corner see exactly the same alert on their screens. By homogenizing
place, the convention of visualizing by county extends the warning evenly across
a whole area, though only a fraction of it may be affected. As we mentioned
earlier, color conventions prevail in risk visualizations, with warm, intense colors
indicating potential problems and cooler, lighter ones low risk, and in the process
over- or understating risk visually. Also, what a visualization shows and does not
show (Barton & Barton, 1993a, pp. 53-68) may strongly influence a user’s per-
ception of risk. A map showing tornado patterns across the central United States
may intimidate a New Yorker wanting to relocate in Kansas City by isolating this
one phenomenon in what otherwise may be (in terms of natural disasters) a very
uneventful place. To remedy this, Barton and Barton (1993a) would advocate a
more complex, nuanced, and complete picture—here perhaps by supplying links
to visualizations of other natural disaster risks so that users have a broader context
within which to interpret the data and make well-informed decisions.
CONCLUSION
As a form of scientific rhetoric that spans several earth science disciplines,
visualizations of natural disasters—past, present, future—embody an array of
rhetorical elements. These displays embody forensic rhetoric by articulating data
about past natural events in logical frameworks within which users can
manipulate data to highlight variables and reveal patterns. As a new form of
digital rhetoric, most data visualizations invite user participation to customize
displays according to their needs and preferences as well as to provide data and
feedback. In displays of present and often real-time data, kairos dominates, as
users experience data in the moment, focusing on the immediate events unfolding
and how to interpret and react to them. In visualizations that predict future natural
events within a range of probability, deliberative rhetoric dominates, as users
assess and debate plans and policies in response to the risk. Credibility and ethics
pervade all three temporal modes, particularly predictive visualizations that have
decision-making consequences for stakeholders. All three temporal modes foster
emotional responses, ranging from relief, anxiety, or fear to those of terror,
empathy, and the sublime. Understandably, disasters stir the emotions, which
visualizations can further intensify through color, animations, and ambiguity.
We have now experienced the first wave of visualizations about natural
disasters, which have largely been designed to help the public sort through,
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
187

understand, and respond to complex datasets. The variety of forms these displays
embody—graphs, maps, lists, animations, color, interactivity, blogs—have
engaged users on steep learning curves in many different rhetorical situations,
ranging from learning and discovery, to responding to immediate crises, to
making long-range plans. This first wave of visualizations has established
a rhetorical and perceptual foundation that scientists, designers, and Internet
users can build on. Ahead lie countless more Internet visualizations that
ever-more numerous, engaged, and sophisticated users will learn how to interpret,
critique, and act on.
REFERENCES
Aristotle. (2007). On rhetoric: A theory of civic discourse (G. A. Kennedy, Trans., 2nd
ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Barton, B. F., & Barton, M. S. (1993a). Ideology and the map: Toward a postmodern visual
design practice. In N. R. Blyler & C. Thralls (Eds.), Professional communication:
The social perspective (pp. 49–78). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Barton, B. F., & Barton, M. S. (1993b). Modes of power in technical and professional
visuals. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 7, 138–162.
Brasseur, L. E. (2003). Visualizing technical information: A cultural critique. Amityville,
NY: Baywood.
Burke, E. (2008). A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime and
beautiful. A Phillips (Ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. (Original work
published 1757)
California Institute of Technology Southern California Earthquake Data Center/
U.S. Geological Survey. (2013, August). Index map of recent earthquakes in
California-Nevada [Map]. Caltech.Dataset. doi: 10.7909/C3WD3xH1. Retrieved
from http://www.data.scec.org/recenteqs/
Dragga, S., & Voss, D. (2001). Cruel pies: The inhumanity of technical illustrations.
Technical Communication, 48, 265–274.
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI). (2012, July). U.S. wildfires map [Inter-
active map]. Retrieved from http://tmappsevents.esri.com/Website/wildfire/index.html
Fisher, D. (2010). Animation for visualization: Opportunities and drawbacks. In J. Steele
& N. Iliinsky (Eds.), Beautiful visualization: Looking at data through the eyes of
experts (pp. 329–352). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media.
Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.
GeoJournal, 69, 211–221.
Gross, A. G. (1996). The rhetoric of science (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Hive Group. (2012, July). Most powerful and deadliest earthquakes since 1900 [Inter-
active chart]. Retrieved from http://www.hivegroup.com/gallery/earthquakes/
Hoblitt, R. P., Walder, J. S., Driedger, C. L., Scott, K. M., Pringle, P. T., & Vallance, J. W.
(1998). Volcanic hazards from Mount Rainier, Washington. U.S. Geological
Survey Open-File Report 98-428. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior,
U.S. Geological Survey.
188
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Johnson, H., & Nelson, E. S. (1998). Using flow maps to visualize time-series data:
Comparing the effectiveness of a paper map series, a computer series, and animation.
Cartographic Perspectives, 30, 47–64.
Kienzler, D. (1997). Visual ethics. Journal of Business Communication, 34, 171–187.
Kimball, M. A. (2006). London through rose-colored graphics: Visual rhetoric and infor-
mation graphic design in Charles Booth’s maps of London poverty. Journal of
Technical Writing and Communication, 36, 353–381.
Kostelnick, C. (2008). The visual rhetoric of data displays: The conundrum of clarity.
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 51, 116–130.
Kostelnick, J. C., Land, J. D., & Juola, J. F. (2007). Judgments of size change trends
in static and animated graduated circle displays. Cartographic Perspectives, 57,
41–55.
Liu, S. B., & Palen, L. (2010). The new cartographers: Crisis map mashups and
the emergence of neographic practices. Cartography and Geographic Information
Science, 37, 69–90.
Mirel, B. (1998). Visualizations for data exploration and analysis: A critical review
of usability research. Technical Communication, 45, 491–509.
Monmonier, M. (1997). Cartographies of danger: Mapping hazards in America. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Monmonier, M. (2008). Web cartography and the dissemination of cartographic
information about coastal inundation and sea level rise. In M. P. Peterson (Ed.),
International perspectives on maps and the Internet (pp. 49–71). Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
NASA. (2011, July). Fire and smoke [Animated map]. Retrieved from http://www.nasa.
gov/mission_pages/fires/main/modis-10-overview.html
NASA/Near Earth Object Program. (2012). Sentry risk table. Retrieved from
http://neo.jpl.nasa.gov/risk/
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). (2012, August). Sea level
rise and coastal flooding impacts [Interactive map]. Retrieved from
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/slr/viewer/#
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/National Weather Service.
(2012a, July). Advanced hydrologic prediction service: Chance of exceeding levels
during entire period [Graph]. Retrieved from http://water.weather.gov/
ahps2/period.php?wfo=dmx&gage=amwi4
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/National Weather Service.
(2012b, July). Advanced hydrologic prediction service: Hydrograph [Graph].
Retrieved from http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=dmx&gage=
amwi4
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/National Weather Service.
(2012c, July 18). River observations [Interactive map]. Retrieved from http://
water.weather.gov/ahps/region.php?state=fl
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/National Weather
Service/National Centers for Environmental Prediction. (2012, July 14). Objective
long-term drought indicator blend percentiles [Map]. Retrieved from http://www.
cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/predictions/tools/edb/sbfinal.gif
ONLINE VISUALIZATIONS
/
189

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)/National Weather
Service/National Hurricane Center. (2011, August 26). Irene graphics archive
[Animated map]. Retrieved from http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/archive/2011/graphics/
al09/loop_3W.shtml
Patton, D. K., & Cammack, R. G. (1996). An examination of the effects of task type
and map complexity on sequenced and static choropleth maps. In C. H. Wood
& C. P. Keller (Eds.), Cartographic design: Theoretical and practical perspectives
(pp. 237–252). Chichester, UK: Wiley & Sons.
Slocum, T. A., Blok, C., Jiang, B., Koussolakou, A., Montello, D. R., Fuhrmann, S., &
Hedley, N. R. (2001). Cognitive and usability issues in geovisualization. Cartography
and Geographic Information Science, 28, 61–75.
Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
U.S. Department of the Interior/nationalatlas.gov. (2004, May). Mount Rainier: Learning
to live with volcanic risk [Map]. Retrieved from http://nationalatlas.gov/articles/
geology/a_volcanicrisk.html
U.S. Geological Survey/Earthquake Hazards Program. (2013, August). Latest earthquakes
[Interactive map]. Retrieved from http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/map/
U.S. Geological Survey/Geologic Hazards Science Center. (2012, July). 2009 Earthquake
probability mapping [Map]. Retrieved from http://geohazards.usgs.gov/eqprob/
2009/index.php
U.S. Geological Survey/National Drought Mitigation Center. (2012). Vegetation drought
response index: VegDRI animated series [Animated map]. Retrieved from http://
vegdri.unl.edu/TimeSeries.aspx
Viégas, F., & Wattenberg, M. (2012, March 27). Wind map [Animated map]. Retrieved
from http://hint.fm/wind/gallery/mar-27.js.html
Zappen, J. P. (2005). Digital rhetoric: Toward an integrated theory. Technical Com-
munication Quarterly, 14, 319–325.
190
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

CHAPTER 10
Meltdowns in the Media:
Visualization of Radiation Risk from
The Printed Page to the Internet
James Wynn
ABSTRACT
This chapter considers whether and in what ways the Internet might be
influencing risk communication about nuclear accidents. It compares the
visual and verbal features of radiation maps in pre-Internet print reports
of the accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl with the features of
online maps of the Fukushima Daiichi disaster—maps created by both
mainstream media outlets and citizen activists. This investigation sug-
gests (a) that visual representations of radiation risk vary in response to
the material, sociopolitical, and/or technical conditions in which the risk
communication is made; (b) that the choices of risk visualization can be
driven as much by rhetorical, or persuasive goals, as communicative ones;
and (c) that the Internet has fundamentally transformed visual risk
communication of radiation risk.
In Risk Society (1992), Ulrich Beck argues that the central social concern in 20th-
century Western nations is the rise of risk brought about by their regimes of
scientific progress and technicization. This intuition seems to be reaffirmed
almost daily as events like the Deep Water Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico
and the meltdown of reactors at Fukushima, Japan attract media attention and
generate public debate and discourse about the risks of modern techno-industrial
society. Rhetorical scholars of science and technology have been quick to pick up
on and investigate the growing importance of risk and its consequences for
argument and communication. Carolyn Miller, for instance, has written articles
191

on a variety of risk topics, including how organizational communication influ-
ences risk (Herndl, Fennell, & Miller, 1991), how failures of risk communication
impede public deliberation (Katz & Miller, 1996), and how the mathematization
of risk elides ethical engagement between governing institutions and citizens
(Miller, 2003). Other rhetoric and communication scholars have written on a
range of risk topics, including nuclear accidents (Farrell & Goodnight, 1998),
mine safety (Sauer, 2003), and bioweapons (Keränen, 2011).
Despite the significant attention to written and spoken risk discourse, virtually
no consideration has been paid to visual representations and their role
in characterizing risk.1 It is also notable that rhetorical scholars have yet to
explore how the introduction of the Internet might be transforming risk com-
munication and argument. This omission seems unusual given the attention that
the relationship between the Internet, political communication, and argument
has garnered (Davisson, 2011; Gil de Zuñiga, Puig-I-Abril, & Rojas, 2009;
Warnick, 2007). This chapter engages with these research gaps by exploring
maps visualizing the radiation risk from nuclear plant accidents at Three Mile
Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima in both print and online media. In particular,
it will pursue these questions: What are the strategies for visually representing
radiation risk? To what extent and in what ways do visualization strategies change
across accidents and media types? And what possible consequences do these
changes have for the consumers and producers of risk communication?
To assess the strategies in print media for representing radiation risk and their
change over time, this chapter will analyze the visual/verbal features of radiation
maps in pre-Internet print stories in the New York Times and Washington Post on
Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. These visualizations will be compared with
online maps of the radiation risk from Fukushima created by the New York Times
and the citizen group Safecast to gain insight into whether and in what ways the
Internet might be influencing risk communication about radiation and what the
consequences of this transformation might be. This investigation suggests (a) that
visual representations of radiation risk vary in response to the material,
sociopolitical, and/or technical conditions in which the risk communication is
made; (b) that the choices of risk visualization can be driven as much by
rhetorical, or persuasive goals, as communicative ones; and (c) that the Internet
has fundamentally transformed visual risk communication of radiation risk.
192
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 Lee Brasseur’s work on Florence Nightingale’s development of rose diagrams to show
the risks of poor sanitation in military hospitals takes a step in this direction. Its goal, however,
is not a self-conscious discussion of risk visualization. See Brasseur (2005). Beverly Sauer
in The Rhetoric of Risk (2003) also talks about the role of visual mediums such as gesture
and FATALGRAMS in mine safety education and discourse. This discussion, however, is
limited to private specialized risk communication rather than public representation of risk.
See Sauer (pp. 166–175, 232–244).

METHOD
Describing and comparing visual representations of risk across nuclear
accidents requires analytical categories for visual assessment and methods that
allow similarities and variations to be accounted for. To maintain comparability
and a manageable sample size, the corpus of print visuals for this investigation
has been limited to the New York Times and the Washington Post, while the online
visual corpus has been limited to the websites NYTimes.com and Safecast.org.
These corpora offer access to important slices of mainstream print and online
visual representations of the three nuclear accidents. In conducting this inves-
tigation, every issue for each of the print publications was searched for risk
visuals for a 1-month period following each nuclear accident. Once located,
all of the visuals in the sample were assessed using a standard format. Basic
background information about the visual was recorded, including the date, the
source, the author, and location in the news publication. Then, a detailed quali-
tative evaluation of the visual was made, which included four categories of
assessment: the format of the visual presentation, the information provided about
radiation risk, the relationship between the visual and the text of the news
story (or stories) with which it was associated, and the context in which it
occurred. In the assessment of the online risk visuals on NYTimes.com and
Safecast.org, these strategies of analysis were also applied with the exception of
the analysis of the relationship between the text and the story. The map on
NYTimes.com was linked as a resource to a number of stories rather than attached
to a single one, making it difficult to identify any specific connection between
the reporting and the interactive visual. Safecast.org was not a news site and
therefore had no news text to analyze. However, maps and blogs posted on the
website between March of 2011 and 2012 were examined.
In assessing the format of the visual presentation in all of the sources, the
range of strategies for representing risk were identified and inventoried. These
included features like maps and map insets, visualizations of population centers,
visualizations of radiation and its magnitude, and the incorporation of words
and numbers in visuals. Once the visual formats were identified, they were
assessed for the type of information about risk they communicated. This assess-
ment was made on the basis of a basic set of questions considered vital by
media experts on risk reporting: What is the risk? What is its magnitude? What
is its location and geographic extent? Who is affected by it? What are the con-
sequences for those who are affected? Who/what is responsible for it? (Kitzinger,
2009; Ropeik, 2011). In cases where risk visuals were complements of news
stories or blogs, the relationships between the visual risk representations and
textual content were also examined. The relationship between words and
visuals and the kinds of epistemological and rhetorical contributions each makes
to discourse and argument has been the subject of research by a number of
rhetoric and communication studies scholars (Gross, 2009; Hagan, 2007; Kress
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
193

& van Leeuwen, 2006). This study focuses specifically on the extent to which the
basic questions about risk were supplied by the text of a news story, its associated
visual, or both. Then, conclusions will be drawn about the role of visual and
textual elements or their collaboration in communication about risk. Finally, this
assessment considers the context in which the risk visualizations occur. As
Birdsell and Groarke (2007) point out, visual representations need to be
interpreted in a manner that fits the context in which they are situated (p. 104).
Because the contextual factors influencing risk visualization of nuclear accidents
are myriad and not all relevant, this investigation will focus specifically on
assessing the influence of existing visual conventions on choices of risk repre-
sentation, the immediate historical-political context in which the risk visuals
emerge, and the technological-material factors that might affect them.
THREE MILE ISLAND
Understanding how the representation of radiation risk has changed over time
requires a consideration of what the characteristics of risk visualization were at its
inception. This section examines that moment by looking at visual representations
of the very first widely reported nuclear accident, Three Mile Island. This exam-
ination suggests that the conventions for visually representing radiation risk were
borrowed from the iconography of civil defense discourse and that borrowing
this iconography had some unintended consequences for risk representation.
At 4 a.m. on Wednesday, March 28, 1979, the main cooling pump of reactor
number two at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant shut down, and the auxiliary
pump could not be brought on line to cool the reactor core. The plant’s engineers
shut the reactor down; however, pressure built in its core as the reactor’s uranium
rods continued to fission without being cooled. Steam building in the reactor
core was released to maintain pressure; however, a stuck-open valve allowed
cooling water to flow out of the reactor as well. A cascade of events followed,
including the melting of more than half of the reactor core, the buildup of a
hydrogen gas bubble in the reactor, and the release of radioactive water, vapor,
and particulates into the area surrounding the plant. As the crisis at the plant grew,
the news media descended on southeastern Pennsylvania to cover the event. The
coverage of Three Mile Island represents a watershed moment in radiation risk
communication because it is the first time that news reporters and designers were
tasked with representing radioactive risk from a nuclear power plant accident.
Though there were two other accidents reported on in the 1960s,2 these did not
194
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
2 In 1961 there was an accident at a government test reactor SL-1 in Idaho where three
people were killed. Time magazine and the New York Times ran stories on it in January of
the same year. See Finney (1961) and “Runaway” (1961). The second accident was a partial
meltdown in the core of the Fermi nuclear plant outside Detroit in October of 1966, which was
reported a month later in the New York Times in November of the same year. See Gamson
and Modiglioni (1989, p. 14).

generate the media attention or risk visuals that the Three Mile Island accident
did (Gamson & Modiglioni, 1989, p. 14). Because of their first-of-their-kind
status, the verbal/visual risk representations in the media coverage of Three
Mile Island offer a starting point from which to assess the developments of the
conventions for visualizing radiation risk from nuclear accidents.
Though the visualizations created to describe the accident at Three Mile Island
were the first of their kind, it is important to note that the accident did not
immediately or directly spawn new conventions for representing radiation risk.
That a conventional representation was not immediately created is evidenced
by the initial variety of strategies for risk visualization used in the first two days
of reporting (March 29 and 30, 1979). During this period, the New York Times
and the Washington Post both carried maps of the area at risk from the acci-
dent. However, only the Washington Post offered a visualization of radiation,
which used a shaded square to identify the supposed area affected by radio-
active emissions (O’Toole, Peterson, Richards, Cohn, Lantz, Baer et al., 1979). It
wasn’t until March 31 that newspapers introduced maps that included a bull’s-eye
overlay—a set of concentric rings radiating out from a central point. This design
strategy quickly became a conventional standard for representing radiation risk
for a nuclear accident. After March 31, this visual element appears on every
radiation map in the sample. Figure 10.1 (printed in The Patriot-News of
Harrisburg, PA) is just one example of the bull’s-eye map.
Some rhetorical scholars have argued that visual strategies seldom exist in a
vacuum. Instead, conventions, or existing strategies for representation, often
drive information design (Kostelnick & Hasset, 2003, p. 7). In the case of the
bull’s-eye overlay, its adoption as a convention for describing nuclear accidents
seems to have been driven by earlier civil defense evacuation and risk assessment
maps, which use the bull’s-eye strategy to represent the area of risk created by
a hypothetical atomic bomb attack and its consequent fallout. Visualizations
of this kind appear as early as 1952 in the Greater Boston Civil Defense Manual
and continue to be part of the format of local3 as well as national4 civil defense
pamphlets and booklets distributed to the public into the 1960s. Though by the
1970s, civil defense against nuclear attack was no longer a priority of the govern-
ment5 and the circulation of these documents ebbed, their use in a decade of
public education had likely given them an iconic status.
Their iconicity was also reinforced by their use in the media during the
same period to describe the threat of a potential nuclear strike. In 1955, for
example, the concern over the consequences of nuclear warfare reached a new
fever pitch with the release of estimates of the area of destruction created by the
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
195
3 See Office of Civil Defense, St. Louis (1955).
4 See U.S. Department of Defense, Fallout Protection (1961, p. 13).
5 See Krugler (2006, p. 184).

hydrogen bomb in the 1954 Bikini Atoll tests. These tests revealed that the
hydrogen bomb was more powerful than anticipated and the spread of fallout
greater than expected. In the first few months after the test in 1955, stories such
as “U.S. H-bomb Test Put Lethal Zone at 7,000 sq. Miles: Area Nearly the Size
of Jersey Covered by Atom Fallout . . . Civilian Peril Stressed” and “City Evacu-
ation Plan: 3 Governors and Mayor Weigh Plans to Meet H-Bomb Attack” were
front page news in the New York Times (W. Blair, 1955; Porter, 1955). In the
same period, the Associated Press (1955) produced a map, “Radiation Effects,”
with a bull’s-eye overlay to describe the “range of possible death if an H-bomb
should hit squarely on Cincinnati.” In the visual, a bull’s-eye overlay with three
196
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 10.1. An example of the bull’s-eye overlay often used to represent
the Three Mile Island Accident. This map appeared in The Patriot-News,
a Harrisburg, PA newspaper. Note. © March 31, 1979 The Patriot-News.
All rights reserved. Preprinted and/or used with permission.

concentric circles marks off three zones of radiation risk from fallout in the
aftermath of a nuclear attack. In the inner 140-mile radius circle, all persons
downwind from the bomb blast could expect to receive a fatal dose of radiation.
In the two rings marked off between 160 and 190 miles, 5 to 10 persons out of
100 exposed to radiation might be expected to die. Because of the iconicity the
bull’s-eye overlay in civil defense materials and the media, and its connection
with the risks of radiation, it is not surprising that it would be co-opted for
representing the radiation risk from the nuclear accident at Three Mile Island.
Though the bull’s-eye overlay was uniquely suited for representing the risks
associated with a hypothetical nuclear strike, there were some consequences for
choosing this method to represent a real radiological disaster. In civil defense
materials, for example, the bull’s-eye graphic was useful because it could
simultaneously represent a number of different dimensions of the risk situation,
including the actual risk, the area affected by the risk, and/or the area where risk
intervention had to take place. This polysemic representation of risk was useful
in civil defense documents that were dedicated to educating the populous about
the risks of a nuclear strike as well as informing them who would be affected
and what they should do in the case of an attack. Under real emergency conditions
where simple and direct communications are essential, however, this polysemy
could be detrimental because it encouraged multiple ways of interpreting a risk
communiqué. In addition to being polysemous, the bull’s-eye overlay was also a
visual strategy for generalizing risk. The concentric circles that were the hallmark
of the visualization represented the possible zones of risk rather than specific
details about actual risk location and intensity. In the hypothetical nuclear attack
scenario described in civil defense materials, this representational strategy was
required since no event had taken place. In fact, imaging the broadest range of
potential risk was useful for citizens and local governments who needed to plan
for a range of disaster scenarios. While the general quality of the bull’s-eye
overlay’s concentric rings works well in a civil defense manual, in cases with
real risks with specific locations, it can offer a false sense of either safety or risk
because it does not account for the actual dynamics of radiation spread which
typically follow an asymmetrical path.
An assessment of the first bull’s-eye overlay maps in the New York Times
and Washington Post on March 31 illustrates the problem of visual polysemy
(Cook, 1979; Lyons, 1979). The visual polysemy of these maps seems to be
associated with the prior conventional use of the bull’s-eye overlay to represent
different aspects of the risk situation and the presence of textual cues in news
reporting that supported different readings of the visual. In both the Washington
Post and the New York Times, the maps were juxtaposed with content discussing
radiation levels at the plant and content about Pennsylvania Governor Richard
Thornburgh’s evacuation plans. In the New York Times, for example, the first
fallout map is placed between the headline “U.S. Aides See a Risk of Meltdown at
Pennsylvania Nuclear Plant; More Radioactive Gas Is Released” and its caption,
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
197

which describes Governor Thornburgh’s advisement of evacuation. The juxta-
position of the map with text describing these two different subjects raises
questions about which of the topics the map is representing: the area of radio-
active fallout or the area of evacuation ahead of the foreseeable threat from
radioactive fallout. This ambiguity is further encouraged by the fact that neither
the Times’ nor the Post’s maps are labeled to indicate whether the area within
the bull’s-eye represents the area of evacuation or the area affected by radiation
released from the plant. The Post’s map is titled generically, “Area Surrounding
Three Mile Island Nuclear Plant,” while the Times’ map is not labeled at all.
Though there is no direct reader response evidence that the polysemy of the
maps created confusion or panic, the Carter administration’s Kemeny Report,
which examined the role of the media in the accident, suggests that it might
have. The creators of the report noted that “A few newspapers . . . did present a
more frightening and misleading impression of the accident. This impression
was created through headlines and graphics, and in the selection of material to
print” (President’s Commission, 1979, p. 58).
In addition to facilitating polysemy, the bull’s-eye visual also fosters vague-
ness about the location and magnitude of radiation risk. It suggests, for example,
that people living in the area circumscribed by a ring of the bull’s-eye would be
exposed to the same amount of radioactive material, though in reality, radioactive
gases and particles escaping a nuclear plant follow the path of the prevailing
winds, distributing the risk of radioactivity asymmetrically across geographic
areas (ApSimon & Wilson, 1986, p. 43). Further, the concentric circle design
encourages the interpretation that people living in different rings are exposed to
geometrically higher or lower doses of radiation than those in the rings further
away from or closer to the center of the bull’s-eye. Under actual conditions,
however, exposure rates are never geometrical. They tend to be extremely high
in areas close to the accident and fall off precipitously as distance increases
(Von Hippel & Cochran, 1986, p. 18). This misconception might be easily
cleared up by including radiation measurements in the visual; however, neither
the Post’s nor the Times’ maps included these. In fact, only one mainstream media
source6 provided quantitative values for radiation in their visualizations of the
Three Mile Island accident.
The obvious communicative drawbacks of the bull’s-eye overlay raises ques-
tions about why the mainstream media would have adopted this strategy for
representing risk or at least not tried to supplement it with numerical data and
textual information. More accurate ways of representing radiation risk existed
long before the accident at Three Mile Island. As early as 1957, for example, the
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was employing basic isopleth illustrations—
nested lines with assigned values—to describe the direction and concentration
198
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
6 See Matthews, Agrest, Borger, Lord, Marbach, & Cook (1979).

of radionuclide releases from hypothetical nuclear plant accidents. Figure 10.2,
for example, shows the hypothesized diffusion of radioactive material under
daytime conditions from a ground-level cloud pushed by a 5-meters-per-second
wind (AEC, 1957, p. 61). The figure looks like a bull’s-eye overlay whose rings
have been pinched together and stretched to make concentric conjoined ovals.
Though geometrically this isopleth design and the bull’s-eye overlay appear
similar, their slight differences have important implications for the kinds of
information they convey. The pinch and stretch of the isopleth allows it to
represent more precisely the general physical shape of the radioactive cloud
emitted from the plant, whereas the perfect circles in the bull’s-eye overlay
are visually ambivalent about the direction of the spread of radiation. Further,
isopleth illustrations were not limited strictly to internal government publications,
meaning that here they were familiar representations in the broad public discourse
about radiation risk. For example, many of the popular civil defense educational
materials such as the U.S. Office of Civil Defense’s film Radiological Defense
(1961) and the Defense Department’s handbook on nuclear attack Fallout Pro-
tection (1961) used isopleths to describe the complex shape of the fallout.
The existence of more sophisticated ways of visualizing radiation and their
presence in popular representations of radioactive fallout deepens the mystery
of why the press did not rely on these kinds of visualizations to describe the
accident at Three Mile Island. The absence of these types of representations
in the daily newspapers likely had more to do with the unavailability of data in
the immediate aftermath of the accident than with the media’s negligence. One
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
199
Figure 10.2. Isopleth graphic of radiation fallout from a hypothetical
nuclear accident. From Theoretical Possibilities and Consequences
of Major Nuclear Accidents in Large Nuclear Power Plants (WASH-740),
by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1957, p. 61.

of the criticisms of the utilities and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission fol-
lowing the accident at Three Mile Island was that they failed to gather sufficient
data about radiation levels near the plant and also withheld information about
these levels from the public. The scarcity of data is evidenced in news reports
on the day following the release of the first bull’s-eye maps. On April 1, Walter
Pincus of the Washington Post reported,
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission yesterday began to “blanket the coun-
tryside” with devices to monitor and record accumulated radiation.
Until yesterday, monitoring outside the plant site had consisted primarily of
spot checks that determined radiation levels at a specific time and place.
Without knowing accumulative dosages, no determination can be made on
the levels of exposure of persons in the vicinity of the power plant. (Pincus,
1979, p. A1)
Without accurate comprehensive measures of the radiation levels by a dis-
tributed sensor network, there was no way for the media to know the magnitude
and direction of the releases of radiation from the plant in a more precise manner.
As a consequence, the bull’s-eye overlay with its capacity for generalization
offered the best method to describe the risk of radiation emanating from the plant.
An examination of the available visual conventions and a contextualization of
data for representing radiation risk at Three Mile Island suggests that the main-
stream media, though incomplete and inaccurate in their representations of risk,
nonetheless seemed to have made a reasonable decision when they adopted the
bull’s-eye overlay. Though they might have done more to address the polysemy
generated by the visual strategy, its familiarity and capacity to communicate
generally about risk in a moment of ambiguity made it an appropriate and useful
visual strategy for describing the accident. As we will see, however, the institu-
tional embrace of the bull’s-eye overlay in the long term, despite its shortcomings,
becomes a source for critiquing institutional risk visualizations by grassroots
groups like Safecast.
CHERNOBYL
With the accident at Chernobyl, there is some change in the strategy for
visualization used in the mainstream media’s reporting on radiation risk.7
However, the bull’s-eye overlay continues to play a prominent role in risk
reporting. Like the accident at Three Mile Island, very little is known or reported
about radiation risk in the early days of the accident, encouraging the media
to return to the bull’s-eye overlay as the primary method of risk visualization.
200
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
7 The mainstream media introduces a radiation cloud visualization, which uses stippling,
or black dots, to show represent the location and density of the fallout cloud.

Despite this continuity of visual representation between the two accidents, the
use of the bull’s-eye overlay in the Chernobyl accident incorporates a novel
feature, which, when considered in the sociopolitical context of the accident,
suggests that the bull’s-eye overlay could be used to persuade as well as inform.
The accident at Chernobyl occurred on April 26, 1986, at 1:23 a.m. (Moscow
Standard Time) during a test of the electrical backup systems in reactor four.
The test was conducted under suboptimal conditions, which resulted in a
spike of radioactivity and heat that blew apart the reactor core. Subsequent
explosions and the extreme heat created by radioactive material in a state
of uncontrolled fission set fire to exposed graphite rods, sending black
radioactive smoke billowing from the plant. The nearby town of Pripyat was
evacuated the next day, but there were no reports of the event in the main-
stream Russian media until the evening of April 28 (Luke, 1987). The first
stories in the American media appeared on April 29, three days following the
accident. On the same day, the first visualizations of radiation risk appeared
(Gwertzman, 1986).
Communication scholars writing at the time of the accident suggest that the
Western media, particularly in the United States, endeavored to make the disaster
into a morality tale by contrasting U.S. and Soviet cultures (Dorman & Hirsch,
1986, p. 56). One of the moral narratives that dominated the American media
was that Russia was trying to cover up the seriousness of the accident, particu-
larly the death toll (Dorman & Hirsch, 1986, p. 54; Luke, 1987, p. 361). The
support of the New York Times and the Washington Post of this narrative is
clear in the early coverage of the accident. Though it is not unreasonable for
casualties to be the main focus in early reporting, the degree of unsubstantiated
speculation about the number of casualties in the Times and Post suggests that
the papers were developing a cover-up narrative in which the Soviets were being
vilified for attempting to grossly underestimate the number of victims claimed by
the accident. In the front-page story “Soviet Reporting, Atom Plant ‘Disaster,’
Seeks Help Abroad to Fight Reactor Fire; 2 Deaths Admitted” on April 30, 1986,
for example, Serge Schmemann of the New York Times reports that the Soviet
government “said that two people had been killed in the accident [at Chernobyl]”
(p. A1). He then challenges the credibility of the Russian casualty count with
skeptical statements by Reagan Administration officials. He writes, “Some
Western officials questioned whether the death toll could be as low as two.
In Washington, Kenneth L. Alderman, director of the Arms Control and Disarma-
ment Agency, called the Soviet assertion ‘frankly preposterous’” (Schmemann,
1986, p. A1). Though suspicion of Russian official numbers was not unwarranted
given years of Cold War mistrust, the elevation of emphatic speculative
comments by Western officials as counterbalance to these numbers suggests a
prejudice toward the perspective that the Russian government was being
deceptive and the Reagan Administration was telling the truth. The only way to
move the debate beyond prejudice was to corroborate it with reliable evidence.
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
201

The New York Times does offer corroboration, however, it seems only to
provide further evidence of their prejudice toward a massive Russian cover
up. The supporting evidence appears in a text box immediately following
Schmemann’s (1986) story. The box is titled “U.P.I. [United Press Interna-
tional] Says Toll May Pass 2,000” and contains a story from an anonymous
author who reports that an “unidentified Kiev resident” said that “‘Eighty people
died immediately and some 2,000 people died on the way to hospitals’” (UPI,
1986, p. A10). The article quotes the foreign editor at UPI as stating that “this
source has never proved to be unreliable” but concedes that “it could find
no Soviet official to confirm the report” (UPI, 1986, p. A10). Because there is no
independent confirmation of the death toll, the story’s validity rests on the
Western reader’s judgment of which scenario is more credible: an anonymous
source vouched for by a prominent Western journalist is lying, or Soviet officials
are being deceptive about casualties in an effort to obscure the scope of the
accident. By creating this choice, the New York Times seems to be staking the
credibility of its evidence on the reader’s prejudice toward the latter interpre-
tation and in so doing reinforcing as a sustaining narrative of the accident the
Soviet deception about the death toll. The Washington Post advanced the same
narrative in its April 30 edition using Kenneth L. Alderman’s statement about
the preposterousness of the official Russian casualty count and the UPI figure
of 2,000 deaths to back up this assertion (Bohlen, 1986, p. A1).
If the casualty count of UPI’s anonymous source had been accurate or the
Soviet’s number a substantial undercount of the death toll, the United States
and the Western media would have certainly scored a major moral victory with
their cover-up narrative. As it turns out, however, not only could the UPI numbers
not be substantiated, but the official Soviet numbers were accepted as legiti-
mate. By May 3, Harold Denton, an official of the Nuclear Regulatory Com-
mission, was quoted by the Washington Post as saying, “It is ‘entirely possible’
that Soviet officials gave accurate casualty figures” (Peterson, 1986, p. A16).
A month later, UPI officially retracted its story of the casualty count.
The controversy over the casualty count and the Western media’s failed
attempt to support its narrative of a massive Soviet cover up provides a con-
textual framework for understanding how slight changes in conventional radia-
tion risk visualizations might be used to defend or advance an ideological agenda.
Whereas bull’s-eye visualizations of the Three Mile Island accident include
basic information about the accident’s location and distance from different
geographic points and population centers, the Chernobyl bull’s-eye map also
incorporates details about the size of the population affected by the accident.
Though this addition seems to be an innocent informational enhancement; in the
context of the debate over casualties it also takes on the rhetorical, argumentative
function of defending the ideological perspectives of the New York Times and
Washington Post. The addition of information about population sizes to risk
visuals seems to be a response by these papers to the problem created by their
202
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

claims about the high number of casualties related to the accident and their
subsequent inability to find credible evidence to corroborate them. It seems more
than coincidental that the only maps that included details about the population
in the area around the accident appeared in these publications on May 1 and 2,
the period between the Post and Times reporting on high casualty estimates and
the growing acceptance by U.S. officials that Soviet casualty numbers were
legitimate. The addition of visual representations of population information to
bull’s-eye overlay maps is used to make the case that the casualty numbers have
to be higher than the Soviet government is claiming, given the size of the
population around the plant.
The first bull’s-eye overlay map in the sample with population data appeared
in the New York Times on May 1 in conjunction with the story “197 Hospitalized,
Kremlin Says; Calls for West’s Help Broken Off.” The story revisits the dis-
cussion of casualties initiated in the previous day’s reporting, though in a more
subdued, the-jury-is-still-out tone. In the opening paragraphs, Philip Taubman
describes the Soviet denials of the high casualty count reported by the Times.
He uses the phrase “Western reports” to emphasize that it was not only the New
York Times who reported these numbers: “Moscow denied Western reports
that there had been thousands of casualties. It said 197 people had been hospit-
alized as a result of the accident, 49 of whom were discharged after examination”
(Taubman, 1986, p. A1). Following the description of the Russian response,
Taubman restates the commitment of Western media sources, including the New
York Times, to the cover-up narrative, though the tone of the claim is more
subdued than in the previous day’s reporting. He writes, “Western assessments
of the magnitude of the accident and the health dangers posed by it continued
to be considerably graver than Moscow’s” (p. A1).
The visual that accompanied the story was titled “The People Nearest the
Damaged Reactor” and shows a map of the area, including the countries of
Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Soviet Union, Moldavia, Lithuania, and Poland (The
people near, 1986, p. A10). My Figure 10.3a is not the actual map from the
New York Times, but it presents similar features and demonstrates similar
rhetorical strategies. The locations of a number of population centers are marked
on the map. In the middle of the map, there is a bull’s-eye overlay centered on
Chernobyl and Pripyat, with concentric rings marking the distance in 50-mile
increments radiating out to 250 miles. All of these features also appeared in
maps of the Three Mile Island accident. A notable difference, however, is
in the way that the population centers are represented. In addition to being
marked for location, the size of each population center is indicated using both
larger and smaller dots, ringed circles, and shaded polyhedrons. A key for
decoding the visualization strategies by connecting it with population size is
located in the bottom right-hand corner of the map. Given that the map describes
the population size around the accident in the context of a dispute over casualties
and cover ups and is even juxtaposed with reporting on the dispute, it seems
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
203

204
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 10.3. A comparison of two strategies for representing the radiation risk to the populations centers surrounding
the Chernobyl site. Both maps include a bull’s-eye overlay; however, a) emphasizes the size of population
centers while b) emphasizes the number of population centers.

reasonable to suggest that the map is implicated in this debate. The question is
how? With the Soviet backlash over high casualty counts as well as the growing
insecurity in the West about the reliability of these claims, the Times map offers
a visual defense of its argument that the risks posed by the accident are consider-
ably graver than what Russian officials are letting on. The visual argument
of the map is that there is a substantial population near the accident; therefore,
the Soviet’s claim that only two people were killed seems unreasonable.
One of the critiques leveled against visuals as argument is that visuals are
too ambiguous to reliably make arguments by themselves. Rhetorical and critical
scholars have defended the argumentative function of visuals by making the
case that the problem of ambiguity is often solved by the appearance of visuals
in a particular context or their juxtaposition with written or spoken discourse
(Barthes, 1977, p. 156; J. A. Blair, 2004, p. 47). Though this is certainly case,
I would argue the ambiguity of visuals is itself a rhetorical strength because
it offers arguers a subtle and deniable method for making claims. In the case
of the New York Times, for example, a subtle and deniable argument is required
because the paper must walk a fine line between defending its narrative about
the Soviet cover up and risking the further loss of credibility for doing so too
forcefully under uncertain conditions of evidence. With the UPI casualty count
under suspicion and no other reliable information to support its claim, the paper
falls back on the probabilistic argument that the Soviet estimates have to be
wrong; that is, given the size of the population near the accident the likelihood of
only two people being killed seems improbable. Because this argument is specu-
lative, making it in print might invite the charge that the paper was desperately
grasping at straws to defend its casualty cover-up narrative. By using a visual to
make the argument, however, the paper can avoid having its defense publicly
critiqued because it would be difficult for critics in the Eastern or Western media
to cite these visual arguments and too involved to explain simply in a critique.
The drawback to this strategy, however, is that the reader might miss their
defensive argument. In hopes of drawing some attention to the map and the
argument it is making, the Times offers readers a few verbal cues to help them
make the connection. The map’s title, “The People Near the Damaged Reactor,”
indicates that the focus of the map is people and their proximity to the reactor.
This frames the viewer’s visual experience by promoting the idea that the popu-
lation centers represented in the bull’s-eye are near the damaged reactor and
therefore at risk from radiation. The number of people at risk is also alluded
to briefly in the text of the article in a discussion about the contamination of
the water supply. Taubman writes,
There have been constant unconfirmed rumors reaching Moscow that Kiev’s
water supply might have been contaminated by the accident. . . . The plant
is on the Pripyat River, which feeds into . . . a 50 mile-long reservoir that
supplies water to Kiev, a city of 2.5 million people. (Taubman, 1986, p. A10)
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
205

The inclusion of Kiev, the Pripyat River, and the Kiev Reservoir on the map
as well as in the story create a link between the text and the visual. This link
might also invite the reader to connect the risks, the number of people in harm’s
way, and the claims about the extent of the casualties, which are also part of
the conversation in the text.
The strategic use of population density visualizations to defend arguments of
a Soviet cover up of casualties was not limited to the New York Times. On May 2,
the day following the publication of the map in the Times, the Washington Post
relied on a similar strategy to defend the same position. The Post presented a map
entitled “Density of Population around Chernobyl” in conjunction with the story
“Soviet Lid on News of Chernobyl Reflects Cost, Security, Image Concerns.”
This article, like the article in the Times, discusses the Russian report on injuries,
noting that the Russian’s claimed that “‘Only’ 197 were hospitalized after the
accident” (Lee, 1986, p. A26). In a similar fashion, the article also informs the
reader of the Soviet critiques of Western reports explaining that Tass, the official
Soviet news agency, “charged ‘bourgeois mass media’ with ‘whipping up the
scale’ of the disaster” (Lee, 1986, p. A26). The visual that appears directly
below the article on the page, like the visual in the New York Times, supports the
position that the casualties have to be higher than the Soviets are letting on.
Like the Times map, the title of the Post map “Density of Population around
Chernobyl” frames the visual for the reader by highlighting the number of people
near the accident. Also like the Times map, the Post map includes graphic
representation of the population size.
Unlike the Times map, however, the Post map marks every population center,
big or small, within a 150 mile radius of Chernobyl (Cook, 1986, A26). Though
the claim that the strategy is meant to support is the same—that the risk and
casualties have to be higher given the number of persons living around the
plant— the technique of argument here is different. As Figure 10.3a demon-
strates generically, The New York Times visual relied on the size of the popula-
tion centers near the accident to make its point. To comprehend these essential
features of argument, the reader must visually jump between the cities on the
map and the information about population density in a “Population Key.” In
the Post map (which was similar to Figure 10.3b), the visualization focuses on
the number of population centers rather than their magnitude. Though the map
also includes a population key, there is no need for the reader to look at it. Instead,
a quick glance at the bull’s-eye overlay region on the map densely packed with
dots is sufficient to form an impression of the population density around the
plant. This strategy of visualization, therefore, makes an accumulation argument
in which the number of population centers at risk in the accident reinforces the
visualizer’s perspective.
Though the introduction of population size to bull’s-eye overlays is a subtle
change in risk representation, its introduction to the Washington Post and the New
York Times maps during a period of debate over Russian casualty assessments
206
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

seems more than a coincidence or an unconscious communicative act. Instead,
it can be reasonably considered a rhetorical strategy on the part of the papers
to subtly defend their ideological narrative about Russian attempts to cover up
the deadly consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear accident. Their use of risk
visualizations toward this end illuminates the value of the semantic ambiguity
of visuals for making subtle and deniable claims about risk.
FUKUSHIMA
Whereas the previous sections have examined how visual conventions and
the ideologies of risk visualizers have influenced representation, this final section
will explore how new technologies, in particular the Internet, have changed it.
A comparison between old and new print visualizations in the New York Times
suggests that the affordances of the Internet have begun to change print repre-
sentations of risk and that the movement from print to online media has greatly
expanded the content of risk visualization. Perhaps more significantly, however,
the Internet has allowed grassroots groups outside of the mainstream media to
create and broadcast their own radiation risk visualizations. A comparison
between the risk representations of Safecast and the online visualizations in the
New York Times reveals that visual strategies of grassroots organizations diverge
from and even challenge conventional practices of risk visualization in the main-
stream media and that these divergences and challenges can be directly linked
to the different goals and audiences of the two.
Perhaps the most significant change in risk representation in the mainstream
media occasioned by the advent of Internet has been the use of rich multi-
layered formats known as “mashups.” Mashups are aggregates of discrete nodes
of information that are thematically coherent but separated from each other in
cyberspace. These nodes are conceptually bound together by an anchor, a text
or visual that a user would encounter first while browsing, which provides a
hub for accessing off-screen nodes. By clicking links embedded in the anchor,
off-screen nodes appear overlaid on the text or visual or in a separate window.
These features offer solutions to the problem of information density by allowing
individual layers of information to be peeled off and sequestered in cyberspace.
At the same time, links in the mashup connect the informational nodes to the
anchor and each other, promoting conceptual connections and facilitating ease
of access.
The influence of online mashups on print visualizations of radiation risk is
illustrated in the graphic associated with the New York Times story “Data Show
Radiation Spread; Frantic Repairs Go On,” which appeared on March 18, 2011
(Cox, Ericson, & Tse, 2011a). The graphic is divided into two visual sections.
One is dominated by a giant map of Japan with a bull’s-eye overlay. The map
commands the most attention, suggesting that this element is the print equivalent
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
207

of the anchor in an online mashup. The other section is subdivided into four
columns of information, including the distance from the risk event, the magnitude
of radiation risk, the possible effects of radiation, and the population of the risk
area. The content in this section emulates the format of online mashups by
presenting individual nodes of information in visually separate spaces and con-
necting these nodes to the visual anchor using lines and brackets. Like the
radiation visuals of Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, the visual anchor of the
Fukushima accident includes the source of the risk, its geographical extent, and
the populations affected by the risk. However, unlike previous print visualiza-
tions, the nodes in the second section include additional risk information like
magnitude and risk effects.
This brief visual assessment of a sample of risk representation in the New York
Times suggests that the style and content of the print media had been influenced
by the online media mashup. The move in older print formats to emulate newer
online ones seems to run counter to the process of remediation outline by Bolter
and Grusin (1999, p. 45). Instead of recycling or repurposing old media, what
seems to be happening here is a kind of retrocycling or retropurposing, where
traditional media is being “modernized” or updated by adding stylistic elements
from new media. But why is this happening? Though modernization may be
one reason for retropurposing, a more pragmatic reason might be the require-
ments of producing news simultaneously in both print and online formats.
Because they are working in two formats, it makes sense from a production
standpoint to create visuals that can function in both rather than producing
different visuals for each. In fact, the visualization previously discussed appeared
in both the print and online versions of the New York Times in virtually the same
format (Cox et al., 2011a; Cox, Ericson, & Tse, 2011b). Considering the require-
ments of news production, it seems that this visual representation of risk is a
hybrid style emulating the format of a media mashup but adapting it to the
limits of the printed page.
In addition to producing hybrid print/online visualizations, the New York Times
also developed an interactive online map representing the radiation risk from
Fukushima. The interactive map was included as part of a suite of interactive
maps generally titled “Map of the Damage from the Japanese Earthquake.” By
selecting “radiation levels” on the infographic’s navigation bar, the user can
bring up a map of the area within a 50 km radius of the accident. Within this
radius, the map includes 44 dots, ranging in color from white to dark purple,
which indicate increasingly higher levels of radiation. When the user’s cursor
moves over a dot, a text box appears on the page that includes the radiation
level measured in microsieverts per hour (Sv/h), the date of the measurement,
the number of measures taken, a graph of the change in measurement over time
(between March 17 and April 10, 2011), and a comparative contextualization
of the measurement (Bloch, Cox, Marsh, McLean, Tse, Park et al., 2011). By
providing an interactive map that included specific information about radiation
208
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

levels near the accident, the New York Times allowed their online readership in
both the United States and Asia to explore the risks of radiation from the accident
in more detail than they had previously been able to thanks to the affordances of
the Internet and the availability of information about radiation risk. This level and
type of detail, though far richer than print representations from previous
accidents, were qualitatively and quantitatively limited when compared to the
visualizations created by Safecast. This disparity, I will argue, is a consequence of
differences between the goals, audiences, and information-gathering practices of
the producers of mainstream media and those of the citizen-science endeavor.
The organization Safecast and its website have emerged from a complex
interplay of individual and collective needs and public and expert exigencies.
Safecast began as RDTN.org, an online radiation mapping site conceived by
Portland, Oregon designer Marcelino Alvarez and developed with the help of his
colleagues at Uncorked Studios. In the days following Japan’s earthquake and
nuclear accident, Alvarez became frustrated with the limited information in the
American media about the crisis. In his personal blog at Uncorked Studios on
March 21, 2011, he explains,
I wanted to gather all the information that the talking heads did not have
time to talk about. I wanted to create a site so simple and easy to use that
it would allow anyone the ability to check and see if all things were clear.
(Alvarez, 2011, para. 3)
In addition to personal motives, Alvarez was also driven by a sense of demo-
cratic idealism that his website could provide information for and by the people
about radiation risk, “We thought there was something noble to the notion of
having people purchase their own detection devices and post data” (Alvarez,
2011, para. 5). Energized by these frustrations and convictions, he and his
co-workers developed and launched the website RDTN.org on March 19, 2011,
a little more than a week after the accident at Fukushima.
Alvarez’s development of an online visual representation of radiation levels
attracted attention early on from well-connected individuals in the computer
technology and information design communities. This group, who might best
be described as publicizers and networkers, included three figures who would
become central to the advertisement of the site and its eventual transforma-
tion to a Japan-based alternative radiation monitoring network. They included
Sean Bonner, an online entrepreneur, journalist, and activist in Los Angeles;
Joi Ito, venture capitalist, high-tech entrepreneur, activist, and soon-to-be head
of MIT Media lab; and Pieter Franken, an information technology manager in
the Tokyo banking sector and visiting researcher at Keio University in Tokyo.
On the day before the launch of the RDTN website, Alvarez and his team in
Oregon were put in touch with Ito and his associates. Collectively they agreed
to collaborate on developing and publicizing the site.
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
209

As RDTN began to develop and get attention in the media for its efforts to
visualize risk, a parallel citizen-science endeavor for radiation measuring was
starting to take shape across the Pacific in Japan. This endeavor was set in motion
by American expatriate Christopher Wang, known as Akiba, who was a member
of Tokyo Hackerspace, a club dedicated to modifying existing technologies
to extend their utility or create new devices (Tokyo Hackerspace, n.d.). On
March 15, 2011, the Tuesday following the earthquake, Akiba and his tech-savvy
hacker compatriots met at Tokyo Hackerspace to decide how they could use their
technical skills to respond to the crisis created by the earthquake, tsunami, and
nuclear accident. They decided to build solar lanterns and to develop a Geiger
counter network to collect radiation readings in Tokyo and then expand the
network out into the rest of Japan. Because of his experience building custom
electronic devices,8 Akiba assumed the task of hacking or fabricating Geiger
counters for the group’s sensor network. On April 2, Pieter Franken, who was an
electronics enthusiast, participated in one of Tokyo Hackerspace’s solar lantern
builds. At the event, he introduced himself to Akiba and the two discussed the
group’s plans to establish a radiation sensor network.
By the end of March and beginning of April, the original confederation of
RDTN and Ito, Bonner, and Franken expanded to include Akiba and a few
other members of Tokyo Hackerspace. The participants in this newly expanded
confederation recognized that their fundamental problem was the lack of Geiger
counters. To respond to this need, RDTN and Tokyo Hackerspace jointly broad-
cast a pledge drive for donations using the Internet fundraising site Kickstarter
(Aaron, 2011). They also realized that with the expansion of the group, it was
important to work more closely to coordinate their efforts. In response to this
exigence, representatives from each part of the collective agreed to meet for
face-to-face discussions about the enterprise at the New Context Conference
in Tokyo on April 15, 2011. During the conference, they decided to “focus on
collecting data and concluded that a new brand was needed to describe both
the work we were doing now and in the future. . . . We were to be called Safecast”
(Safecast, 2011a).
By the time the citizen-science collective officially changed its name to
Safecast on April 24, 2011, the transformation of its mission from strictly visual-
ization to data gathering and visualization had already begun. Their most sig-
nificant innovation was the development of the bGeigi, a bento-box-sized radia-
tion measuring device, which could be strapped to the side of a car and driven
around to take and download continuous radiation measurements. Because
of its mobility and automaticity, the device provided a simple and reasonably
inexpensive method for collecting measurements across a large area, certainly a
210
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
8 Akiba is the owner of Freaklabs, which designs and manufactures custom-built wireless
sensor devices. See his website freaklabs.org for more details.

boon for a small grassroots organization aspiring to provide a comprehensive
survey of radiation levels. As a consequence of Safecast’s extra-institutional
status and its unique mission to both gather and visualize radiation risk online,
its representations of risk offer a unique opportunity to examine the way in
which changes in the audience for and source of risk representations impact
visualization (S. Bonner, personal communication, July 31, 2012).
Like the New York Times, Safecast was able to harness the affordances of the
Internet in their Safecast map to create a risk visual that was more information-
dense and visually sophisticated than its print predecessors. However, unlike
the Times, Safecast pushes these affordances far beyond the risk visualizations
created by the mainstream media. It even uses them to critique conventional
risk visualization practices.
The use of color by Safecast offers one example of how the group’s visual
strategies go beyond those used by the mainstream media. Though Safecast, like
the Times, employs color to describe variations in radiation levels, the role of
color in Safecast’s visual goes beyond representing risk at a fixed point. Instead,
it is used to indicate risk at different geographical scopes. On the Safecast map,
radiation levels are visualized using a grid of colored squares (Figure 10.4a).
Cooler colors (green or blue) represent levels of radiation either commensurate
with or barely elevated above levels of radiation previous to the accident, and
hotter colors (red or yellow) are used to indicate radiation levels that are sub-
stantially higher.9 When the user places their cursor over a colored square on the
grid of the map, a textbox pops up, which includes the precise level of radiation
measured in counts per minute (CPM) and microsieverts per hour (Sv/h),
the GPS coordinates of the measurement, and the date on which it was taken. In
addition to providing specific information about radiation levels and measure-
ments, the map allows users to zoom in and out so that they can examine these
metrics at different levels of granularity. As the user zooms out a few levels,
the individual measurements are replaced with a grid of larger colored squares
whose colors and radiation levels are determined by averaging all of the squares
at the subordinate level that the larger square encompasses (Figure 10.4b). By
zooming out even further, the user can examine the distribution of radiation
risk around the whole region and, at the highest resolution, the whole country.
This strategy for representation allows users, for example, to identify a hotspot
20 miles northwest of Tokyo at the regional level, which at a higher resolution
can be pinpointed to a stretch of highway 2km west of Daiichi Hospital between
the cities of Ota and Isesaki (Safecast, 2011b).
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
211
9 Safecast has changed their color coding for risk over time. Initially, they used a con-
ventional green-to red-risk scale. However, their most recent visualization breaks with this
conventional color scheme by using a blue to light yellow risk scale.

212
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
Figure 10.4. Radiation visualizations on the Safecast Map (Safecast, 2011b).
Images retrieved from Safecast.org. Used under the terms of a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en_US.

While Safecast mobilizes color in a more sophisticated fashion than the Times
to represent the radiation risk at different geographical scopes, perhaps more
impressive is the number of radiation measurements it displays and the amount
of auxiliary detail it offers for contextualizing risk. Though the Times interactive
map far outstrips its print predecessors by including radiation measures for 44
separate locations in the proximity of the accident, it seems a paltry account of
risk when compared to Safecast’s map, which in its very first iteration included
over 100 radiation measurements and now, thanks to the bGeigi and the efforts
of Safecast volunteers, boasts over 3 million individual measurements taken
from the very northern to the very southern tip of the main island of Japan
(Safecast, 2011b). In addition to visualizing a greater number of measurements,
Safecast also includes in its risk representations more contextual details so that
the reader can orient themselves with respect to the risk.
In the Times interactive map, dots on the map marked the places where
radiation levels were taken so that a user in Japan could get a general sense of
what the risk levels were at various locations and distances from the nuclear
plant. However, no names for the locations are given when the user clicks on
a dot and the areas in which the dots appear are devoid of most navigational
features such as roadways, mountains, or rivers. Though the map does contain a
few major cities as locational markers, only a very general sense of the location
of the measurement sites can be extrapolated from these (Bloch et al., 2011). In
contradistinction, the Safecast map provides the reader with a very fine level of
detail. Not only are roads, mountains, and rivers and other navigational features
marked, but each of the individual readings is tagged with a GPS coordinate that
would allow any user with a GPS-capable device to locate the exact spot where
the measurement was taken. In addition, because Safecast’s map includes so
many measurements and the capability to identify readings at scales of hundreds
of meters, users of its maps living in the areas measured would be able to find
the reading nearest their location with great precision.
In addition to providing a more comprehensive account of radiation levels
than the Times online map, the Safecast map also supplies a more accurate picture
of radiation distribution that avoids the weaknesses of the conventional bull’s-eye
overlay used by the mainstream media but incorporates its strengths. Like the
bull’s-eye overlay, the Safecast grid map, at the very broadest level of visual-
ization, allows the user to have a sense of the average levels of radiation in
areas around the plant. In fact, the map even incorporates a very basic bull’s-eye
overlay design that outlines the 20km evacuation zone around Fukushima and,
in earlier iterations, also included the 50km ring marking the evacuation zone
suggested by the U.S. Embassy. Because the visualization in the Safecast map
is built up dynamically by continually averaging radiation values from more
local measurements, it can represent, unlike the bull’s-eye overlay, the asymmetry
of the distribution of radiation risk from a nuclear accident. Interestingly, in
talking with the media about their efforts, members of Safecast reveal a keen
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
213

awareness of the value in their visual technique for overcoming the limitations
of the bull’s-eye overlay. In an interview in fall 2011 with PBS News Hour
correspondent Miles O’Brien, Safecast’s Sean Bonner illustrates this awareness
in the following exchange:
Miles O’Brien: Sean Bonner is one of the founders of Safecast, an all-
volunteer organization that has plotted the most detailed maps of radiation
contamination in Japan. . . . Radiation doesn’t fit that nice neat little disk they
want to paint on the map right?
Sean Bonner: Yes. Radiation isn’t looking at a compass radiating outward.
Miles O’Brien: Yes. That’s right. It’s a very arbitrary thing.
Sean Bonner: Yes. There is wind and topography and this crazy stuff
that ends up playing into it. (O’Brien, 2011)
Here, O’Brien and Bonner take aim at the bull’s-eye overlay’s inability to capture
the nuances of radiation movement. O’Brien, for example, critiques the overlay’s
inherent prejudice toward an orderly symmetrical advance of radiation with the
comment/question, “Radiation doesn’t fit that nice neat little disk they want
to paint on the map right?” In addition, the two team up to emphasize the asym-
metrical nature of the risk. O’Brien begins the critique with the statement that
“It’s [radiation is] a very arbitrary thing,” and Bonner elaborates by talking
about the variety of factors that play into its distribution: “There is wind and
topography and this crazy stuff that ends up playing into it.” With the grid map
design, Safecast is able not only to illuminate the complexity of the distribution
of radiation risk but also critique conventional styles of risk representation that
have been used by the media.
The technical affordances of the Internet allow Safecast and the New York
Times to create visualizations of radiation risk that far exceed the informa-
tional and visual capacities of their print predecessors; however, the differences
between the Safecast map and the New York Times online map cannot be
explained by changes in technological circumstances. In order to account for
the divergences in visualization here we must consider the differences in the
goals and audiences of the mainstream media and grassroots groups. The goal of
news reporting is to get the basic facts about the accident out in an accessible
and concise fashion. The New York Times interactive visual goes beyond the
basic facts by providing some precise levels of radiation data; however, it is
not surprising that the creators of the map stopped far short of providing a
comprehensive set of datapoints. Although the print and online versions of the
Times circulate in Japan and other parts of Asia, its primary audience is the
American news-reading public. For the majority of this audience, providing a few
214
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

datapoints in the area around the plant would be sufficient to satisfy most of
their demands for information about the radiation levels. Further, geographically
contextualizing these datapoints with a few navigational features would be suf-
ficient for American readers to get the gist of the location of the radiation
while at the same time avoiding information overload on the map. For Safecast,
however, comprehensiveness and detail rather than sufficiency and concision
are the primary design parameters. These goals are clearly spelled out in their
website blog, where they write,
Our hope in launching this site is that clear reliable data can provide focus
on the critical relief efforts needed in Japan. . . . We have been working
day and night to find and integrate new data sources that can help provide
reliable data. (Ewald, 2011)
As stated, the goal of Safecast’s citizen-science endeavor was to get reliable
data and make it useful for victims of the Fukushima accident. Given these
goals, it’s not surprising that their map is far more comprehensive and includes
navigational details such as roads, mountains, and rivers. Therefore, the different
goals of the mainstream media and grassroots organizations seem to be as much if
not more central than technological changes are in accounting for the choices
made when visualizing risk.
CONCLUSION
By following the development of radiation risk visualization over time, it is
possible to see how changes in informational, sociopolitical, and/or technological
contexts can have important consequences for risk communication and argument.
An examination of risk representation at its conception reveals that visualizers
of the Three Mile Island accident relied on the existing conventions from civil
defense manuals for visualizing radiation risk. Though these conventional repre-
sentations were suitable models for visualization, they had significant conse-
quences for how media consumers understood the risks of radiation from Three
Mile Island and subsequent accidents. With the advent of Chernobyl, the bull’s-
eye strategy for visualizing risk was preserved but enhanced with population
information to make it a tool for ideological argument. This analysis reveals
how the New York Times and Washington Post used bull’s-eye visuals with
population data to discretely argue that the Soviets were covering up the number
of casualties from the accident. Finally, with the accident at Fukushima, we
witness a more dramatic change in risk visualization facilitated in part by the
affordances of the Internet and in part with the emergence of grassroots risk
visualizations. An investigation of the online group Safecast suggested that
thanks to the affordances of the Internet, radiation maps could be created that
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
215

juxtaposed massive amounts of information to provide comprehensive and
detailed representations of risk. It also revealed, however, that even though this
technology was widely available, its accessibility alone could not account for the
unique character of Safecast’s risk visualization strategy. A comparison between
the Safecast map and the New York Times online interactive map suggests that
differences in the goals and audiences of institutional and noninstitutional risk
visualizers play a critical role in shaping visual choices of risk communication.
As attention to risk and the use of visuals to communicate about it increases,
the efforts of scholars in rhetoric, communication, information design, and pro-
fessional and technical writing to understand the practical and ethical conse-
quences of these practices need to keep pace. Though important gains have
been made in the last two decades to develop rhetorical perspectives on visual
artifacts like murals, photographs, architecture, and video games, it’s surprising
that risk representation that plays a vital role in communications between govern-
ments and citizens, employers and workers, caregivers and patients, businesses
and consumers has been ignored. This chapter has endeavored to make an initial
contribution toward a deeper understanding of risk visualization by exploring
the strengths and limitations of risk representation strategies, the variety of
roles they can play in risk communication, and the myriad factors that might
influences the choices of risk visualizers.
REFERENCES
Aaron, J. (2011, March 30). Japan’s crowdsourced radiation maps [Blog post]. New
Scientist. Retrieved from http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/onepercent/2011/03/
crowdsourced-radiation-maps.html
Alvarez, M. (2011, March 21). 72 hours from concept to launch: RDTN.org [Blog post].
Retrieved from http://uncorkedstudios.com/words/page/3
ApSimon, H., & Wilson, J. (1986). Tracking the cloud from Chernobyl. New Scientist,
111, 42–45.
Associated Press. (1955, March 4). Radiation effects [Fallout map]. Retrieved from
http://www.apimages.com
Atomic Energy Commission. (1957). Theoretical possibilities and consequences of
major nuclear accidents in large nuclear power plants (WASH-740). Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Barthes, R. (1977). Rhetoric of the image. In C. Handa (Ed.), Visual rhetoric in a digital
world (pp. 152–163). Boston, MA: Bedford.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: Towards a new modernity. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Birdsell, D., & Groarke, L. (2007). Outlines of a theory of visual argument. Argumentation
and Advocacy, 43, 103–113.
Blair, J. A. (2004). The rhetoric of visual arguments. In C. Hill & M. Helmers (Eds.),
Defining visual rhetorics (pp. 344–363). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Blair, W. (1955, February 16). U.S. H-bomb test put lethal zone at 7,000 sq. miles.
New York Times.
216
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Bloch, M., Cox, A., Marsh, B., McLean, A., Tse, T. M., Park, H., et al. (2011).
Map of the damage from the Japanese earthquake [Radiation map]. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/packages/flash/newsgraphics/2011/0311-japan-earthquake-
map/
Bohlen, C. (1986, April 30). U.S. experts see situation as more serious than admitted.
Washington Post, pp. A1, A18.
Bolter, D., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation: Understanding new media. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Brasseur, L. (2005). Florence Nightingale’s visual rhetoric in the rose diagrams. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 14(2), 161–182.
Cook, D. (1979, March 31). Area surrounding Three Mile Island nuclear plant [Radiation
map]. Washington Post, p. A8.
Cook, D. (1986, May 2). Density of the population around Chernobyl [Radiation map].
Washington Post, p. A26.
Cox, A., Ericson, M., & Tse, A. (2011a, March 18). The evacuation zones around the
Fukushima plant [Map]. New York Times, p. A11.
Cox, A., Ericson, M., & Tse, A. (2011b, March 25). The evacuation zones around the
Fukushima plant [Map]. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/
packages/flash/newsgraphics/2011/0311-japan-earthquake-map/
Davisson, A. (2011). Beyond the borders of red and blue states: Google maps as a site
of rhetorical invention in the 2008 presidential election. Rhetoric and Public Affairs,
14(1), 101–124.
Dorman, W., & Hirsch, D. (1986). The U.S. media’s slant. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist,
43(1), 54–56.
Ewald, D. (2011, March 23). Open dialogue [Blog]. Retrieved from http://blog.safecast.
org/2011/03/open-dialogue/
Farrell, T., & Goodnight, T. (1998). Accidental rhetoric: The root metaphors of Three
Mile Island. In C. Waddell (Ed.), Landmark essays on rhetoric and the environment
(pp. 75–105). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Finney, J. (1961, January 5). Atom aides scan effect of blast. New York Times, p. 19.
Gamson, W., & Modigliani, A. (1989). Media discourse and public opinion on
nuclear power: A constructionist approach. The American Journal of Sociology,
95(1), 1–37.
Gil de Zuñiga, H., Puig-I-Abril, E., & Rojas, H. (2009). Weblogs, traditional sources
online and political participation: An assessment of how the Internet is changing
the political environment. New Media and Society, 11(4), 553–574. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1461444809102960
Gross, A. (2009). Toward a theory of verbal-visual interaction: The example of Lavoisier.
Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 39(2), 147–169.
Gwertzman, B. (1986, April 29). Plume of radioactive material spread from accident
at Pripyat [Radiation map]. New York Times, p. A1.
Hagan, S. (2007). Visual/verbal collaboration in print: Complementary differences, neces-
sary ties and an untapped rhetorical opportunity. Written Communication, 24(1),
49–83.
Herndl, C., Fennell, B., & Miller, C. (1991). Understanding failures in organizational
discourse: The accident at Three Mile Island and the shuttle Challenger disaster. In
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
217

C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions (pp. 279–305).
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Katz, S., & Miller, C. (1996). The low-level radioactive waste siting controversy in
North Carolina: Toward a rhetorical model of risk communication. In C. Herndl &
S. Brown (Eds.), Green culture (pp. 111–140). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Keränen, L. (2011). Concocting viral apocalypse: Catastrophic risk and the production
of bio(in)security. Western Journal of Communication, 75(5), 451–472.
Kitzinger, J. (2009). Risk and regulation advisory council. Department for Business
Innovation and Skills. Retrieved from http://bis.ecgroup.net/Publications/AboutUs/
RiskandRegulationAdvisoryCouncil.aspx
Kostelnick, C., & Hassett, M. (2003). Shaping information: The rhetoric of visual con-
ventions. Carbondale, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2006). The semiotic landscape: Language and visual
communication. Reading images: The grammar of visual design (2nd ed.). London,
UK: Routledge.
Krugler, D. (2006). This is only a test: How Washington D.C. prepared for nuclear war.
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lee, G. (1986, May 2). Soviet lid on news of Chernobyl reflects cost, security, image
concerns. Washington Post, p. A26.
Luke, T. (1987). Chernobyl: The packaging of transnational ecological disaster. Critical
Studies in Mass Communication, 4, 351–375.
Lyons, R. (1979, March 31). Children evacuated. New York Times, p. A1.
Mathews, T., Agrest, S., Borger, G., Lord, M., Marbach, W. D., & Cook, W. J. (1979,
April 9). Nuclear accident. Newsweek, pp. 24–33.
Miller, C. (2003). The presumption of expertise: The role of ethos in risk analysis.
Configurations, 11(2), 163–202.
O’Brien, M. (2011, November 10). Safecast draws on power of the crowd to map Japan’s
radiation. PBS News Hour. Retrieved from http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/science/
july-dec11/japanradiation_11-10.html
Office of Civil Defense, St. Louis. (1955). Escape from H-bomb: St. Louis county and city
[Fallout map]. Retrieved from http://www.historyhappenshere.org/archives/4193/
O’Toole, T., Peterson, B., Richards, B., Cohn, V., Lentz, P., Baer, J., et al. (1979, March
29). Radiation spreads 10 miles from a-plant mishap site. Washington Post, pp. A1,
A7.
Peterson, C. (1986, May 3). Plume believed deadly for miles. Washington Post, pp. A1,
A16.
Pincus, W. (1979, April 1). Radiation monitors installed to check exposure. Washington
Post, pp. A1, A6.
Porter, R. (1955, March 12). City evacuation plan: 3 governors and mayor weigh plans
to meet H-bomb attack. New York Times, p. 1.
President’s Commission on the Accident at Three Mile Island. (1979). Report of the
President’s commission on the accident at Three Mile Island. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Ropeik, D. (2011, June 27). Risk reporting 101. Columbia Journalism Review. Retrieved
from http://www.cjr.org/the_observatory/risk_reporting_101.php?page=all
218
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Runaway Reactor. (1961, January 13). Time, pp. 18–19.
Safecast. (2011a). History. Retrieved from http://blog.safecast.org/history/
Safecast. (2011b, August). Maps. Retrieved from http://blog.safecast.org/maps/
Sauer, B. (2003). Rhetoric of risk: Technical documentation in hazardous environments.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schmemann, S. (1986, April 30). Soviet reporting, atom plant “disaster,” seeks help
abroad to fight reactor fire; 2 deaths admitted. New York Times, p. A1.
Taubman, P. (1986, May 1). 197 hospitalized, Kremlin says; call’s for West’s help
broken off. New York Times, p. A1, A10.
The people nearest the damaged reactor. (1986, May 1). [Radiation map]. New York Times,
p. A10.
Tokyo Hackerspace. (n.d.) What is Tokyo hackerspace? Retrieved from http://tokyo
hackerspace.org/en/what-is-tokyo-hackerspace
UPI says toll may pass 2,000. (1986, April 30). New York Times, p. A10.
U.S. Department of Defense. (1961). Fallout protection: What to know and do about
a nuclear attack. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved from
http://ia700300.us.archive.org/7/items/falloutprotectio00unitrich/falloutprotectio00
unitrich.pdf
U.S. Office of Civil Defense. (1961). Radiological defense [Motion picture]. Retrieved
from http://archive.org/details/Radiolog1961
Von Hippel, F., & Cochran, T. (1986). Estimating long-term health effects. Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientist, 43(1), 18–24.
Warnick, B. (2007). Rhetoric online: Persuasion and politics on the World Wide Web.
New York, NY: Peter Lang.
MELTDOWNS IN THE MEDIA
/
219

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 11
Intersections: Scientific and
Parascientific Communication
on the Internet
Ashley R. Kelly and Carolyn R. Miller
ABSTRACT
We examine the purported “erosion,” suggested by Trench (2008), of
boundaries between expert and non-expert spheres of discourse in science
communication online. Taking online communications in response to the
Fukushima Daiichi disaster as our case, we suggest that there are genres,
or protogenres, of science communication emerging online that do seem to
blur the boundaries between expert and non-expert spheres of discourse.
These genres, we suggest, might be described as “parascientific genres,” a
notion from Kaplan and Radin (2011) we take up and adapt to help explore
the genres we are seeing emerge online. Parascientific genres are those that
function alongside traditional genres of science communication in that
they borrow scientific authority and knowledge structures from the realm
of science but operate without the gatekeeping and traditional reporting
forms of internal science communication.
INTRODUCTION
Some decades ago, John Ziman (1968) characterized science as “public knowl-
edge,” constituted in an important way by its communication system. The
“public” that Ziman referred to was not voting citizens or the mass media
audience but rather the “free, intellectual consensus” of other scientists (p. 145),
and much of the subsequent research on scientific communication has been
devoted to characterizing expert interchange within the scientific community as it
221

sets itself apart from the “lay,” “non-expert,” or general public. Increasingly,
however, communication with that wider public has been of interest, a develop-
ment due in part to the reversals of public deference to expertise of the late
1960s and to governmental concern for acceptance of public projects and public
funding of research (Cooke, 1991; Gaskins, 1992). This newer focus has given
rise to several subspecialties (such as risk communication) and scholarly forums
(such as Public Understanding of Science). One recent example is the 2012
National Academy of Science Sackler Colloquium on “The Science of Science
Communication,” which had as one of its main goals “To improve understanding
of relations between the scientific community and the public” (National Academy
of Sciences, n.d.).
This distinction between expert and non-expert communities or spheres of
discourse and the boundaries between them has been central to recent views
of science. Such views have been built on Thomas Kuhn’s (1970) picture of
disciplinary knowledge as generated and judged by a “special kind of com-
munity” (p. 167); on Toulmin’s (1958) notion of “argument fields” involving
“field-dependent” premises; and the sociological concept of “boundary work”
necessary to distinguish one discipline from another and science from not-science
(Gieryn, 1999; Taylor, 1991). The result has been that studies of scientific
communication have become formulated along these same lines, with distinct
lines of research devoted to, on the one hand, internal or expert communication
(Ceccarelli, 2001; Gross, Harmon, & Reidy, 2002; Harris, 1991) and, on the
other, to external or public communication (for example, Brossard, 2009; Bucchi,
2008; Condit, Lynch, & Winderman, 2012; Stocking & Holstein, 2009), with
both presuming the distinctiveness of the two spheres of discourse. Farrell and
Goodnight’s (1981) classic discussion of the rhetoric playing out during the Three
Mile Island nuclear disaster is built on a Toulmin-like distinction between the
social or public sphere and the technical sphere and the incompatible structures of
reasoning and value sustaining their differences.
In his 2008 review of the effects of the Internet on science communication,
Trench
(2008)
reprises
this
distinction
between
internal
and
external
communication (as does the organization of the present volume of essays). But
Trench goes on to make a further point: that the Internet is “turning scientific
communication inside out” (p. 185). The Internet has not simply transformed
expert and public communication of science but has also transformed their rela-
tionship, “eroding” the boundaries between the scientific community and the
public (p. 186). Trench’s observation challenges the adequacy of our tradi-
tional view of scientific communication, the autonomous status of scientific
communities, and the nature and stability of the boundaries between expert and
public communities. Our aim here is to explore these challenges.
The Internet has changed even in the few years since Trench (2008) wrote, and
so have the possibilities for communication within and about science, within
and through those supposedly eroding boundaries. It would be impossible (or at
222
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

least would require a much larger project than this can be) to document and
inventory all those possibilities. The proliferation of Internet technologies and
platforms continues apace. Rather than focusing on specific platforms or tech-
nologies in an attempt to update Trench’s observations, we look to a particular
event as an initiating exigence from which we might trace how emerging
affordances of the Internet are put to work, for what reasons, and to what effect.
We look specifically at some of the ways the online communication figured in
responses to the disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, following
the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami that crippled the site. We choose this
event, sometimes known as 3/11, for three reasons. First, as an unprecedented
combination of events—the earthquake, tsunami, and breach of the operating
nuclear power plant—the disaster was beyond immediate comprehension, scien-
tific or public; there were, therefore, both immediate and longer-term efforts to
gather information, to understand and track what was happening. Second, the
event galvanized an enormous amount of Internet activity, both within Japan,
because other modes of communication (cell phones and landlines) did not
function (Jung, 2012), and worldwide, as the traditional media have become
incapable of controlling information flow (Friedman, 2011). And third, it
exemplifies the kind of event that may become increasingly common in a highly
interconnected and technologically mediated world, an event unpredictable in
its particulars, global in its potential consequences (Beck, 1992), and complex
in its tight coupling of natural forces and human artifacts: as Perrow (2011) has
noted, “despite the best attempts to forestall them,” accidents are inevitable “in
the complex, tightly coupled systems of modern society, resulting in the kind of
unpredictable, cascading disaster seen at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power
Station” (p. 44).
In order to explore how the Internet mediated science-related communi-
cation about Fukushima Daiichi, we will be looking for evidence of rhetorical
genres in the uses of selected Internet platforms. Using genre as a probe in
this way will provide a complex perspective on the ways these platforms are
shaping communication. Genres represent relatively stable agreements about
what kinds of “utterances” (Bakhtin, 1986), or communicative actions (Miller,
1984), are being undertaken and what they mean, but the agreements and the
meanings are relative to a community of actors. Thus, by implicit agreement,
established genres internal to the scientific community, such as the research
report, the referee’s report, the call for proposals, make a certain kind of claim,
invoke certain communally held premises, rely on certain forms of authorization,
take a certain form, exploit certain media affordances, and invite certain kinds
of responses. In short, each is taken as a typified meaningful action that is
recurrent and predictable to a certain extent. The same is true for genres that
carry scientific information within public communities: news reports, popular
science magazines, science textbooks, patient package inserts for prescription
drugs, museum displays, information about blood and organ donation, public
INTERSECTIONS
/
223

service advertising for eating disorder awareness or other mental health issues.
And the agreements are relative to the communities in which these genres
circulate as typified meaningful utterances (Medway, 2002; Miller, 1992; Swales,
1990); as Berkenkotter and Huckin put it, “genre conventions signal a dis-
course community’s norms, epistemology, ideology, and social ontology” (1993,
p. 475). Thus, in order to explore the ways in which the boundaries between
scientific communities and public communities are eroding (or perhaps being
otherwise disrupted), we can look at the constitution and circulation of genres,
these recurrent patterns of communication, as they develop in relation to various
Internet platforms.
We will suggest that some of these genres may be characterized as “para-
scientific,” to adopt a notion from Kaplan and Radin (2011). They use the term
specifically with reference to the trade journal Chemical & Engineering News,
which exists “alongside” peer reviewed scientific journals and addresses audi-
ences both within and outside the scientific community, aiming to influence
(“deliberately intervene in”) scientific practice, particularly through its access
to elite audiences in the media and policy arenas (p. 460). The need for such a
characterization of an old medium like a trade journal suggests that the binary
division of science communication into internal and external has been an over-
simplification all along.1 We will use the term in a more general way than
Kaplan and Radin do: to refer to a variety of genres that do not fit clearly into
the more traditional internal/external binary.
Our argument will begin with a brief review of the events at Fukushima
Daiichi in March 2011 and then examine the ways in which various commun-
ities of users and communities of concern deployed several established Internet
platforms to address the exigence of this event as they constructed it. We will
briefly examine three sites that might be characterized as social media, which
afford the creation and exchange of user-created content. First, we look at the
very popular microblogging site, Twitter.com, used by about 15% of online
adults (Smith & Brenner, 2012). Second, we examine the ways that science
bloggers took up the issue, using the relatively well-established conventions
of blogging for purposes arising out of this singular event. Third, we look at the
social encyclopedia, Wikipedia, which the Pew Research Center reports as a
source of information for 42% of all Americans who are online (Zickuhr &
Rainie, 2011). We then turn to a somewhat different community that made
different uses of the capacities of the Internet, creating its own technology
platform: a group calling itself Safecast and often characterized as “citizen
science,”2 though we will find that the situation is somewhat more complicated. In
224
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 See also Miller’s discussion of “contact zones” between expert and public forums (2005).
2 See, for example, Scientific American’s online database of citizen science projects,
which includes Safecast.

each case, we will ask what exigence is being constructed, assumed, and shared
by those using the platform. As exigence represents the social knowledge at the
core of situation, and recurrent exigence is the core of genre (Bitzer, 1968; Miller,
1984), identifying the recurrent exigences in the uses of the Internet allows us to
determine whether online activity surrounding the accident at the Fukushima
Daiichi power plant can be described in terms of genres and whether those genres
are well established or newly emerging. Looking across a spectrum of Internet
use, then, we can focus on the ways that perceptions and responses are turned into
typified motives for those engaging in rhetorical action.
EVENTS AT FUKUSHIMA DAIICHI
Fukushima became a globally recognizable signifier for the 2011 Thoku
earthquake and subsequent tsunami that ravaged the coast of Japan, causing
numerous failures at the Tokyo Electric Power Company’s (TEPCO) Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power station. Crippling the plant, the 9.0 magnitude earthquake
occurred Friday, March 11, 2011, at 5:46 UTC, with its epicenter near Sendai,
which triggered the automatic shutdown of several reactors at the site, a mech-
anism designed to safely cool reactors to prevent meltdown in the event of
power loss (U.S. Geological Survey, 2011). While reactors were automatically
shut down, a 14-meter high tsunami overtook the protective seawall, resulting
in further damage to the plant and creating new problems by interrupting the
automatic cool down. As the site flooded, backup generators designed to ensure
that the reactors are safely cooled failed, and approximately 6 hours later an
evacuation order was issued for the surrounding area. After a cascade of addi-
tional failures, the site became increasingly worrisome to experts and the com-
munity alike, and almost a month after the accident, the International Nuclear
Event Scale rating for the site was raised to Level 7, the site now standing atop the
nuclear event scale with one notorious companion, Chernobyl. More than 2 years
later, accidents are still occurring, such as the discharge of radioactive water, and
the condition as well as future of the site remains unclear. With such an unprece-
dented nuclear disaster—Chernobyl, while being more deadly and dangerously
scattering radioactive material when it exploded, was a less complex accident
in that only one reactor was damaged, whereas the Fukushima site has several
damaged reactors—the response to the accident has been equally unprecedented.
Despite the enormous amount of scientific expertise focused on the event, there
was considerable debate about radiation levels and safety for those living near
the site, later questions about safe levels for those near the exclusion zone, and
uncertainty about how the food chain might be affected, with the possibility
of radiation effects extending across Japan. The cascading uncertainty was
exacerbated by the unwillingness of Japanese authorities to release information
and the minimal amount of information that the authorities did have.
INTERSECTIONS
/
225

EXIGENCE I: NEED FOR INFORMATION
With the situation at Fukushima Daiichi worsening, and reports leaking
through the mainstream media, speculation began. Many citizens would turn
to social media sites in an attempt to find more information about what was
happening and how dangerous it was. Those on the ground in Japan turned to
social media as an outlet to share what they were seeing and experiencing. In
both cases, the traditional channels of information flow from experts to journal-
ists to the public were disrupted. We look to Twitter, which saw dramatically
increased usage following the earthquake, as an example of a social media
platform put to use to create public knowledge about complex, unfolding events.
Our examination of the other two media platforms, blogging and Wikipedia, will
also focus on their informational uses in the immediate aftermath of the tsunami.
Twitter
In The Philosophy of Literary Form, Burke (1941) profitably elucidates the
process of joining a conversational space, such as a discipline or community of
practice, through the metaphor of an unending conversation. Burke’s metaphor
asks the reader to imagine arriving late at a parlor, with conversations long
preceding their arrival. Because the conversation has already started, and there is
no time for pause, the reader must listen for some time to determine the nature of
the conversation and subsequently join (pp. 110–111). Burke’s metaphor is
helpful for understanding social media landscapes, particularly for our purposes.
First, sites like Twitter.com often see patrons come and go without much fuss, no
formal system of check in or check out. The fluid, informal nature of the
conversational space is made evident by the fluctuating discursive spaces within
which conversations dwell. Second, as one is free to come and go from the
conversational space, the antecedent threads of the conversation isolate and push
back against those who come late and wish to join. Similarly, while social media
sites can be relatively open conversational spaces, conventions begin to emerge as
a user base is established and users learn to utilize the system for their
communicative ends. Discovering the conventions of the place allows for fuller
engagement within the conversational space. For example, on Twitter, the use of
hashtags and @replies and the understanding of supplementary functionality such
as TwitPic and TweetDoc allow a richer conversational experience. Finally, as
one would not walk into the parlor and address a lamp with the full force of their
argument, one would not join Twitter and broadcast to a following of none. To
fully engage in conversations in some platform, one must first identify the
opponents and allies and then engage them. A response is not guaranteed, but
voices also go unheard in parlors, and some voices are never allowed into the
parlor.
With its continuous, even relentless, flow of brief messages, Twitter pro-
vides real-time information about current events, from news stories, to conference
226
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

discussions, to crisis events like 3/11 (Acar & Muraki, 2011; Binder, 2012;
Sakaki, Okazaki, & Matsuo, 2010; Thomson, Ito, Suda, Lin, Liu, Hayasaka et al.,
2012). A survey of Japanese college students about the social-media platforms
they used on the day of the earthquake found differences from previously
documented patterns: although Facebook was more heavily used that day, Twitter
usage was higher when compared to usage rates before the earthquake (Jung,
2012). In this study, Twitter use was associated with a goal of understanding or
getting information, whereas Facebook was associated with a goal of
interpersonal connection; that is, checking on the safety of friends and family.
The surge of Twitter use that has been documented during the early stages of 3/11
(even before the nuclear plant accident), with Twitter reporting a 500% increase
of tweets originating in Japan alone (Chowdhury, 2011), is thus consistent with
an identification of the need for information as a central exigence.
Two previous analyses of Twitter data relevant to the 3/11 events are useful
here: one from tweets originating in Japan and the other from tweets originating
in the United States. Doan, Vo, and Collier (2011) provide an analysis of tweets
originating within Tokyo during the period of March 9, 2011, to May 31, 2011.
They collected over 1.5 million tweets to determine some of the social attitudes
during this period, and the corpus data provide insights about the use of Twitter
as the earthquake and tsunami hit, analyzing Japanese- and English-language
tweets separately for keywords concerning the earthquake and tsunami, keywords
concerning radiation, and keywords concerning anxiety. In this corpus, the first
tweet arrives, in Japanese, 1 minute and 25 seconds after the earthquake began
(p. 61). Shortly after messages about the earthquake, those about the tsunami
followed, with a retweeted message from someone on the coast who wrote that
they could see the tsunami coming (p. 62). Finally, within 9 minutes, there are
worries about nuclear plants, and Doan et al. provide the following examples
posted within hours of the earthquake: “Is the nuclear power plant okay?,” “In
detail RT @u_tips: Fukushima Dai-ni power plant is on alert,” and “The
Fukushima plant is in a really bad situation. . . . I hope that the government won’t
deceive the public” (p. 63).3 Though the range of their study demonstrates that
discussion about the accident at Fukushima Daiichi, and possibly other sites such
as Fukushima Dai-ni, had a significant volume for the first month, they provide
two excellent examples of the kinds of messages delivered through Twitter early
INTERSECTIONS
/
227
3 All examples, including translations, are from Doan et al. (2011), though we have reversed
the order, putting English first because the collection to which this chapter is contributed is an
English-language anthology. Another consideration these examples forward concerns writing
systems. Kenji Ito (2011) notes that the Japanese character system allows for more to be
communicated in any given number of characters of Japanese than in a comparable number
of English characters. In the first example above, there are 32 English characters to the
8 in Japanese; in the second, 63 to 33; and, in the third, 101 to 32. Given Twitter’s strict
140-character limit, the difference in writing systems should be of considerable interest.

on where, on March 13, a user writes, “People are asked to close window, door;
not to use AC; use mask & not to drink tap water #Fukushimasradiation” and
another “210 becquerel iodine (normal 100 becquerel) discovered in Tokyo tap
water. Infants are urged to avoid drinking it #Fukushimasradiation” (p. 64). These
examples suggest something of the variety of exigences being addressed, from the
need for information (news), to a responsibility to warn or instruct others, and the
impulse to express and share anxiety.4 These may not represent distinct genres,
but they can be considered something like proto-genres (or perhaps what Bakhtin
[1986] might call “primary genres”), as they are more like conversational speech
acts than like fully typified discursive genres.
The categories that Doan et al. (2011) offer also provide some substantiation
for Binder’s (2012) assessment of the function of tweets within the first few
days of the crisis at Fukushima. Binder examined a sample of English-language
tweets originating within the United States within the 2 weeks immediately
following the tsunami (March 11–25). He looked for keywords related to risk
and classified the tweets as either “informative” (descriptive information) or
“interpretive” (attributions of cause or significance). He found that neither the
number of tweets per day nor the proportion of “interpretive” tweets changed
over this period but that mentions of risk were most likely in informative tweets
near the beginning of this period. While the informative/interpretive distinction
is not quite the same as the news/warning/anxiety distinction seen in Doan et al.,
the informational function fits the “news” data, and the warnings and anxiety
expressions are similar to interpretive tweets concerning risk. Once again, as
the proportions of the different categories of tweets changed over time, we
can understand these as protogenres invoked by the changing construction of
exigence as the events unfolded and associated needs changed. Nevertheless,
these genres or protogenres are ones associated with or available within the
genre ecology of the media platform in each case.
Science Blogs
A Google Blogs search for “Fukushima” shows a dramatic, though unsur-
prising, increase in bloggers’ attention to the events in Japan, increasing from
some 3,160 results for the month of February to 45,200 results in March, and
54,300 in April. “Blogs take many forms,” Miller and Shepherd write in their
2004 account of blogs and genre, and indeed blogs address many exigences and
thus have become many genres (Formal Features section, para. 1). Blogs, in
many forms, took note of the events in Japan, but we are particularly interested in
the responses of bloggers who were attempting to redress technical and scientific
misinformation about the accident at the Fukushima plant. The blogging form
228
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
4 These functions are similar to three of the classical stases: existence (news), translation
or policy (warnings), and quality or value (sharing states of mind).

known as science blogging is an increasingly favored method of pushing scien-
tific stories to nonspecialist audiences, and many popular science publications
have sections devoted to the science blog, including Scientific American,
National Geographic, and Wired. Is there a distinctive genre here? What is the
purposeful action that such blogs accomplish? Bora Zivkovic, former Blogs
Editor at Scientific American, writes that, “much of what science bloggers
do—and do very well—is critique the science coverage by the mass media”
(2012). Such critique indeed motivated much science blogging about 3/11 and
was extended to address both traditional mainstream media and various online
discussions as questions about the accident at Fukushima arose. Scientific
American provided coverage of the events unfolding in Japan, making
connections to other social tools: for example on March 14, 2011, the editors
posted a short note, reading,
Conditions are changing rapidly at the Fukushima power plant, where at least
two of its six nuclear reactors have partially melted down. The editors of
Scientific American are following the developments, and part of the effort
involves following various Twitter users. Here are a few we are following:
International Atomic Energy Agency (@iaeaorg)
Geoff Brumfiel, one of our colleagues at Nature (@gbrumfiel)
The Japan Times (@japantimes)
U.S. Geological Survey (@USGS)
American Red Cross (@RedCross). (Scientific American, 2011)
An application allowing Twitter feeds to be displayed, showing real-time
messages, is embedded in the blog post and several websites are linked. More
posts were soon to follow, many exhibiting either the impulse to clarify or an
admission about how difficult clarity was to achieve. “The extent of the damage
at Japan’s Fukushima nuclear facility is still unknown,” writes Rita King
on March 12 in Scientific American’s guest blog, and then asks whether the
analogies comparing the unfolding event to a “Chernobyl-like” disaster are
accurate (King, 2011). In a lengthy account of the unfolding event, Chris
Rowan’s March 14 article concludes with tips for keeping updated. He cites
geologists who are blogging and tweeting, should one “want to go beyond the
media coverage” (Rowan, 2011). What if you “really want to understand what’s
going on at the nuclear reactors at Fukushima?” Rowan, a geologist himself,
cites geologist-blogger Evelyn Mervine’s interview with her nuclear engineer
father, Callan Bentley’s blog that provides “early, in-depth and comprehensive
coverage of the geological story,” and a blog post that lists more bloggers and
blog sites (Rowan, 2011). Scientific American’s March 11 blog post came from
Zivkovic (2011), who shared Cyranoski’s blog article, posted by Brian Owens to
Nature News Blog. “Some phone lines are dead, but my Internet is working.
I’m writing minutes after the earthquake, stuck on a train that screeched to a
halt and then bounced on the tracks,” Cyranoski writes (2011). At 12:37 GMT
INTERSECTIONS
/
229

on March 11, Mark Peplow submitted a post titled “Update 1: Japan declares
nuclear emergency,” saying that “Nuclear Engineering International reports
that Onagawa, Fukushima Daiichi, Fukushima Daini and Tokai nuclear
power stations have all automatically shut down” and that “Nature’s Tokyo
correspondent, Cyranoski, Japanese media are reporting that the emergency
core cooling system (ECCS) at the Fukushima #1 plant is not working due to a loss
of electrical power” (Peplow, 2011). Days after the event, the confusion was
evidenced in several posts. “The television and various news sources are clogged
with radiation numbers and experts trying to explain them,” writes Geoffery
Brumfiel, concerned whether the use of micro- and millisieverts by different
sources might confuse “the public” (Brumfiel, 2011). By March 24, things were
only the more confusing: “There is now so much disparate data from many
sources, in different units, and on various aspects of radiation, that there still
seems much confusion about what it all means,” writes Declan Butler (2011).
A group of graduate students in MIT’s Nuclear Science and Engineering
program began a blog, the first post dated March 13, 2011, with the “intent of
providing unbiased, accurate information on the disaster . . . borne out of frustra-
tion among the students at the misinformation and hysteria that characterized
initial reactions to the disaster” (Pierpoint, 2011, p. 56). The purpose of the blog
was also to vet what was believed to be questionable sources or accounts of
the events unfolding in Japan (Pierpoint, 2011, p. 56). The MIT blog describes
itself as “maintained by the students of the Department of Nuclear Science
and Engineering at MIT with the support of the NSE faculty” with the goal
of providing “non-sensationalized, factual information about the situation in a
manner that the general public can understand” (mitnse.com). The blog addresses
key topics, including “What are Spent Fuel Pools?,” “What is Decay Heat?,”
“Introduction to Radiation Health Effects and Radiation Status at Fukushima,”
“On Worst Case Scenarios,” and “Impact of Plutonium on Human Health”; and
the site within which the blog is embedded also features an FAQ with common
questions that are posed to the bloggers (mitnse.com). This effort is similar to
much public risk communication, with the assumption by the scientific
community of public ignorance and miscomprehension and thus of their own
responsibility to explain. What this “deficit model” of risk communication
(Bucchi, 2008) leaves out is the very evident confusion on the part of scientists
evidenced just above.
All of this blogging activity demonstrates a substantial conversational space
where rhetorical work on behalf of science is being done. This rhetorical work
taken on by scientists, though in some cases functioning as boundary work to
maintain the “integrity” of scientific knowledge, often aims deliberately to bridge
the boundary—even to violate it—thus contributing to what Trench (2008) called
its “erosion.” None of these efforts, or the perceived exigences to which they
230
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

respond, are necessarily new; what is new is the use of blogging to address them.
As a platform, blogging does not require peer review or the editorial gatekeeping
and distribution infrastructures of institutionalized science or trade journalism.
Whether there is one genre of science blogging or many, this brief account cannot
determine, but it seems clear that one of its distinctive features is exactly its
ability to work on, around, and through the putative boundary between science
and the public. There are science blogs that look more like scientific reports,
which certainly feature different characteristics than crisis reporting might, but
that does not detract from the argument that the way scientists are communicating
is changing, and good evidence for this is the genre (or genres) of science
blogging. Indeed, we might consider this genre to be very much in line with
Kaplan and Radin’s (2011) notion of “para-scientific” genres, in that science
blogging borrows scientific authority and knowledge structures from the realm
of science but operates without the gatekeeping and traditional reporting forms
of internal science communication. In other words, it borrows some features
from the internal discourse of science without the whole complex of features
upon which the epistemic authority of science depends. However, these genres,
unlike popular science genres, forego the rhetorical accommodations outlined
by Fahnestock (1986), such as appealing to “wonder.” Rather, the parascientific
genres are concerned with the collection, arrangement, or application of scientific
knowledge in contexts formally external to but somehow involved with the
scientific community.
Wikipedia
On March 12, at 15:50 UTC, a Wikipedia page titled “Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Disaster” was created by user Kslotte; this page linked to a section on
“2011 earthquake events” of the article on “Fukushima I Nuclear Power Plant”
(Wikipedia, 2012a). It included a standardized disclaimer at the beginning:
This section documents the Fukushima I nuclear incident, a current nuclear
event. Information regarding it may change rapidly as it progresses.
Although this section is updated frequently, it may not reflect the most
current information about this nuclear event for all areas.
There was no further activity that day, but by the end of the next day, March 13,
there had been 396 edits, and the entry had grown from 1,737 to 2,871 words,
with 75 source citations and 5 external links. By the end of the month, nearly
4,000 edits had been made, there were nearly 13,000 words, with 383 source
citations, 9 external links, 9 photos, 2 tables, 4 diagrams, and 2 maps. On May 22,
INTERSECTIONS
/
231

the earthquake section was moved from the page on the power plant to the page
on the disaster and became a separate article, with a link in the first sentence
to “Fukushima I Nuclear Power Plant.”5 By the end of May, there had been
nearly 5,000 edits, and the article had nearly 14,500 words, 478 references,
16 external links, 13 photos, 2 tables, 7 diagrams, and 2 maps. Editing still
continues as we write, though at a much slower pace than in the early days,
and the article now has just over 22,000 words, 448 citations, 25 external links,
8 photos, 10 diagrams, 5 maps, and 1 table.6
Who did all this work? Of the 1,516 “editors” who contributed, 12 made
more than 100 edits each, with 281 the most by any one person; all but one of
these top 12 began contributing in the first 5 days (by March 17), but only 3
were still contributing in 2012. None of these most-frequent editors self-identifies
as a scientist on Wikipedia’s associated User Page, and only two mention interests
specifically relevant to the Fukushima accident: Johnfos, with 109 edits, focuses
on energy, renewable energy, and the antinuclear movement, and Shinkolobwe,
with 122 edits, a native speaker of French, is interested in chemistry and geology;
for 4 of these top 12 contributors, no user information is available at all.
The user who started the page on the accident, Kslotte, made 26 contributions
between March 12 and March 18 but then ceases to be involved; his user page
indicates that he is Finnish, owns an information technology company, and
“seldom contribute[s] with content,” focusing mainly on organizing, copyediting,
and ensuring adherence to Wikipedia policies. Another frequent contributor in
the first days of the event, Marie Poise, with 57 edits between March 13 and 19
and none subsequently, provides no biographical information. Many of these
contributors describe themselves as experienced but not expert Wikipedians,
with an interest in implementing the rules and policies and in offering informa-
tion that is correct and useful. The “About” page of Wikipedia indicates that
“Wikipedia is written largely by amateurs . . . [and] is not subject to any peer
review.” The advantage claimed is that amateurs have more free time and can
thus make “rapid changes in response to current events,” as clearly was the case
here (Wikipedia, 2012b, para. 31).
It is a bit difficult to track readership because the data before May 22 are
for the entire page about the power plant, not just the section on the earthquake
and ensuing events at the plant and beyond, which became the separate article.
Nevertheless, because “Fukushima I Power Plant” shows virtually no readers
until March 11, a dramatic spike on March 12 to over 300,000, and a readership
for the month of over a million and a half (an average of over 72,000 readers
232
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
5 There was a fair amount of talk among the editors about whether this article should
be headed “accident” or a “disaster,” based on comparison with similar events and the
way that the event was commonly referred to by the press.
6 These data are as of August 10–12, 2012.

per day after March 11), it seems reasonable to assume that this interest repre-
sents a search for information pertaining to the earthquake and nuclear disaster.
In April, the readership is one-tenth that, with an average of 7,700 per day.
In May, the average readership drops to 976 per day on that page, but for the
new page, “Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Disaster,” the rate averaged 2,418 per
day after May 22, with readership in the next five months varying between
about 2,500 and 6,500 per day. The average readership per day for the page on
the power plant itself decreased steadily from 543 in June to 277 in October,
suggesting that sustained reader interest was indeed in the disaster and not the
plant itself. User ratings of the page (as of mid-August 2012), on a scale of 5,
are “trustworthy” 4.2, “objective” 4.3, “complete” 4.8, and “well-written”
4.6 (with the number of ratings ranging from 234 to 253), indicating substan-
tial reader confidence in the information provided, although it has not been
designated as a “featured” or “good” article, designations that would add editorial
authority to the high user ratings.7
We can learn a great deal about the ways that Wikipedia functions for users
from the “Talk” pages associated with the edits as the article is built out over
time. What was it that the editors thought they were doing and why? How did
they evaluate and improve the article over time? The answers to these questions
will tell us something about how they understood the exigence they thought
they were facing and thus the ways they shaped their actions to fit the genre
of the Wikipedia article. In addition to the rich data available on the talk pages,
an extensive system of self-governance and policies have developed since
Wikipedia’s founding in 2001, including a set of official aims and ideals, and
criteria for excellence, all of which inform the reasoning of the editors as they
do their work.8 In scanning through the talk pages, we see the contributors
enjoining each other to add information, to evaluate sources, to have patience
as an unfolding event gets reported, to explain in ordinary language, to avoid
sensationalizing. As an exploratory study, we examined the 57 editorial discus-
sions in Archive 1, which covers March 11–13, 2011, coding them for references
to these Wikipedia policies (Wikipedia, 2011a). The policy most frequently
invoked (36 times) was “verifiability,” meaning that “Other people have to be
able to check that you didn’t just make things up. This means that all quotations
and any material challenged or likely to be challenged must be attributed to a
reliable, published source using an inline citation” (Wikipedia, 2012d). The next
most frequently invoked criterion (18 times) was that of comprehensiveness,
meaning that the article “neglects no major facts or details and places the subject
INTERSECTIONS
/
233
7 Page ratings were added to Wikipedia sometime after July 2011, well after the initial
response to Fukushima, and ratings of earlier versions have apparently not been archived
(Fung, 2011).
8 For example, see the Content Criteria article on Wikipedia, as well as articles listing the
Core Content Policies, the Five Pillars, Featured Article Criteria, and “The perfect article.”

in context”; followed by “no original research” (11 times), “neutral point of
view” (9 times), and “well written” (8 times) (Wikipedia, 2007).
The most obvious invocation of genre in this archive (7 times) was reference
to the fact that Wikipedia is an “encyclopedia,” a mandate that contributors
took seriously by pointing out that it is “not a news source,” that editors should
“stop using PRESENT TENSE,” that “Wikipedia must not be sensationalistic,”
and “it’s not wikipedia’s job to keep on top of things: this site is supposed to be
an encyclopedia, which is appropriate for getting to the bottom of things.”9
Indeed, the criteria of verifiability, comprehensiveness, no original research,
and neutral point of view are all part of the understanding of Wikipedia’s
specific genre identity as an encyclopedia. The most serious tension in the
early hours of Wikipedia’s treatment of the unfolding events at Fukushima
Daiichi was between the archival function of the encyclopedia, with the need to
provide stable and authoritative information, and the chaos of the unfolding event
for which only partial and imperfectly reported and comprehended information
was available. The multiple editors working together functioned as checks on
each other to provide the most authoritative and most comprehensible version
they could manage at each moment. Wikipedia thus distinguishes itself from
journalism; it also distinguishes itself from science as not subject to expert peer
review and not presenting original research.10 The prior understandings of the
capabilities and responsibilities of the encyclopedia genre informed the ongoing
reflective construction of the exigence by the Wikipedia editors who labored
over the articles about Fukushima as the events unfolded—and thus informed and
reinforced the genre of the Wikipedia article.
EXIGENCE II: NEED FOR DATA
To this point, we have examined the ways that established Internet platforms
were used to engage in a variety of rhetorical actions as the events of 3/11
unfolded. In each case, we see evidence of lack of information, lack of compre-
hension, uncertainty, and confusion. In each case, we find that the 3/11 events
at Fukushima elicited uses of these established platforms in familiar ways,
drawing on typifications of social needs and audience roles that would be already
available to both rhetors and audiences, making perhaps minor adaptations to
the flow of events in March 2011, to perform familiar social actions addressing a
234
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
9 See also the policy page, where the understanding of Wikipedia as an encyclopedia
is developed contrastively (Wikipedia, 2012c).
10 For a time in 2006, Wikipedia experimented with the use of formal “scientific peer
review” for articles on scientific topics but in 2007 reverted to internal review by editors
upon request because of a lack of use of the “scientific” process and in the interests of
efficiency. See Wikipedia (2011b) and the associated “talk” page.

general and widely understood exigence. We see how available typifications
underwrote the attempts to deal with this series of unprecedented events. We
turn now to a different sort of effort that marshalled the capacities of the Internet
in new ways to address a somewhat longer-term exigence related to the lack
not only of information about what had happened but of detailed data that
could be used to assess the future, that is, to understand risk.
Originating as the combination of RDTN.org11 and the efforts of Sean Bonner,
Joi Ito, and Pieter Franken, the group that would become known as Safecast
began with frustrations regarding the lack of information about specific radiation
levels and exposure risks to those at various locations in Japan. Bonner, Ito,
and Franken began an email exchange after the accident, asking after friends and
family in the impacted region, which soon turned to attempts to secure Geiger
counters for said family and friends, but the scope grew, as did their network
of connections (Safecast, n.d., History). Ito, Director of the MIT Media Lab,
described Safecast’s initial creation as a response to several problems, including
a lack of information released to the public, the lack of existing information,
and the lack of tools to obtain that information (J. Ito, 2011). RDTN founder
Marcelino Alvarez expresses similar motivations, saying the project was moti-
vated to aggregate and validate data,12 following the confusion resulting from
3/11, but the project would evolve into an effort to collect the data as well. A
Kickstarter appeal for funds13 was launched on April 7, 2011, with the following
project description:
Safecast.org (formerly RDTN.org) is a website whose purpose is to provide
an aggregate feed of nuclear radiation data from governmental, non-
governmental and citizen-scientist sources. That data will be made available
to everyone, including scientists and nuclear experts who can provide context
for lay people. In the weeks following launch, it has become evident that
there is a need for additional radiation reporting from the ground in Japan.
This Kickstarter project will help us purchase up to 600 Geiger Counter
devices that will be deployed to Japan (Alvarez, 2011a, para. 1).
The appeal went on to indicate that a map of radiation detection in Japan showed
“many holes where no data is being captured whatsoever. Some of those are
very close to Fukushima while others are well outside of Tokyo. The initial set of
[detection] devices will be utilized in areas where coverage is sparse” (Alvarez,
INTERSECTIONS
/
235
11 RDTN.org was founded within 72 hours of the accident. Another group, Bonner, Ito,
and Franken, were also beginning to coordinate. These two groups were connected and
then merged their efforts, rebranding as “Safecast” (from “safe” and “broadcast”).
12 For an account of RDTN’s founding, see Alvarez’s (2011b) “72 Hours from Concept to
Launch: RDTN.org” blog post.
13 Kickstarter is a social platform that allows users to pitch a project and attempt to
secure crowd-sourced funding through the Kickstarter community.

2011a, para. 4). The idea was to distribute the devices “to people on the ground
who have been trained in how to use them. It could be a teacher, a university
student, or a citizen-scientist looking to contribute to the project” (Alvarez,
2011a, para. 14).
Safecast designed a response to the need for data, moving from delivering
information, to collecting and contextualizing information, and even building
tools for the collection of data. As of July 2012, Safecast reported having a
team of 100 volunteers, mostly located in Tokyo, with 135 sensors in varied form
deployed and more than 3,500,000 data-points collected (Safecast, n.d., About).
We might characterize the response to this second exigence as data collection
to help alleviate the lack of information about radiation levels and exposures
that could endanger those in the area. Safecasters themselves say, “After the
3/11 earthquake and resulting nuclear situation . . . it became clear that people
wanted more data than what was available” (Safecast, n.d., About, para. 1).
Data is central to the story of Safecast. Safecast employed many genres of
coordination, organization, and sharing, based in technology platforms such as
email, Skype, and the website, and such to collect and aggregate data. However,
we suggest that the data, and more specifically, the rhetorical construction of data
within and by databases also merit consideration in terms of genre.14 This is a
particularly interesting topic to pose with the rise of “Big Data.”15 But how might
we begin to describe the rhetorical nature of data (bases or structures)? The
creation and organization of a database are not determined processes: there must
be an organizer, and the organization and standards to which data are held are the
product not merely of technological affordance and constraint, but of consensus
among a community of users and of anticipations of the functions the data
will be serving. If the database can be seen as rhetorical, then we might pose
questions about its generic function and form. Are there genres of databases?
Are databases components of other genres?16
236
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
14 Since James Wynn treats the rhetorical nature of the maps generated by Safecast in
this collection, we will restrict our discussion to the data collection and sharing efforts
of Safecast.
15 “Big Data” is a term with increasing currency, as evidenced by the NSF solicitation
for “Core Techniques and Technologies for Advancing Big Data Science and Engineering
(BIGDATA). An account of NSF interest in big data more generally can be found in press
release 12-060: http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=123607.
16 Manovich (2000, 2007) and Brooke (2009) treat this question somewhat differently,
suggesting that the purposes to which databases are put vary with users and can be reflected
in their queries. Following Manovich, Brooke suggests that the database is like Saussurean
“langue,” which in itself “does not actually mean anything; it is only when it takes the form
of utterance, when it is put into practice, that meaning is generated. The same thing is true
of databases” (Brooke, 2009, p. 101). When a user queries a database, it responds with
an “utterance,” and each database is capable of multiple utterances, increasing with the
complexity of the database itself and the sophistication of the query routines and user goals.

For example, in asking “what constitutes a ‘scientific’ database?” Pfaltz (2007)
argues that it is the effort to construct scientific knowledge, maintaining that the
“actual hallmark of a scientific database is the ease with which the underlying
hypotheses, scientific assertions, rules or implications (call them what you may)
can be obtained from the observed data” (p. 9). Pfaltz further suggests that what
distinguishes them from business databases is the need for scientific databases
to accommodate spatial and/or temporal data and to allow for unforeseen data
attributes and new hypotheses to be accommodated. Constructing a scientific
database requires not only technical decisions, but also rhetorical decisions, just
as formulating hypotheses, constructing lab experiments, justifying methods,
and various other work in the laboratory are (also) rhetorical work. Scientific
databases are rhetorical in that they are constructed to respond to particular
exigences, constrained by the very nature of the scientific enterprise. They are
rhetorical both from the perspective of the creator(s) and from the perspective
of the user(s). As a genre,17 the scientific database is a recognition of recurrent
characteristic needs and functions and of conventional (and emerging) ways
of engaging those needs and functions. Safecast’s efforts are built on this
set of recognitions.
Using a sensor network of both stationary and mobile radiation-detection
devices throughout Japan, Safecast collects data through a crowd-sourcing
approach. As the data are collected, they are added to the database and thereby
organized, and then published on the Safecast website through a Creative
Commons Universal license. The quality of the data collected has been con-
sidered by the group, who not only quickly acquainted themselves with the
literature on radiation, but also participated in experimental work to ensure
its quality. For example, Safecaster Joe Moross, in an interview with IEEE
Spectrum, describes determining whether or not vehicle motion interferes with
readings by testing their “theory” and finding that there did not appear to be
evidence for concern (Cherry, 2011). If we take the data to be accurate, since it
results from considered methods and collection protocols, we can then turn to
questions of the database design itself. The data collected includes time stamps,
latitude, longitude, altitude, and radiation events in counts per minute, among
other information. Though it is certainly notable that the Safecast data correlate
to “real-world” events, a characteristic of the scientific database for Pfaltz
(2007), what is important is that decisions about what data would be collected,
what units of measure would be used, and what kind of structural relations the
data would have were all determined by Safecasters themselves. That is, they are
INTERSECTIONS
/
237
17 A somewhat different case has been made by Folsom, following Manovich (2001),
arguing that the database “is becoming a new genre, the genre of the twenty-first century”
(Folsom, 2007, p. 1576). Both contrast database with narrative, seeing these as mutually
exclusive forms of storage, structure, and access, but these general forms are not genres in
the rhetorical sense.

not collecting data to be compiled into a structure determined by scientific experts
(they are not acting as field technicians); rather, they are making their own
decisions about what to include and exclude and how to organize it. The data are
then accessible through Safecast’s website, where anyone can download the CSV
(comma-separated value) file in a relational database. While sites like Yahoo!
Japan and the Scanning the Earth project18 have used the data, the data are also
being shared in less conventional ways, with strategic placement of stickers
showing radiation readings (microsieverts per hour) at that location and the date
the reading was recorded.19 At least some Japanese residents are apparently using
the data to make judgments about evacuation and personal safety, and some local
governments in the Fukushima prefecture are making Safecast data available to
residents (Kageyama, 2012).
We should clarify the roles of the participants, both the organizers and the data
collectors. The Safecasters were none of them trained scientists, though many
have technical backgrounds, and many key members in the development of
the group have some connections to the hacker/do-it-yourself (DIY) culture:
the connection to the DIY community through the Tokyo Hackerspace was
essential to the development of the sensor network Safecast uses.20 In addition
to off-the-shelf Geiger counters (Inspector Alter and the CRM-100), Safecast
and the Tokyo Hackerspace helped to build mobile monitoring devices. These
devices, called a bGeigie (for the bento-box form and Geiger counter), include
a standard Geiger counter and an in-house electronic recording system to track
and save the readings and the GPS coordinates (Safecast, n.d., Devices). The
electronics are bundled into a water resistant box and mounted to an automobile
to take readings. These devices have been distributed to volunteers on the ground
in Japan. The volunteers might be characterized as citizen-scientists, except for
the fact that the usual model of the citizen-scientist assumes that an ordinary
untrained person is working with direction from scientists who have designed
a research project, established the data protocols, will do the data analysis, and
will publish in a peer reviewed forum with the aim of making a sanc-
tioned scientific claim (Cohn, 2008). In the case of Safecast, these marks of
institutionalized science are absent: the data-collection devices and protocols
were designed by largely self-taught Safecasters with the goal of producing
238
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
18 Scanning the Earth consortium is a research project affiliated with Safecast and uses
their data. Safecast co-founder Pieter Franken is a Senior Visiting Researcher at the university
housing the project, Keio Research Institute at the Shonan Fujisawa Campus.
19 Safecast provides examples on its blog: http://blog.safecast.org/2012/03/information-
disbursement/.
20 Definitions of hacker vary and have negative connotations in colloquial use, but we mean
hacker in terms of a recognized level of technical interest and capability in technical systems
(hardware or software). Hackerspaces, as defined by hackerspaces.org, are “community-
operated physical places, where people can meet and work on their projects.”

information for the public that institutionalized science had not provided.
We believe it’s fair then to call Safecast’s work “parascientific,” genuinely
“alongside” the work of science and quite deliberately positioned on the increas-
ingly questionable boundary between the expert and the public spheres.
Given that databases are rhetorical, and given that Safecast’s database is a
parascientific construction, we would argue that it functions here as a possible
new genre, the parascientific database. Similar efforts of citizen monitoring
have the capacity to produce similar databases, such as the Bucket Brigade’s
work with air pollution monitoring.21 Safecast itself has branched out with
Safecast Air, in development, which will monitor air quality. This particular effort
is being led by Ariel Levi Simons, a high school science teacher in Los Angeles,
suggesting significant opportunities for student participation and learning
(Bonner, 2012). A new Geiger counter was developed by a Safecaster22 and
will be produced by International Medcom, manufacturer of radiation detection
instruments. While many of the strategies of Safecast, such as crowd-sourced
funding, community-based monitoring of radiation levels, and open access pub-
lishing of data, are being used in different ways within institutional science, they
are hardly routine and thus probably not solidly generic in that environment
yet. And one major difference between institutionalized science and an enter-
prise like Safecast is the expertise or professionalization of participants, and the
concomitant cluster of motivations, interests, and ambitions they bring to the
project. Are they “scientists” by virtue of their careful information-gathering
and dissemination? To what extent do they ally themselves with science or draw
upon scientific practices? In what ways do they define themselves and their
project as distinctly “outside” science? We can learn something about this from
the rhetorical work that Safecast members have done to define themselves as a
group. We may find that the erosion of boundaries between science and the
public and the emergence of new genres of parascientific discourse entail new
roles for participants, such as the role of the “citizen-scientist” and “citizen-
monitor,” or perhaps even the “parascientist.” We believe that Safecast illustrates
some of the ways that new technologies, new roles, and new genres are changing
the relationship between science and the public sphere.
FINAL REMARKS
The examples we have examined here tell us some important things
about genre emergence and change, processes that are central to understanding
INTERSECTIONS
/
239
21 See, for more information, https://gcm.rdsecure.org//section.php?id=9.
22 Read about the development process of the Safecast Geiger counter, designed by Andrew
“bunnie” Huang, here: “Safecast Geiger Counter Reference Design” http://www.bunnie
studios.com/blog/?p=2218.

science in the age of the Internet. With the social media tools we outlined
under Exigence I, we see that platform development provides new affordances
to users for social, collaborative, and communicative ends. While we might
trace antecedent genres or technologies to find similar rhetorical work being
accomplished—perhaps Twitter has some lineage to the telegraph that would
be insightful about how news information travels within communities and
globally—there are notable changes with online social media. Primarily, we are
talking about scales of attention and time. Under Exigence II, we provided an
account of Safecast, which responded to the lack of data about radiation levels
in Japan after 3/11. Here we depart from our study of what might be strictly
characterized as “social media” and look to the way in which the group used the
affordances offered by the Internet to connect rapidly with others and begin to
coordinate a massive data-collection program. Certainly Safecast employed a
variety of social media tools in this effort, but we focus on their development of
a database to move beyond the comfortable space of social media, already staked
out by rhetoricians and media theorists, and begin to look at the database as a
site of rhetorical work. We speculate about the kinds of rhetorical work that
construct the database and, indeed, the rhetorical work the database is doing.
Whether we focus on characterizing the various genres that might be found
on Twitter, science blogs, or elsewhere on the Internet, or use other rhetorical
perspectives to understand events like Fukushima, it is evident that the
landscape of scientific communication has undergone and continues to undergo
massive changes.
Approaching this chapter, we asked whether boundaries between scientific
and public spheres could fairly be characterized as “eroding” (Trench, 2008).
If so, might we see genres emerging in response to these erosions? We also
considered whether we might see new exigences crystallized with the aid of
new media platforms (Miller & Shepherd, 2009). In the three cases of social
media, it seems that new genres did not emerge specifically for Fukushima,
unprecedented though it might have seemed as an exigence. The recognized uses
of available technologies were appropriate and adequate for most information
needs, both those of people directly affected by conditions in Japan and those
around the world seeking to understand what was happening. In each case,
however, we observe that these uses either assumed or contributed to the erosion
of the boundary between the scientific and the public sphere and thus often
between the roles of expert and public: Twitter users bypass experts and officials
to disseminate immediate observations, and Wikipedia works to make scien-
tifically authorized information useful to nonscientists; science blogs work from
the other side of the boundary, enabling scientists to adopt the role of public
educator or public advocate or even particularly knowledgeable citizen.
The Safecast example is different in that there was no Internet community or
platform readily available to meet the recognized need for monitoring data and
no immediate capacity in the expert sphere to do so. The DIY ethos and Internet
240
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

savvy of those who spearheaded the effort enabled them to construct what they
needed—including the detection devices, the data-collection network, and the
community of action—and to adopt the genre of the scientific database to their
specific purposes. Again, they bypassed, or simply ignored, the expert/public
boundary and have subsequently worked with both non-expert citizens and with
expert advisors as the project has developed since the events of 3/11. We can call
this work “parascience” insofar as it works alongside science and outside the
formal authorizing and gatekeeping institutions of science. But is there another
sense in which this work is science? Or an intimation of the future of science? If
the erosion of boundaries—between spheres, between roles, and between genres—
continues, then the parascientific may become the new model for science.
Farrell and Goodnight’s (1981) study of Three Mile Island expressed par-
ticular concern about the apparent impoverishment of the public sphere and its
domination by technical reason, which grounds the expert sphere. The erosion
of this boundary they saw as a threat, a “usurpation” (p. 273) of the role of an
empowered public to deliberate its own fate. Technical reason fails, they say,
“to offer communication practices capable of mastering the problems of our
age” (p. 271). Yet it could equally be argued that social reason, which grounds
the public sphere, is inadequate to the problems of our age, as the worldwide
stalemate over political measures to address global warming illustrates. Perhaps
as Ceccarelli (2011) has recently argued, rhetoricians should not be satisfied
only with critique of scientific orthodoxy, but must account for the manufac-
turing of controversy and turn their critique on the public sphere as well in order
to understand the intersection of the two. With the cases here, with these para-
scientific genres, we can begin to examine the complex relationships of science
and its publics, not only the publics that support science but also the publics
that science supports. Whether the Internet’s capacities to erode boundaries
will lead to new ways of doing science or to a reconfiguration of these spheres
of reasoning, it seems clear that institutionalized science will continue to be
challenged by these new capacities and the new genres they enable.
REFERENCES
Acar, A., & Muraki, Y. (2011). Twitter for crisis communication: Lessons learned from
Japan’s tsunami disaster. International Journal of Web Based Communities, 392–402.
Interscience Publishers.
Alvarez, M. (2011a). RDTN.org: Radiation detection hardware network in Japan.
Kickstarter.com. Retrieved from http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1038658656/
rdtnorg-radiation-detection-hardware-network-in-ja
Alvarez, M. (2011b). 72 hours from concept to launch. RDTN.org. Retrieved from
http://uncorkedstudios.com/2011/03/21/72-hours-from-concept-to-launch-rdtn-org/
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). The problem of speech genres (V. W. McGee, Trans.). In
C. Emerson & M. Holquist (Eds.), Speech genres and other late essays (pp. 60–102).
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
INTERSECTIONS
/
241

Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: Towards a new modernity. London, UK: Sage.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1993). Rethinking genre from a sociocognitive per-
spective. Written Communication, 10(4), 475–509.
Binder, A. R. (2012). Figuring out #Fukushima: An initial look at functions and content
of US Twitter commentary about nuclear risk. Environmental Communication:
A Journal of Nature and Culture, 6(2), 268–277.
Bitzer, L. F. (1968). The rhetorical situation. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 1(1), 1–14.
Bonner, S. (2012). Monitoring air quality [Blog]. Safecast. Retrieved from http://blog.
safecast.org/2012/04/monitoring-air-quality/
Brooke, C. (2009). Lingua fracta: Toward a rhetoric of new media. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Brossard, D. (2009). Media, scientific journals, and science communication: Examining
the construction of scientific controversies. Public Understanding of Science, 18(3),
258–274.
Brumfiel, G. (2011, March 16). Confusing radiation numbers swirl around Fukushima
[Blog]. nature.com. Retrieved from http://blogs.nature.com/news/2011/03/confusing_
radiation_numbers_sw.html
Bucchi, M. (2008). Of deficits, deviations and dialogues: Theories of public com-
munication of science. In M. Bucchi & B. Trench (Eds.), Handbook of public
communication of science and technology (pp. 57–76). New York, NY: Routledge.
Burke, K. (1941). The philosophy of literary form. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Butler, D. (2011, March 24). Fukushima nuclear data proliferation [Blog]. nature.com.
Retrieved from http://blogs.nature.com/news/2011/03/fukushima_nuclear_data_
prolife.html
Ceccarelli, L. (2001). Rhetorical criticism and the rhetoric of science. Western Journal
of Communication, 65(3), 314–329.
Ceccarelli, L. (2011). Manufactured scientific controversy. Rhetoric & Public Affairs,
14(2), 195–228.
Cherry, S. (2011, November 17). Crowdsourcing radiation monitoring. IEEE Spectrum.
Retrieved from http://spectrum.ieee.org/podcast/geek-life/hands-on/crowdsourcing-
radiation-monitoring
Chowdhury, A. (2011, June 29). Global pulse [Blog]. Twitter. Retrieved from http://
blog.twitter.com/2011/06/global-pulse.html
Cohn, J. P. (2008). Citizen science: Can volunteers do real research? BioScience, 53(8),
192–197.
Condit, C. M., Lynch, J., & Winderman, E. (2012). Recent rhetorical studies in public
understanding of science: Multiple purposes and strengths. Public Understanding of
Science, 21(4), 386–400.
Cooke, R. M. (1991). Experts in uncertainty: Opinion and subjective probability in
science. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Cyranoski, D. (2011, March 11). Japan earthquake: Report from Tokyo [Blog].
nature.com. Retrieved from http://blogs.nature.com/news/2011/03/post_74.html
Doan, S., Vo, B.-K. H., & Collier, N. (2011, March). An analysis of Twitter messages in
the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. eHealth 2011 conference, pp. 58–66.
Fahnestock, J. (1986). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific facts.
Written Communication, 3(3), 275–296.
242
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Farrell, T. B., & Goodnight, G. T. (1981). Accidental rhetoric: The root metaphors of
Three Mile Island. Communication Monographs, 48, 271–300.
Folsom, E. (2007). Database as genre: The epic transformation of archives. Publications
of the Modern Language Association, 122(5), 1571–1579.
Friedman, S. M. (2011). Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima: An analysis of
traditional and new media coverage of nuclear accidents and radiation. Bulletin of
the Atomic Scientists, 67(5), 55–65.
Fung, H. (2011, July 15). “Rate this page” is coming to the English Wikipedia. Wikimedia
Foundation. Retrieved from https://blog.wikimedia.org/2011/07/15/%E2%80%9
Crate-this-page%E2%80%9D-is-coming-to-the-english-wikipedia/
Gaskins, R. (1992). Burdens of proof in modern discourse. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Gieryn, T. F. (1999). Cultural boundaries of science: Credibility on the line. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Gross, A. G., Harmon, J. E., & Reidy, M. (2002). Communicating science: The scientific
article from the 17th century to the present. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Harris, R. A. (1991). Rhetoric of science. College English, 53(3), 282–307.
Ito, J. (2011, September 4). Safecast presentation. Ars Electronica. Linz, Austria.
Ito, K. (2011, November 2). Twittering a nuclear disaster: Circulation of technoscientific
knowledge and politics of expertise in emergency. Paper presented at the 4S annual
meeting, Cleveland, OH.
Jung, J-Y. (2012). Social media use and goals after the great East Japan earthquake. First
Monday, 17(8). Retrieved from http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/
fm/article/view/4071/3285
Kageyama, Y. (2012, July 9). American praised for getting Japan radiation data. Yahoo!
Finance. Retrieved from http://finance.yahoo.com/news/american-praised-getting-
japan-radiation-data-074518244—finance.html
Kaplan, S., & Radin, J. (2011). Bounding an emerging technology: Para-scientific media
and the Drexler-Smalley debate about nanotechnology. Social Studies of Science,
41(4), 457–485.
King, R. (2011, March 12). Failure of imagination can be deadly: Fukushima is a warning
[Blog]. Scientific Americans. Retrieved from http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/
guest-blog/2011/03/12/failure-of-imagination-can-be-deadly-fukushima-is-a-warning/
Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. (Original work published 1962)
Manovich, L. (2000). Database as a genre of new media. AI & Society, 14(2), 176–183.
Manovich, L. (2001). The language of new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Medway, P. (2002). Fuzzy genres and community identities: The case of architecture
students’ sketchbooks. In R. Coe, L. Lingard, & T. Teslenko (Eds.), The rhetoric and
ideology of genre: Strategies for stability and change (pp. 123–153). Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton.
Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70, 151–167.
Miller, C. R. (1992). Kairos in the rhetoric of science. In S. P. Witte, N. Nakadate,
& R. D. Cherry (Eds.), A rhetoric of doing: Essays on written discourse in
honor of James L. Kinneavy (pp. 310–327). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois
University Press.
INTERSECTIONS
/
243

Miller, C. R. (2005). Risk, controversy, and rhetoric: Response to Goodnight. Argumen-
tation and Advocacy, 42(1), 34–37.
Miller, C. R., & Shepherd, D. (2004). Blogging as social action: A genre analysis
of the weblog. Into the Blogosphere. Retrieved from http://blog.lib.umn.edu/
blogosphere/blogging_as_social_action.html
Miller, C. R., & Shepherd, D. (2009). Questions for genre theory from the blogosphere.
In J. Giltrow & D. Stein (Eds.), Genres in the Internet: Issues in the theory of genre
(pp. 263–290). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.
National Academy of Sciences. (n.d.). The science of science communication. Retrieved
from http://www.nasonline.org/programs/sackler-colloquia/completed_colloquia/
science-communication.html
Peplow, M. (2011, March 11). UPDATE 1: Japan declares nuclear emergency [Blog].
nature.com. Retrieved from http://blogs.nature.com/news/2011/03/japan_declares_
nuclear_emergen.html
Perrow, C. (2011). Fukushima and the inevitability of accidents. Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists, 67(6), 44–52.
Pfaltz, J. L. (2007, July 9). What constitutes a scientific database? SSDBM 19th
International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database. Retrieved from
http://www.ursuletz.com/~jlp/07.SSDBM.pdf
Pierpoint, L. (2011). Feeds: Informing the public in a digital era. The Electricity Journal,
24(6), 53–58.
Rowan, C. (2011, March 14). Japan earthquake: The explainer [Blog]. Scientific
American. Retrieved http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/2011/03/14/
japan-earthquake-the-explainer/
Safecast. (n.d.). Homepage. Retrieved from http://blog.safecast.org/
Sakaki, T., Okazaki, M., & Matsuo, Y. (2010). Earthquake shakes Twitter users: Real-time
event detection by social sensors. Proceedings of the International World Wide Web
Conference, pp. 851–860. Raleigh, NC: ACM.
Scientific American. (2011, March 14). Japan’s nuclear crisis and tsunami recovery via
Twitter and other Web resources [Blog]. Retrieved from http://blogs.scientific
american.com/observations/2011/03/14/japans-nuclear-crisis-and-tsunami-recovery-
via-twitter-and-other/
Smith, A., & Brenner, J. (2012). Twitter use 2012. Pew Research. Retrieved from http://
www.pewInternet.org/Reports/2012/Twitter-Use-2012.aspx
Stocking, S. H., & Holstein, L. W. (2009). Manufacturing doubt: Journalists’ roles and
the construction of ignorance in a scientific controversy. Public Understanding of
Science, 18(1), 23–42.
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, C. A. (1991). Defining the scientific community: A rhetorical perspective on
demarcation. Communication Monographs, 58, 402–420.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Thomson, R., Ito, N., Suda, H., Lin, F., Liu, Y., Hayasaka, R., et al. (2012). Trusting
tweets: The Fukushima disaster and information source credibility on Twitter.
Proceedings of the 9th International ISCRAM Conference, pp. 1–10.
244
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Trench, B. (2008). Internet: Turning science communication inside-out. In M. Bucchi &
B. Trench (Eds.), Handbook of public communication of science and technology
(pp. 185–198). New York, NY: Routledge.
U.S. Geological Survey. (2011, March 11). Magnitude 9.0 - Near the east coast of Honshu,
Japan. Retrieved from http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/
2011/usc0001xgp/
Wikipedia. (2007, April 26). FACR. Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Wikipedia:FACR&oldid=126251043
Wikipedia. (2011a, May 22). Talk: Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster/Archive 1.
Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Fukushima_Daiichi_nuclear_
disaster/Archive_1
Wikipedia. (2011b, October 26). Scientific peer review. Retrieved from http://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Scientific_peer_review&oldid=457477974
Wikipedia. (2012a, March 29). Fukushima I Nuclear Power Plant. Retrieved from
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fukushima_I_Nuclear_Power_Plant&oldid=
484538029
Wikipedia. (2012b, October 3). About. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:About#Strengths.2C_weaknesses.2C_and_article_quality_in_Wikipedia
Wikipedia. (2012c, December 20). What Wikipedia is not. Retrieved from http://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:What_Wikipedia_is_not&oldid=529003301
Wikipedia. (2012d, December 22). Verifiability. Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Wikipedia:Verifiability&oldid=529228726
Zickuhr, K., & Rainie, L. (2011). Wikipedia, past and present. Pew Internet: Internet &
American Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/01/13/
wikipedia-past-and-present/
Ziman, J. (1968). Public knowledge: The social dimension of science. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Zivkovic, B. (2011, March 14). Nature: Earthquake dispatches from the correspondent
in Japan [Blog]. Scientific American. Retrieved from http://blogs.scientific
american.com/guest-blog/2011/03/11/nature-earthquake-dispatches-from-the-
correspondent-in-japan-upd/
Zivkovic, B. (2012, May 15). The SA incubator, or, why promote young science writers?
[Blog] Scientific American. Retrieved from http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/
a-blog-around-the-clock/2012/05/15/the-sa-incubator-or-why-promote-young-
science-writers/
INTERSECTIONS
/
245

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 12
Why People Care About Chickens
and Other Lessons About
Rhetoric, Public Science, and
Informal Learning Environments
Stacey Pigg, William Hart-Davidson,
Jeff Grabill, and Kirsten Ellenbogen
ABSTRACT
This chapter is drawn from a larger discourse analysis project analyzing
interaction in Science Buzz, a community blog facilitated by the Science
Museum of Minnesota. After describing how our findings intersect with
recent scholarly conversations about everyday science learning and par-
ticipation, we focus on one Science Buzz blog posting entitled “The Chicken
and the Egg” and its comment stream in order to discuss which discursive
moves are common in an online science conversation that has continually
garnered high participation over several years. Drawing on a close analysis
of this case example, we argue that constructing useful science learning
environments where participants ask and answer practical questions about
matters of concern can create high levels of public science engagement.
When facilitated with care, online social media spaces can act as forums that
encourage links between scientific knowledge and local concerns, including
the ethical, political, emotional, and experiential issues that arise with a
question such as “How should one best care for chickens?”
When, where, and how do people learn science? In response to this question, the
National Academy of Sciences report, “Learning Science in Informal Environ-
ments” (Bell, Lewenstein, Shouse, & Feder, 2009) stressed the importance of
247

everyday experiences, designed spaces like museums and science centers, non-
school science education programs, and science media. The report built on an
array of scholarship attuned to science learning as a lifelong, often self-motivated
endeavor. The findings are not surprising. In all cases, we spend more of our lives
learning outside of classrooms and other formal learning institutions than we
do inside them (Gerber, Cavallo, & Marek, 2001). The situation is analogous
when we think about when, where, and why people engage public science. Often
the scholarly literature focuses on deliberation in related normative forums,
yet most of us engage science issues in ways (and in places) less structured and
more connected to circumstances of daily life (Barron, 2006; Falk, Storksdieck,
& Dierking, 2007). Indeed, in these less structured forums, what we do would
not often be considered “deliberation” at all by scholars. This is particularly
true for learning and engagement online, which can be easily understood as too
messy to be useful (Grabill & Pigg, 2012).
We made a number of claims in that first paragraph, and in what follows,
we intend to be more precise in developing our thinking. Our chapter dwells in
the informal and the digital and focuses as well on learning as important to
science communication. Specifically, we argue that scientific communication in
an age of social media might benefit from focusing more on creating engaging
and useful learning environments than on transmitting scientific information.
Online learning environments can tap into interests of public participants and
facilitate engagement with both scientific concepts and scientific ways of thinking
and making knowledge. With their ability to act as both collective memory
and epistemic medium, online writing environments can involve participants in
ongoing inquiry-based learning. This is a fundamentally different way of thinking
about the role writing can play in mediating public encounters with science—as
a tool for knowledge creation, rather than reception.
In this chapter, we provide a descriptive example of this approach to science
communication through findings from a recent study of the Science Museum
of Minnesota’s Science Buzz, a popular blog that uses writing to create space
for conversation about current science. Our larger study provides us with a
way to characterize the nature of the discourse on Science Buzz and to discuss
indicators of learning in this forum. However, we spend much of our chapter
discussing one key blog entry entitled “The Chicken and the Egg,” which
has generated hundreds of public comments over several years. This thread,
known as the “Chicken Thread,” demonstrates a model of knowledge building
driven by the interest and identities of participants who leverage experiences
caring for chickens to engage science. To be more precise, the participants
are most often discussing chicken eggs and exploring the conditions of incu-
bation. A text analysis of this thread to isolate important terms reveals that
two words in particular stand out as used far, far more often than others
(by an exponent of nearly 3, in fact): “egg” and “if.” When we read the threads
in both systematic ways as researchers and as interested observers following the
248
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

conversation, we are reminded that science is driven by quite practical questions
like “If the eggs get too cold, will they still hatch?”
But is this how we think of science in policy discussions about enhancing
STEM learning? Do we understand the forms of reasoning central to “doing
science” to be grounded in deeply practical questions and answers? The answer,
we suggest, is not nearly often enough. With science itself driven by questions of
application and practical import and embedded in complex political, ethical, and
linguistic webs, it is only natural that online learning and engagement environ-
ments should open conversation to practical scientific questions that matter deeply
to citizens. In response, we forward this conversational dynamic of shared concern,
multiple stakeholder engagement through practical questioning and answering,
and persistence through writing as a model for 21st-century online science learning.
COMPLEXITIES OF PUBLIC SCIENCE CONVERSATION,
ENGAGEMENT, AND LEARNING
Public understanding of science scholarship has long called for engagement
efforts that place scientists and nonscientists in conversation about matters of
concern (see Irwin & Michael, 2003). How these dialogues are to be structured,
however, and to what ends remains a matter of debate. For example, Bickerstaff,
Lorenzoni, Jones, and Pidgeon (2010) identified tensions in Royal Society
National Forum dialogues facilitating public discussions between scientists and
nonscientists. They argued that within the National Forum project, “choices
about problem framing and purpose, roles and identities, as well as the detail
of the day’s structure, were predefined by the Society” (pp. 482–483). With
responsibility for framing solely in the institution’s hands, members of the
public were given “very little capacity to either shape the trajectory of debate
or, subsequently, the ways in which the outputs were (institutionally) interpreted
and deployed” (p. 489).
Bickerstaff et al. (2010) suggested that argument framing, or shaping the
parameters of discussion, often becomes a latent influence controlled by someone
or something in public engagement discourse. When tightly controlled framing
undercuts the public’s capacity to participate, it recalls the perceived hier-
archies between scientists and members of the public that have been the focus
of public understanding of science scholarship for 20 years now. Wynne (1992),
for example, argued that the social gulf between stakeholder groups led to
the difficulty for scientists and nonscientists to learn from one another’s exper-
tise. As Wynne pointed out, with different “social identities” come different
understandings of argument and how it functions. Discussing post-Chernobyl
interactions between scientific authorities and Cumbrian sheep farmers,
Wynne showed how “each side only recognized even as possible evidence,
claims expressed within its cultural style” (p. 296). Thus, Wynne concluded that
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
249

significant differences between scientists and nonscientists are generally “social
conventions” that distribute “relative authority in ways which may be inappro-
priate” (p. 297). Renegotiating these hierarchies is key to productive conver-
sations between scientists and nonscientists. Gross (1994) connected this
conversation to rhetoric studies through his focus on the contextual model’s
“interaction between science and its publics,” whereby public understanding
becomes “the joint creation of scientific and local knowledge” (p. 6).
In spite of this work, assumptions like those foundational to a “deficit model”
of public science knowledge have not disappeared. As Bauer, Allum, and
Miller (2007) have described, survey-based measures of scientific literacy in
the 1980s measured public knowledge by “quiz-like textbook items,” and low
scores on individual items in these inventories were often reported as “indi-
cators of public ignorance and reasons for moral panic” (p. 81). Indeed, with
the current similarly perceived crises related to high-stakes standardized test
performance across educational sites and levels, science learning contends not
only with scientific institutional hierarchies and tensions but also educational
ones. The problem with this scenario is not only its negative positioning of
publics, but also its narrow view of science, which becomes reduced to a mass
collection of facts divorced from contexts of production and use.
Against this backdrop, however, recent approaches to science learning
emphasize the need for developing habits of mind that lead to inquiry and
ongoing interaction with science over time. These approaches reframe science
learning not as passive reception of established facts but rather an active process
of interacting with—not merely aligning with—scientific ways of knowing.
Recognizing that science language use in general (Lemke, 1990) and scientific
argumentation in particular (Bricker & Bell, 2008; Duschl & Osborne, 2002) are
central to science learning, Goldman, Duschl, Ellenbogen, Williams, and Tzou
(2003) focused on the role online discourse can play in creating “thinking spaces”
that support peer argumentation and scaffold dialogues in which learners reason
through science thinking together. According to Goldman et al., online systems
for science dialogue mediate thinking space differently for at least two reasons:
they restructure spatial/temporal expectations of participation, and they make
insights concrete and visualized: part of a collective memory as a “written record
of the dialogue” that is “available for inspection and reflection at any time” (p. 3).
We build on this scholarship as we call for increased attention to the possi-
bilities new web-based social writing platforms offer for facilitating science
learning and engagement through interactive communication. Outside of class-
rooms, it is hard to imagine individuals encountering the scaffolded systems
Goldman and her colleagues (2003) describe. However, less structured net-
worked writing systems like blogs and social networking sites are already an
active part of many individuals’ social lives (see Lenhart, Purcell, Smith,
& Zickuhr, 2010). These online writing environments support characteristics
of exchange that have proven successful in classroom implementations. For
250
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

example, social software generally create collective memory through written
archives that can be revisited and extend participation possibilities by making
conversations available to individuals who would not be able to attend formal
dialogues due to space/time constraints. In addition, with their logic built
on a flattened participatory rather than top-down transmission model, online
networked writing systems hold promise for building new forms of social com-
munity (Wellman & Guilia, 1999; Zappen, 2005). Although power dynamics
clearly do not disappear online (Nakamura, 2011), social writing spaces can
potentially support written interaction among individuals with different forms
of expertise, an important component of both science engagement and learning.
SCIENCE BUZZ:
PUBLIC SCIENCE MEETS ONLINE PARTICIPATION
Before moving to our extended example of online science learning and
engagement, we should first provide context about the particular online science
forum we are discussing, as well as the methods used to systematically analyze it.
Science Buzz is a nationally recognized blog maintained by the Science Museum
of Minnesota (SMM). Science Buzz engages a broad audience about relevant
science topics ranging from health to earth science to the latest findings from
chemistry and physics. The blog postings on Buzz are written by a group of
moderators who compose short writings intended to garner interest, promote
feedback, and sustain ongoing argumentation. Broader conversations develop
within the comments attached to these initial postings, and we focus primarily
within these conversational comments to discuss public learning and engagement.
We take our analysis in this chapter from “Take Two: A Study of the
Co-Creation of Knowledge on Museum Web 2.0 Sites,” a multiyear study of
the impact of Web technologies on museum learning and practice. “Take Two”
explored whether and how blogs and other web-based technologies support
outcomes that are important to museums and other institutions of informal
learning. Supported by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS),
“Take Two” brought together a multi-institutional team of investigators focused
on the following questions:
• What is the nature of the community that interacts through Science Buzz?
• What is the nature of the online interaction?
• Do these online interactions support knowledge building for this user community?
• Do online interactions support inquiry, learning, and change within the
museum; i.e., what is the impact on museum practice?
This chapter reports on the results of the discourse analysis, which focused
on participant interaction on Science Buzz and enabled us to identify indicators
of learning.
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
251

Because many Internet-based interactions are written, discourse analysis pro-
vides a systematic method for describing, characterizing, and understanding
what is happening in online interactions. One of the initial tasks of the study
was to build an analytical tool that could accurately describe the discourse on
Science Buzz. Taking an approach that emphasizes rhetoric in detail (Johnstone
& Eisenhart, 2008), our analytical tool focused on how participants build argu-
ment, identity, and community, as well as how they explore new ideas. Our data
analysis was structured in two phases. In the first phase, we coded the Science
Buzz sample at the T-unit level, focusing on indicators of argument, identity,
community building, and the invention of new ideas.1 In the second phase, we
used a more interpretive analytic that built on the coding results of the first phase
but was explicitly structured by the National Academies report “Learning Science
in Informal Environments: People, Places, and Pursuits” (Bell et al., 2009).
Our results suggest that the activity and community that form Science Buzz
are highly complex and variable. Some topics and threads attract a large number
of participants with diverse levels of knowledge and perspective and who partici-
pate from locations both inside and outside the physical museum. Furthermore,
argumentative strategies such as making claims are the most common discursive
moves on the Buzz blog. These reasoning strategies are the focus of many prior
discourse-based studies of concepts like “learning” in group environments. Yet
our analysis of the Buzz blog also shows a range of strategies that we associate
with constructing individual identities (more common) and group identities
(less common). These discourse strategies are often ignored in studies of learning
or knowledge construction, but they are clearly integral to any understanding
of online spaces made available by museums to the public.
Our analysis also shows Science Buzz to be a learning environment. When we
offer the claim that Buzz is an informal learning environment, we are doing so
in a precise fashion: we are not claiming that there is learning per se, which is
extremely difficult to measure and impossible given the context and methods
of this study. Rather, we are claiming that there are indicators of learning in
evidence in meaningful representations, patterns, and densities. In particular,
our discourse analysis identified practices that are aligned with categories of
informal learning identified by the National Academies as important, such as
developing interest in science, engaging in scientific reasoning, and identifying
with the scientific enterprise.
For example, as we look across our sample, we see considerable evidence
that participants are interested in science and that they are compelled to partici-
pate in conversations about science for a number of reasons, ranging from
252
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
1 We computed simple agreement for each code combination for a subsample of threads.
By code combination, we mean that we expected agreement not at the level of the category
“building an argument,” for instance, but rather at the level of the discourse move within the
category (“building an argument, claim”). Agreement was well above 90% on most codes.

entertainment to intellectual engagement to fear and anxiety. We also see indi-
cators of scientific reasoning in each thread, including a number of argument
moves (e.g., use of evidence). In addition, there is evidence of inquiry (asking
questions and engaging in a process of answering them). We see numerous
examples of participants applying ideas, concluding with and from evidence and
thinking with others in conversation. In some threads, we also see sophisti-
cated reasoning practices and people thinking together to work through ideas.
Finally, identity work is persistent and complex. In some threads, participants are
authorizing “expert” and/or “expert-like” identities. Sometimes these dynamics
lead those who identify most strongly with the scientific enterprise to dominate
threads and ignore questions from those less knowledgeable or comfortable
expressing expertise. However, this is not always the case. Performing identities
also allows people to draw from experience in productive ways and call for
answers to questions of concern. This is particularly important in threads where
people are motivated to discuss scientific issues because of their relationship
to problems that directly affect them.
Science Buzz is thus substantial in terms of both the amount of science
discourse it has generated and the extent to which it aligns with what we
know about how people learn about science in informal environments. As we
have suggested, the various threads on the site differ considerably in how these
key dynamics of interest, reasoning, and identification develop through
conversation. The remainder of this chapter explores the intersections of informal
learning, science communication, and web technologies in detail by paying close
attention to one exceptional blog conversation (in terms of participation) that has
been a part of Science Buzz for over 5 years. Within this exchange, we see high
levels of interest and argument—participants thinking together in writing—and
through discourse moves such as these, they construct an engaging learning
environment.
CARING ABOUT AND FOR CHICKENS:
THE CHICKEN AND THE EGG
Begun
in
the
autumn
of
2006,
“The
Chicken
and
the
Egg”
(see
http://www.sciencebuzz.org/blog/chicken-and-egg)
has received 850 public
comments at the date of this draft (with more added every day). Key contributors
to the thread include a museum blogger and staff facilitator, a poultry scientist
from the University of Minnesota, and a number of public posters (some
self-identified and others remaining anonymous). Our analysis revealed that “The
Chicken and the Egg” contained high amounts of argument. Nearly half of the
T-units in the Chicken Thread (48%) were assigned to our code, “Building an
Argument.” This is not surprising compared to our larger sample. Where the
Chicken Thread most stands out compared to other Science Buzz conversations
is in the intersection of this argumentation with discursive moves that build
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
253

community connectedness. Around 18% of T-units (17.71%) in the Chicken
Thread were assigned the code, “Building Community Identity,” compared to an
average of 11.5% across our total sample. According to our analytical scheme,
this meant that the Chicken Thread contained many discursive acts in which
participants explicitly requested that others explain or respond, articulated
shared experiences or roles, or connected their contributions concretely to ideas
or people mentioned previously in the thread. This initial analysis helped us
understand that the reasoning patterns of the Chicken Thread extended beyond
a collection of disconnected claims. Participants were (and are) talking to and
thinking with one another.
The co-presence of engagement and argumentation moves is a substantial
finding in the context of our larger study, which did not always show evidence
of blog commenters creating community or engaging one another. Our closer
narrative analysis of the Chicken Thread helped us to understand how these
moves functioned in this particular case (and perhaps gives clues to why these
particular moves were not present in others). To draw on the language of the
“Learning Science in Informal Environments” report (Bell et al., 2009), a key
to the discursive patterns of the thread is high individual interest. Participants
care about chickens. Perhaps even more importantly, they care about chickens
because they care for chickens. As stewards, their public interest in conversing
and learning more about poultry and poultry science is less driven by a sense
of “wonder” than of “application” (Fahnestock, 1986, p. 279). When individuals
are this deeply invested in a topic or problem, an online writing environment
like Science Buzz has the potential to become an online learning environment,
sustaining engagements that facilitate learning and communication. Within the
Chicken Thread, we see this play out as forms of reasoning connected to appli-
cation and action that prompt continually more nuanced accounts about science.
This inquiry model is similar to the dynamics of scientific rhetoric in more
official genres and discourse communities. Our stance here further supports the
substantive role for rhetoric outlined by Gross (1994) as a means to reconstruct
both the facts and the methods of science in ways that mesh with matters of
importance to the general public. In order to further describe this dynamic,
we first characterize the Chicken Thread’s discourse in more detail before
focusing on two short samples from the conversation that illustrate themes we
have introduced.
“The Chicken and the Egg” and the Discourse
of Engagement and Learning
Like all “threads” on Science Buzz, “The Chicken and the Egg”begins with a
short blog post created by museum staff to facilitate a conversation. In this case,
the initial post positions the museum staff as an interested, inquisitive member of
254
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

the public who has a question relevant to science issues (lines 1–27).2 She
opens simply by describing how she has “noticed a lot of dead fledglings and
raided nests lately" and along with one of them “an unhatched baby bird.” This
act of noticing, the writer says, led her to a question about everyday experience:
“Are grocery store eggs fertilized?” (line 3) and to a set of follow-up questions:
“Why do you never seem to see a grocery store egg with a baby chicken in it?
And, if fertilized eggs are the norm, why would the chicken “spend the energy
required to produce unfertilized eggs?” (line 5).
Her initial post proceeds to describe her next steps: after conducting an
informal Web search, the staff member found relevant evidence from scientists
to answer her questions. She cites the Howard Hughes Medical Institute to
describe how chicken eggs form and develop and provides a simple discus-
sion of the major differences between fertilized and nonfertilized chicken eggs
(e.g., if kept at the right temperature, a fertilized egg will “differentiate to form
a chick, which will hatch after 21 days,” whereas a unfertilized egg will never
differentiate, and thus yolk material remains). We don’t see baby chickens in
grocery store eggs, she continues, because eggs to be sold in large commercial
operations generally come from chickens that never had contact with a rooster.
Importantly, the poster claims that she not only found reputable sources to
help her answer her question, but she also learned that “lots of other people had
the same question” (line 8). She furthermore applies what she has learned to
revise prior thinking. For example, she mentions how her reading helped her
rethink an idea she had been taught as a child: that a “blood spot” means an egg
is fertilized. Now she knows that blood spots are just broken blood vessels.
On the Science Buzz blog, the initial post is important. It serves a facilitative
role that the museum staffer continues in subsequent engagement with thread
participants. In this case, however, the initial post also models a process of
learning science:
1. The post foregrounds the interest of the writer and her identification
with science.
2. The post initiates an inquiry (if not scientific) by asking questions.
3. The post engages—it facilitates—by opening up the learning process to
others rather than providing the answer to the original question.
Rather than simply reporting science facts, the poster models an inquiry process
and way of thinking and wondering that is central to active learning (and by
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
255
2 We include transcript line numbers in our detailed analysis of the blog comments in order
to help readers orient to how the conversation is unfolding. these line numbers are not available
on the Buzz blog. However, we have posted a segmented version of the thread in an online
appendix as a reference for readers. At this time, that version of the thread is available at the
following online location: http://tinyurl.com/cjnca49

extension, we suggest, to doing science as well). What makes the Chicken
Thread remarkable is that the comments that follow enact a similar process of
learning through inquiry but do so through argumentation that involves multiple
participants. The blog comments are largely driven by what appear to be genuine
questions from participants (mostly nonscientists) who are interested and/or
invested in caring for chickens. Commenters in the Chicken Thread often
direct questions to the facilitator, the scientific expert, or to a “you” with an
unclear referent; however, people with a range of social positions offer answers
based on different forms of reasoning and evidence. Active questioning and
responding in the Chicken Thread connect individuals’ interests to broader scien-
tific conversations and create shared objects of concern that can be addressed
from different points of view.
The following example represents one early question and several of the
nested responses to it. In this case, a public participant writes for information
about why her chicken has stopped laying eggs:
Why did my chicken stop laying eggs? (lines 35–37)
Staff answer: Hen may be resting (cites scientists online) or not receiving
enough sunlight. Provides links to Virginia Cooperative Extension and
www.poultryhelp.com. (lines 40–49)
Public answer: Alexis says hen might be ‘clucky.’ Cites methods
for getting rid of cluckiness. (lines 51–64)
Public answer: Anonymous says hen might be moulting. Cites
the look of chicken feathers during moult. References first answer.
(lines 74–81)
Public answer: Eser says hens may be sick. No evidence. (line 84)
As these responses illustrate, both institutional representatives (museum staff)
and other members of the public address the problem of chicken fertility raised
by this poster. Notably, however, none of their answers simply settles the issue
but rather brings new evidence and possibilities to bear on the question of concern
by speaking of the general issue in a newly situated way.
Questions like this one about chicken fertility persist temporally within the
thread discourse, as both staff and public posters add to the building collection
of responses and information. They also recur and are revisited when new
posters enter the conversation. In repeatedly addressing these questions, citations
of online authorities become layered with descriptions of concrete experience.
At times, a particular kind of evidence might more or less useful to answer
a question. For example, as we describe later, there are moments in which the
hypothetical response of a scientist is of little use in helping an interested citizen
256
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

make a contextualized decision about future action. In the same way, a public
poster’s description of caring for chickens might be irrelevant or mismatched
to a more theoretical question. What is consistent, however, is that multiple
forms of response and evidence can be sustained through written engagement.
Much like in the initial posting, the point of this exchange is not merely to
transmit scientific concepts but to enact an inquiry cycle that does not end with
one answer to one question. Science learning, instead, emerges as a sustained
process of engagement by asking, answering, and then asking again. This process
continually tests the limits of shared understanding by considering related
cases of a similar phenomenon. Technologies matter here as well, of course, as
a blogging platform (in this case) is also a participant in creating a thinking
space in which ideas persist in spite of distances of time and space, dialoguing
individuals who might not otherwise have access to one another.
Our description to this point has been concerned with making a narrow but
hopefully meaningful argument, and so we have left out other issues of impor-
tance. For instance, the dynamic we have described is not flat. That is, hierarchies
between experts and nonexperts exist. Indeed, it is notable that much of the
thread follows an “ask the expert” logic wherein one member of the public poses
a question and an expert in the thread answers that question, often by linking
to relevant content on the Web. From the poster who asks the scientist whether
it is possible to find yolk material on commercial chicken meat (line 1053) to
the poster who asks for advice about whether it is possible to keep chickens in
her neighborhood (line 1069), some questions do not launch broader inquiry.
In other moments of the thread, scientific experts draw on markers of status in
order to defend knowledge during moments of community negotiation, citing
authority as a way to add weight to evidence built from formal scientific pro-
cedures. Clearly, power dynamics from outside Science Buzz influence produc-
tion and interpretation of discourse and are part of how the blog functions as an
environment. Dynamics that we associate with power/knowledge relationships
are operational in Buzz, just as they are meaningful in any scientific communi-
cation process. However, it is not always the case that power/knowledge asym-
metries lead to shutting down conversation and learning. Based on our work with
Science Buzz, we suggest that such dynamics can also enable public learning.
Discursive markers of authority, for instance, are used to model inquiry processes
and ways of arguing, add nuance to conversations, or refine ways of asking
or answering questions.
Importantly, in the Chicken Thread, science facilitators have the opportunity
to model practices important to scientific thinking because public participants
inquire in ways that are both useful and personally applicable. Having said this,
we want to close with two examples that move beyond the basic inquiry dynamic
that we have described so far and toward more subtle engagement practices
characterized by participants testing the applicability of scientific knowledge and
norms. We trace, first, how scientists and nonscientists differently support the
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
257

persistent discussion of a question raised by a public poster, adding nuances and
applications as commenters situate the question within varied experiences and
knowledge bases. We follow this by focusing on a moment of community nego-
tiation in which public posters engage science by questioning the “truth” of a
forum facilitator’s claim.
Asking Toward Action: Why Public Posters
Reason About the Difference Between Fertilized
and Nonfertilized Eggs
Within the Chicken Thread, one recurring question—how to tell whether an
egg is fertilized—becomes a site from which to observe that public engagement
in scientific reasoning (an important indicator of learning) is often driven by
questions of future action,3 even when that action is unarticulated. In the post
that launches this conversation, a commenter named Tom asks, “Can you clarify
the fertilized egg issue . . . if you have a rooster in the hen house, how can you tell
which eggs are fertilized and which are not?” (line 197). Addressing an unclear
“you” here, he follows his question by discussing why candling—a common
method for looking through the shell of an egg to see its contents—would not be
an appropriate method to answer his question. Candling is only useful after an
egg has been kept at a proper incubation temperature for around 10 days. For
Tom, who thinks it would be most economical to eat unfertilized eggs and hatch
chickens from fertilized ones, incubating an unfertilized egg would render it
inedible because of high incubator temperatures.
The museum staff member who wrote the blog’s initial post is the first to
take up Tom’s question, claiming there is every reason to believe all eggs laid
by a hen that has had previous contact with a rooster are fertilized. Elaborating
this claim, the staff member assumes that a moral/value imperative had motivated
Tom’s question, which she addresses in her closing thoughts: “I don’t think
there’s any reason you shouldn’t eat a freshly-laid, fertile egg if that’s why
you’re keeping the chickens. After all, if you eat the adults . . .” (line 208). Tom
responds to this assumption by pointing out that, in fact, a different imperative
had prompted his thinking: “My question is, how do you avoid the waste. I’m
not worried about eating fertilized eggs” (line 217).
258
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET
3 Fahnestock’s (1986) application of rhetorical stasis theory to public science provides
useful vocabulary for accounting for misunderstandings thata can arise between public posters
and science facititators during interactive conversations. Drawing on a classical rhetorical
invention method. Fahnestock describes how stasis “defines and orders the kinds of questions
that can be at isssue,” including questions of conjecture, definition, quality and finally of action
(p. 290).

We understand this as an important moment in the Chicken Thread for illus-
trating how the public interest that motivates engagement in scientific reasoning
often emerges from practical, contextualized problems that require action. While
the National Academies report (Bell et al., 2009) lists participation in scientific
reasoning and developing an interest in science as two separate strands of
learning, it is clear that the two are closely connected in this case. The science
facilitator misreads the particular motive for Tom’s question but intuitively
realizes that his form of interest and form of reasoning are linked. Tom’s response
to the staff member is further notable because he does not simply accept the
general answer the facilitator provides; he persists by refining his question,
building on the context that she helps to draw out. Following up, then, Tom
continues by practicing a key discursive move of this conversation: he restates
his original question, now situating it more clearly within the ethic of care for
chickens that motivated it. He suggests that there “must be a more accurate
way” of telling the difference between a fertilized and nonfertilized egg to
avoid “destroy[ing] a potential chick that could have strengthened your chicken
supply” while avoiding the waste of incubating eggs that are not fertilized.
Tom’s refined question now invites a new kind of response. At this point,
two anonymous posters suggest (again) that Tom candle the eggs to tell whether
they are fertilized or not. These answers to the question miss the context Tom
built earlier for why candling would not be an effective method for determining
fertilization in his particular case. However, while their answers do not help
Tom very much, they do prompt additional participation that adds to the
ongoing knowledge building within the thread (in this instance, on the problem
of fertilization identification). Specifically, their responses prompt a poultry
scientist to enter the conversation. The scientist echoes Tom’s sentiment that
candling will not reveal whether an egg is fertilized until an egg has been
incubated (something that wouldn’t happen with an egg to be eaten). The role
that the scientist plays at this particular point is to continue the conversation.
She does not put the issue to rest by offering a definitive answer (something
that does happen by those playing the role of “poultry scientist” at other moments
in the discourse). Instead, she continues the process of knowledge accumulation
that had begun through Tom’s question, the museum blogger’s response, and
the ongoing refining and reiteration.
This practice of knowledge-building continues when a public poster who
calls herself “a nonny mouse” echoes the museum staff member’s original claim
but adds new information, including suggestions on how to hatch chickens and
when candling would be an appropriate method to determine whether an egg
is fertilized. The echoing of this point by another poster who calls herself
“I have chickens 2” still does not sufficiently answer the question for purposes
of the thread. Almost immediately, a poster named Mel asks a question strik-
ingly similar to Tom’s but differently contextualized: “ok so my neighbor gave
me and my friends these three eggs" but “i really want to know if the egg’s he
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
259

gave us are fertilized.” Here again, the scientist responds by pointing out that
candling will not reveal whether an egg is fertilized under all or even most
conditions. The scientist doesn’t stop here, though. She uses the opportunity
of the open question to build additional knowledge into the conversation.
Specifically, she shares a common method for candling, describing the process
and linking to descriptions online. The scientist further uses this point to add
nuance (via her insertion of hypotheticals) that continue to have resonance both
for Tom’s original question and for the much earlier question about chicken
infertility: “If there are too many roosters for the number of hens, however,
you can get a case where the roosters spend more time fighting with each
other instead of mating with the hens.” Following the scientist, another public
poster inserts himself to address the museum staff member’s focus on the moral
discussion about eating fertilized and nonfertilized eggs. Here, this poster,
who calls himself “Tim the Enchanter” says, “It’s actually a vegetarian issue.
Some vegetarians will eat non-fertilized eggs, but fertile eggs are off-limits.
And of course, in that case, you wouldn’t eat the adults either” (line 341).
We could continue tracing the intricacies of this fertilization conversation
for many more pages. The conversation never exactly comes to a halt. For
the sake of space, however, we will simply share a few more places in which
the question recurs:
• line 707: “Is there any other way to tell if the egg has been fertilized, other
than candling?”;
• lines 724–725: “I do not know if the eggs are fertile. Will she continue to
lay on the eggs for many weeks if they do not hatch and if so how long
should I leave it before removing the eggs?”;
• line 812: “we separated the hens and roosters for a brief time due to a large
amount of feathers missing from hens back. Probably a week has gone by
and one of the hens is sitting on her eggs, are these eggs fertile?”;
• line 975: “how can you tell if a egg is fertile?”; and
• lines 1156–1157: “I have 10 bantam chicken eggs taken from the farm where
I work. They are all in an incubator but how do I know if they are fertilized?”
Seeing this recurring question, we might easily ask, Why can’t they settle on an
answer? Why must the question be repeated? Is nobody listening or learning?
What we hope our reading shows is that this iterative questioning process is a
means of engagement that demonstrates participant interest, facilitates argument,
and therefore helps to construct precisely the sort of environment in which
learning is possible. What is notable about the recurring questions around incu-
bation is not only the way rhetoric is used to bring evidence to claims, but also
the way rhetoric becomes a medium for a broader construction of understanding.
Gross (1994) gives this phenomenon a name: a forum of reconstruction. The “re”
in “reconstruction” is especially important for Gross, as the forum functions to
260
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

forge linkages between scientific knowledge and local knowledge, something
that must be done over and over again to establish the truth value of scientific
facts relative to what members of the lay public know from experience. We see
this played out quite vividly in the Chicken Thread in a number of ways, as those
who keep chickens raise questions and relate anecdotes about specific conditions
and circumstances pertaining to fertilization.
The dynamics of the forum of reconstruction also reveal an important role
for the Scientist vis-à-vis the public: that of the facilitator. This role is predicted
by Gross’ (1994) discussion of the way scientific truths in public forums are
mediated by the identity of experts, rising and falling in credibility in proportion
to the trust accorded to the expert. We would expect to see our poultry expert
reiterating scientific facts, but doing so in relation to the subtleties of each new
formulation of public understanding of the phenomenon in question. And that
is precisely what we see. Yet the discourse practices of public posters are equally
important. Tom’s initial question initiates multiple points of connection from
which others build, and his move to reiterate a question based on a clearer sense
of this particular case or context draws new detail into the conversation. Moti-
vated by the issue of how best to care for chickens, Tom’s questions also test the
boundaries of the applicability of scientific knowledge in everyday life. Questions
of chicken stewardship are not strictly scientific. They are practical. They are rich
with ethical, economic, and even emotional issues. As the conversation demon-
strates, science tells us some things that can inform the conversation. But it
will never give a single, definitive answer to such a probabilistic question as
“How should I best care for chickens?” Thus, public science learning requires a
complex synthesis of multiple forms of evidence and knowledge.
This communicative complexity, we suggest, would not be reached through
a public engagement model that seeks simply to inform members of the public
about science concepts. Nor would it likely emerge as part of dialogues in which
scientists overdetermine argumentative frameworks, including questions or topics
of concern. Acts of questioning launch an exchange of different forms of exper-
tise from descriptions of how one should care for chickens, to lay knowledge
about how many roosters are too many roosters, to scientists’ takes on the best
methods for candling. Posters revisit topics of previous interest that were raised
in responses to questions (like when Tom picks back up the moral implications of
eating fertilized eggs) and layers of new commentary emerge, even when thread
participants ask questions that have already presumably been answered.
When Reasoning Styles Conflict: Why Public
Posters Care if Refrigerated Eggs Will Hatch
Our analysis further suggests that conflicts may occur when learning
facilitators assume a reasoning process aligned with “wondering” about a
topic when public interlocutors are actually reasoning toward decisions or action
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
261

(Fahnestock, 1986, p. 334). This tension arises during a conversation between
several thread participants in response to one poster’s plea for advice after
her child’s beloved pet chicken, Sally, disappeared: “Tonight, I went to put the
chickens in for the night and Sally was not around. We have three eggs from the
last three days (they are in the ref.) and I was wondering if they would hatch?
Please let me know” (line 87). This question was meaningful not only because it
involved kids and pets—touchy subjects—but also because it was a recurring
question: one that had been raised and addressed previously in the conver-
sation. Just previously, a poster had asked, “Are unfertilized eggs that have been
stored in a refrigerator considered dead or alive?” (line 87). The museum blogger
at that time responded, first, by suggesting that unfertilized eggs are not living
(line 92) and then by citing an expert website that says it is possible to hatch a
chicken from a fertilized egg that has been in the refrigerator (under specific
circumstances—when the refrigeration happens before incubation and not after).
While this answer is technically correct, the new way of posing the question
involving Sally the pet chicken leads several public posters to express dissatis-
faction with the staff member’s original response. One writes, “If ref. is short
for refrigerator and they’ve been in there for three days the chances of them
hatching is 1 to 1,000 so don’t even try to do anything about it” (line 114), and
another takes issue with the initial poster’s claim that an egg in a refrigerator
could hatch. He writes,
An egg cannot get below 40 degrees or it is no longer viable. You cannot
put a fertilized egg in the refrigerator and expect it to hatch when you
put it in the incubator. People need to do research before answering some-
bodies question. (line 119)
The conflict that arises in this short exchange recalls the dissonance between
different stakeholders’ forms of reasoning and interest illustrated in early studies
like Wynne’s (1992). The staff member is attempting to model a process of
scientific practice by emphasizing the importance of supporting claims through
the evidence of citation and peer review that comes from a record of previous
research. However, public posters’ reasoning toward action leads them to either
misunderstand the facilitator’s thinking process or to reject it as inappropriate
to address the kinds of interests they have in science.
Naturally, the staff member defends her answer to the question by referencing
her citation of evidence: “I cited my source—a reputable expert. And my
answer was reviewed, after posting, by local poultry expert [name removed]. So
I stand by it” (line 125). However, two public posters next jump in to continue
questioning what constitutes an appropriate response in this case. “I have
chickens 2” (also an active participant in the first thread sample we discussed)
further supports the anonymous posters, claiming, “You really need to do some
research before answering anyone’s questions, they really want the truth and
262
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

really want to know what to do, how to do it and all the how to’s” (line 132).
Following up, “I have chickens 2” elaborates this claim, notably drawing on
the idea that it is “really like common sense” that eggs from the refrigerator
would become too cold to hatch, strengthening his/her claim through his/her
authority as someone with much experience caring for chickens (line 133).
Important in both these responses are appeals to practical knowledge of common
sense and the need for reflective action when caring for chickens.
The museum staff member, confronted by this continual questioning, suggests
a return to analyze the context of the original question. She thus reiterates
the initial context for inquiry: “The poster wanted to know if it was possible
that eggs kept in the refrigerator for three days, that had never been incubated,
could still hatch. And my answer was, it’s possible” (line 143). In this discussion,
the staff member reveals that her reasoning process was suited to the original
question about what was possible, as opposed to the following question about
practical action. She follows up by explaining that she never suggested that
hatching eggs from a refrigerator was a “recommended practice,” but instead
just a possibility. Interestingly, a member of the public then steps in to defend
the museum blogger’s claim, providing evidence from her own experience:
“We hatched our pet turkey Charlie from a group of four eggs that were in the
refrigerator for about 24hrs. Only one of the eggs hatched so the chances are
slim but possible!” (line 153). Finally, the scientist enters the argument at this
point to echo the sentiments of the previous two posters. She explains that
although refrigerating eggs is not recommended practice because “most
refrigerators store feed at 45F, which is too cool for successful hatching of fertile
eggs,” it is true that “chicks are extremely resilient and anything is possible” (lines
164).
In this exchange, we see a dynamic common in many public science com-
munication contexts: public challenges to scientific expertise. Such challenges
can be (and are) understood in many different ways, most of them negative
(e.g., uninformed, emotional, NIMBYism). But these participants do not appear
to be merely “flaming,” and instead offer reasonable challenges to a view of
scientific reasoning motivated by generalized knowledge as opposed to practical
action. As with the previous vignette, the questions and challenges are not
merely scientific, and this is precisely one of the points we wish to make. Public
communication of science is almost never simply about science. It is always
also about policy, ethics, politics, experience, and so on. Efforts to isolate the
technical or scientific issues and the risks associated with them often falter
because of their narrowness. New technologies provide mechanisms by which
participants can help frame conversations with representatives of scientific insti-
tutions. Furthermore, such technologies can help support conversations in which
disagreement can happen productively and in ways that encourage partici-
pants to reexamine assumptions. In this vein, it is important not only for public
posters to revisit prior scientific knowledge but also for science facilitators
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
263

to develop an emerging sense of what is driving public interest in science and
shaping the forms of reasoning that are possible. There are significant
cultural issues at stake as well, and the primary way that we have characterized
these cultural issues is our focus on “learning” rather than “communication” as
perhaps a more productive way to think about structuring public engagement
around science.
As we close our discussion, then, we ask, “How might we best use the
resources of the Internet in the interest of advancing scientific knowledge among
the general public?” Our investigation suggests that there is still value in creating
what Gross (1994) calls “forums of reconstruction” that explicitly encourage
experts and members of the lay public to make links between scientific facts
and local knowledge. This can happen around issues that not only stir controversy
but also coincide with routine matters about which people care deeply. Like
caring for chickens. Or, to offer another example, caring for a loved one with a
newly diagnosed chronic illness. The need to draw on scientific evidence to guide
practice and decision-making in such situations creates tremendous motive for
engagement. But the means to engage—the forum for reconstruction—may not
be readily apparent or easily accessible for most people. Conceiving of online
communicative spaces as environments for active learning and engagement is one
possible first step toward reaching out to the significant number of individuals
who have interests or concerns like those of the Chicken Thread’s participants.
REFERENCES
Barron, B. (2006). Interest and self-sustained learning as catalysts of development:
A learning ecologies perspective. Human Development, 49, 193–224.
Bauer, M. W., Allum, N., & Miller, S. (2007). What can we learn from 25 years of PUS
survey research? Liberating and expanding the agenda. Public Understanding of
Science, 16, 79–95.
Bell, P., Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A. W., & Feder, M. A. (Eds.). (2009). Learning science
in informal environments: People, places, and pursuits. Committee on Learning
Science in Informal Environments, National Research Council. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Bickerstaff, K., Lorenzoni, I., Jones, M., & Pidgeon, N. (2010). Locating scientific
citizenship: The institutional contexts and cultures of public engagement. Science,
Technology, & Human Values, 35(4), 474–500.
Bricker, L. A., & Bell, P. (2008). Conceptualizations of argumentation from science
studies and the learning sciences and their implications for the practices of science
education. Science Education, 92, 473–498.
Duschl, R., & Osborne, J. (2002). Supporting and promoting argumentation discourse in
science education. Studies in Science Education, 38, 39–72.
Fahnestock, J. (1986). Accommodating science: The rhetorical life of scientific facts.
Written Communication, 3(3), 275–296.
264
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Falk, J. H., Storksdieck, M., & Dierking, L. D. (2007). Investigating public science
interest and understanding: Evidence for the importance of free-choice learning.
Public Understanding of Science, 16(4), 455–469.
Gerber, B. L., Cavallo, A. M. L., & Marek, E. A. (2001). Relationships among informal
learning environments, teaching and scientific reasoning ability. International
Journal of Science Education, 23(5), 535–549.
Goldman, S. R., Duschl, R. A., Ellenbogen, K., Williams, S. M., & Tzou, C. T.
(2003). Science inquiry in a digital age: Possibilities for making thinking visible.
In H. van Oostendorp (Ed.), Cognition in a digital world (pp. 253–284). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Grabill, J. T., & Pigg, S. (2012). Messy rhetoric: Identity performance as rhetorical
agency in online public forums. Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 42(2), 99–119.
Gross, A. (1994). The role of rhetoric in the public understanding of science. Public
Understanding of Science, 3, 3–24.
Irwin, A., & Michael, M. (2003). Science, social theory, and public knowledge.
Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press.
Johnstone, B., & Eisenhart, C. (Eds.). (2008). Rhetoric in detail. Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning and values. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. (2010). Social media and mobile
Internet use among teens and young adults. PEW Internet and American Life Project.
Retrieved from http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-
Adults.aspx
Nakamura, L. (2011). Race and identity in digital media. In J. Curran (Ed.), Media and
society (5th ed., pp. 336–347). London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic.
Wellman, B., & Guilia, M. (1999). Net surfers don’t ride alone: Virtual communities
as communities. In B. Wellman (Ed.), Networks in the global village: Life in con-
temporary communities. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Wynne, B. (1992). Misunderstood misunderstanding: Social identities and public uptake
of science. Public Understanding of Science, 1(3), 281–304.
Zappen, J. P. (2005). Digital rhetoric: Toward an integrated theory. Technical Communi-
cation Quarterly, 14(3), 319–325.
RHETORIC, PUBLIC SCIENCE, INFORMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
/
265

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 13
Afterword:
Social Changes in Science
Communication:
Rattling the Information Chain
Charles Bazerman
Scientific writing has always been changing, moved by multiple forces—some
of them under the inventive control of writers and editors creating articles and
journals; some evolving from the communal interactions of emerging and
changing scientific communities and their ways of pursuing investigations; some
responsive to larger organizational, political, and economic arrangements within
which science operates; and some exploiting the opportunities afforded by
changing communicative technologies. The forms and appearances of texts are
the realizations of communicative actions within these larger sets of forces.
What we may think of as the standard forms of scientific communication are
only semistable sets of expectations that emerged gradually since the invention
of journals in the 17th century. While some features arose early in this history,
some only took on robust form in the 20th century, as science came to reside at
the intersection of university departments and professional societies (with their
structures of rewards and advancements), government and business interests
and funding (based on their perceived needs for scientific and technological
knowledge), knowledge-based professions that pervade contemporary society
(with their reliance on systems of authority and credentials), expanding educated
populations who look toward science for knowledge, and evolving technologies
and systems for the production and distribution of texts (including cheap printing,
commercial publishing companies, university and professional libraries, national
mail systems, and international agreements).
267

Reinforcing dynamics have served to carry forward the 20th-century expec-
tations even as technology has afforded new opportunities for the production,
format, and distribution of communications as well as opportunities for insti-
tutional, financial, and social change. Disciplines had already coalesced long
before the Internet around regional and international societies, with local instan-
tiations in university departments. Standards for work became defined in the
disciplinary societies relying for legitimacy on university affiliations and creden-
tialing. Leading journals were established and built long reputations. Societies
and corporations became dependent on the profits from the production of these
journals. Health care, military, economies, and other social sectors became
dependent on the production of this knowledge and looked to universities and
academic disciplines. In recent decades, university status has increasingly come
to depend on the production of research, measured by the production of refereed
and cited articles. Faculty rewards have coordinately become increasingly
dependent on productivity, measured by publication in recognized academic
journals supported by practices of communal judgment, especially as universities
and graduate programs expanded, creating more competition among themselves
with an expanded job market and an even more rapidly increasing pool of job
candidates. Competition has also increased for funding, status, recognition, and
students. With increasing intensity, countries of all regions have entered the
world of research and sought status.
At the communicative center of this competition were publications presenting
the kinds of argument that would gain disciplinary acceptance as contributing
to the advance of knowledge valued by the discipline. Such contributions would
meet disciplinary standards, would be useful to relevant stakeholders, would
raise the status of individuals, and would produce reliable knowledge. Contri-
butions would also articulate with other contributions in the field, which might
be sharply distinguished from work in even closely neighboring fields. If the
contribution were to be considered of value to multiple fields, it had to speak
to needs and standards of each of the disciplines and professions. The form and
evaluation processes were intertwined, in that the expected forms of reporting
results and arguing for claims embodied criteria of the field that needed to be
addressed for credibility. Texts had to meet these criteria and make credible
arguments not only to pass refereeing and editorial judgments but to become
cited and used, establishing the basis for future work, creating track records for
reputations of researchers and research programs, and establishing the basis
for fundability of future research.
The focusing of the research question; the articulation with prior knowledge
and other current results; the methods for production, selection, and display of
evidence; the presentation and analysis of the evidentiary findings; and the
valuation of the research for advancing the thinking of the field became important
for most fields, through differences in the specifics of each field, led to major
differences in the genre details in the publications of each. Additional genres
268
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

arose to pursue specific elements of these functions in a more focused way
(such as reviews of the literature, methodological articles, or theoretical pieces).
Also, the coherence of reasoning of these parts was held together in a larger
textual structure that either implied or made explicit the overall logic of the
argument. On the surface, these elements typically add up to the IMRAD
structure (that is, Introduction/review of literature; Methods; Results; Analysis;
Discussion), but there are many variations across the fields. Further, as fields
evolved, so did the methods, kinds of available evidence viewed as relevant,
the accumulated literatures viewed as currently relevant, the theories that bound
contributions together, the forms of analysis considered revealing, the stake-
holders whose needs must be met (such as the changing roles and relationships
of government regulatory and provider agencies, health providers, research
funders, and healthcare business that had interest in medical and pharmaco-
logical research), and many other elements that might influence the contents and
shape of articles.
Yet no matter what the particulars in each field at each moment of time
with respect to each research inquiry, the article needed to present the various
relevant elements in a coherent integrated structure that in its totality argued
for findings or a claim. Disciplinary evaluation of the credibility of the contri-
bution depended both on the adequate performance of each of the elements and
the total argument facilitated in the total article structure. This would be true
even though most readers may not read the article fully or in chronological
order (Bazerman, 1985) because all elements would be there for reviewers
evaluating the suitability for publication and for any readers who had need
or motive to look more deeply into the claims.
During the last decades of the 20th century, digitization entered into this
strongly reinforced though potentially mutable arrangement, changing the means
and economics of the production and distribution of texts and data, the con-
venience of multimedia components, and the ease and pace of collaboration and
other communicative interactions. Digitization also potentially could affect all
the components of the surrounding social, organizational, and economic systems
that surrounded, energized, and shaped the system of scientific knowledge
production. This current volume, Science and the Internet: Communicating
Knowledge in a Digital Age, takes up the question of what has changed, in
what way, and to what degree, particularly with respect to the Internet.
So what is changing, at what level, with what consequences for future changes?
What remains stable, what is facilitated, what is made more intense, what is
disrupted, what is a more attractive alternative path? When do small changes
coalesce in major reinvention? The chapters in this book provide a series of cases
that look at texts, websites, and other textual realizations to see what is visible
in the form of the text; but in these changes we see indications of less visible
underlying social changes that in the long run may lead to bigger changes than
anything now noticeable. That ability to expose small signs of bigger things to
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
269

come is one of the advantages of case studies. Each of the chapters has taken
up interesting cases—that is, cases where novel or previously unexamined or
previously unappreciated changes seem to be occurring. This is not surprising
because in case study research, the novelty of one’s findings often depends on
the novelty of one’s cases—the researcher wants to be able to tell an inter-
esting and engaging story, typically by making visible something the reader
was previously unaware of. Further, each case can look into detail as to the
specific elements emerging in the communications and the social and scientific
histories that lie behind the communications examined in detail. Each case
serves as something of a demonstration proof—something can happen because
it has happened. The forces that have shaped situations and the motives that
have driven those who are responsible for producing texts (this includes
editors, publishers, societies, and authors) have coalesced at least once, and the
choices made by the actors are imaginable and implementable because they
have been made and done. Indeed, in this volume, every case is one of novel
happenings. No study focuses on what remains the same, stabilizing tendencies,
or cases of “nothing going on here.” Even when the reported novelties are
facilitations or intensifications of long-standing practices, the studies emphasize
what is new rather than what is continuing in somewhat altered shape or by
altered means.
While case studies are good at making visible interesting occurrences, they
are less good at evaluating overall trends within a large and varied population,
particularly at a time of hypothesized change where there are many experi-
ments and many different choices being made. Only when the new situation
has achieved new semistability can we determine which innovations have lasted
robustly, responsive to which purposes, concerns, and interests. Even then
there will not be uniformity, and minority experiments are likely to endure,
depending on the rigidity and comprehensiveness of social evaluation, selection
processes, and authority structures that come to rule within any particular
epistemic social grouping. For examining broader trends, larger samples are
needed, to some extent handled through statistical means. One chapter in this
collection (Harmon) does carry out a broader survey, but before I discuss that
chapter, it is useful to look more closely at a book cited by Harmon and three
of the other authors in this collection: Owen’s The Scientific Article in the Age
of Digitization (2007). Although Owen’s data ended in 2004 and may not have
caught some more recent trends, he did examine an extensive, systematically
designed sample of all digital journals. Owen found evidence of both change and
stability, but found the weight dominantly on the side of stability. Reasonably
enough, a set of cases making visible changes would be set in contrast to
Owen’s findings, as the authors in this volume who cite Owen tend to do. Yet
what Owen finds is not so different from what these authors find. Seeing these
two volumes in coordination rather than at loggerheads might help sort out the
real forces of change that they both point toward.
270
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Owen (2007) first reviews theoretical models that would predict change,
including an entire chapter about how research moves from the laboratory into
the communicative sphere. In this chapter on what he and others have called
the information chain (following on an earlier article, Owen, 2002), he argues
that digital production and distribution has great potential to reconfigure the
scientific communication system. I quote at length because this is perhaps the
most transformative element in Owen’s analysis and because it bears on some
of the more striking developments noted in the chapters in this volume:
The traditional communication system has evolved towards a high level
of closure with respect to functionality, actors and role divisions. However,
it seems that digitization is opening up the system considerably. Publishers
and libraries are taking over each other’s functions, some functions are
becoming embedded in the digitized network system, and others are being
taken over to a certain extent by authors and readers or their parent insti-
tutions (e.g., in the form of “self-publishing”). In addition, various new
functions have emerged (such as pre-publishing and long-term archiving)
that require some form of control and actor-involvement. Ideas have been
developed for a more radical effect of digitization, leading to a transforma-
tion towards an entirely systems-mediated form of communication without
any involvement by institutional actors. We have seen, however, that many
important functions of the information chain, and especially the certification
function, do require such involvement.
In fact, rather than becoming more simple . . . , scientific communication is
becoming more complex. The flow of scientific information from author
to reader is no longer a single, well-defined process, passing distinct stages
governed by actors with strictly assigned roles. Digitization has resulted
in an increase in genres, actors and communication modes, with multiple
trajectories through which scientific information can flow, and multiple
access points for users to acquire that information, depending on the stage
in the life cycle of the publication. (Owen, 2007, p. 90)
Owen then presents the results of the study of a sample of 186 established and
continuing peer reviewed, digital-only journals distributed across the sciences,
social sciences, law and humanities. These journals were examined for 11 dimen-
sions of article properties and 4 dimensions of editorial policies to see how much
they differed from traditional print journals and took up special affordances of
digital production and distribution. On some dimensions, he found little uptake
of digital affordances. For example, in only a few journals were authors allowed
to submit fully formatted articles; authors were generally required to submit flat
formats, following fixed style guidelines, leaving the formatting and typography
to editorial processes. In almost all cases, revision ended at a date of final
publication. Similarly, there was little customization of articles for readers’ needs
(beyond allowing readers to create personal collections files of articles). On the
other hand, some digital features were taken up in small but substantial numbers,
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
271

often depending on discipline, such as presentation of data resources and use
of multimedia. Some journals provided opportunities for reader comments, and
8% used a degree of open peer review, though often within hybrid models
that maintained elements of traditional peer review. Finally, some digital oppor-
tunities gained wide acceptance, such as hyperlinks and navigational tools within
articles and journals. Also, digital systems were widely used to facilitate tradi-
tional peer reviewing, and open access ideology was changing copyright policies,
with half the journals asking only for rights of first publication, leaving owner-
ship with the authors.
These findings lead Owen to conclude that uptake of digital affordances is
selective based on choices that differ across situations and across disciplines.
However, the features of digitality incorporated to this point have not disrupted
the integrated structure of the total article, which had historically emerged and
which seems to have migrated to the Internet in a process of “encapsulization.”
In Owen’s words,
So it is not the case that the digital medium has certain properties that will
inevitably be conferred on any genre that uses it. Rather we shall (and do) see
a wide range of different applications where each genre or practice of
communication is made to adopt, at any point in time, a specific set of digital
properties or “digitality.” Some practices of communication may indeed
be transformed (though not by new media as such, but by choices made
by social actors that “construct” what is perceived as new media), others
may stay very close to their traditional modes of representation. This view
is supported by the existence of a certain amount of communicative hetero-
geneity between different scientific domains. There is no single “digital
medium” in science but a whole range of different manifestations of
digital properties. None of these has, as we have seen, transformed formal
scientific communication insofar as it is based on the peer-reviewed research
article. In evolutionary terms, scientific communication has adapted itself by
process of encapsulation: through digitization of the journal as a container,
the scientific article is able to remain relatively stable even within a digital
environment. (Owen, 2007, p. 216)
Given the narrative I have presented of the robust forces aligning to shape
the contemporary article and the role of the coherent argument for making
claims based on systematically produced evidence and positioned as contribu-
tions within disciplinary literatures following disciplinary standards, the encap-
sulization Owen (2007) reports is not surprising, particularly in light of the
importance of evaluation of the argument prior to publication and for use after
publication. Individual and institutional rewards depend on these evaluations,
which lead to publication in esteemed venues and citation following publication.
Owen notes the importance of the certification function, which still seems to
require institutional involvement. Encapsulization rests on social forces that hold
272
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

it together, and in the long run, the greatest changes may come from the different
ways people come together over shared and competitive information as indi-
viduals and as located within institutions and social groups—changes in the
information chain. It is with respect to these changes that I find the analyses
of the cases in this volume most interesting, and it is these changes that are
starting to motivate changes in textual form and fray the solidity of encapsul-
ization—though the ultimate result in the form of scientific communication is
too early to tell.
As to the actual developments in the form of scientific articles, there is only
one survey in this volume that attempts to directly answer Owen’s (2007) survey.
In this volume, Harmon choses a more up-to-date sample of ten articles from
each of 15 journals from 2010 and 2011. He examines 10 long-standing elite
journals that appear both in print and online and 5 recent journals that are
digital open access. Unlike Owen’s sample, Harmon’s smaller sample comes
entirely from the sciences. The dimensions he examines include authorship,
abstracts, inter- and intratextuality, visualization, organizational structure and
supplemental information, readers’ comments, and journal contents pages. The
samples, analytical categories, and ways of reporting results differ from Owen,
making exact comparisons difficult; nonetheless, for the most part, Harmon’s
findings follow the trends noticed by Owen, only a few years further down
the process. Owen had noticed some use of multimedia; Harmon notices an
increasing use of visualization and greater use of color than in print and the use
of links to allow readers to see expanded images, though videos are still a rarity.
Owen had also noted some use of data supplements, as does Harmon. Owen
notices a minority of journals offering opportunities for reader comments as
does Harmon, but Harmon also noted some journals now provide download
statistics as another measure of reader response. Owen noticed widespread use
of internal and external links to heighten intra- and intertextual linkages, as does
Harmon. Harmon, like Owen, notices large and increasing use of navigation
devices within the article and for the journal. Harmon finds, on the other hand,
no major change in article structure and widespread use of the PDF format, both
of which substantiate Owen’s view of the article as encapsulated as a fixed form.
Harmon additionally finds changes in dimensions not considered by Owen
(2007): first, the use of simplified summaries and other accessibility devices
to make the article’s findings available for those who do not wish to or are not
prepared to delve more deeply into the full abstract or the full text. Secondly,
Harmon notices an accelerated trend in multiple authorship from diverse regions.
While these on the surface appear to be minor changes in the actual form and
structure of articles, they may be indicative of deeper changes going on in the
social organization of scientific communication. But on the surface, Harmon only
finds incremental differences from what Owen found a few years earlier, and
neither found radical disruption of the encapsulated paper, only enhancements
or intensification of earlier trends supported by the conveniences and affordances
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
273

of digitization and the Internet. The main difference between the two sets of
results is that Owen puts the weight of emphasis on the more stabilized parts,
and Harmon puts more weight of emphasis on the changing parts.
While the formal changes seem gradual, facilitative to prior dynamics, and
nondisruptive, the cases in the volume reveal in greater detail what these changes
are, what led to them, how they operate in changing interactions, and what
their implications and consequences may be for communications internal and
external to science. Even more, as several chapters note, digital distribution
and participation may be calling the internal/external distinction into question
in both production and use of scientific communications. I would also like to
consider the clues that a number of both the internal and external communication
cases may say about the changing social relations and distribution of work of
science, which may in the longer run be more disruptive of the encapsulization
of the scientific article than anything that now has yet crystallized in a changed
form of scientific article.
Four of the five cases examining internal communications of science involve
postpublication commentary on published science and illustrate the communi-
cative efficiency of the Internet in intensifying long-standing dynamics of evalu-
ation and accountability after the fact of publication. Publication does not in
itself bring long-term acceptance of claims or incorporation into the body of
accepted knowledge. That has depended on how reliable and useful others have
later found that work and whether they take it up in their own writings to carry
the contributions forward into a lived and intertextually strengthened body
of knowledge. Disputing counterpublications, failures of replications, contrary
findings, questions about methods, ethics accusations and investigations, and
retractions go back at least to the early days of the Philosophic Transactions.
Such contesting communication have influenced the long-term evaluation,
uptake, and codification prospects of claims that gain the attention of scientific
peers, although the greatest mechanism of long-term evaluation was and remains
inattention and lack of citation. Claims not considered important, interesting,
or useful enough to be worth a lot of discussion and gather significant uptake,
vanish, even though no one may contest them. In the past, when discussion
has been excited, however, long-term processes of discussion and evaluation
have been somewhat slow and sometimes porous. The four cases of scientific
Internet commentary culture here indicate the Internet is providing potentials
for speeding up and strengthening postpublication evaluation and codification.
Buehl’s introductory case of blog response to a purported breakthrough claim
published in Science, Gross’ study of the blogs Retraction Watch and Abnormal
Science, Sidler’s discussion of a liveblogging event, and Casper’s analysis
of various forms of refereed and nonrefereed online comments all show how
critical questioning, accountability, and postpublication evaluation of articles
have found new and highly effective sites for what had been long-standing
elements of scientific communication.
274
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

The Retraction Watch and Abnormal Science blogs that Gross documents
have intensified inspection of published articles and made it far more likely that
serious accusations of fraud, plagiarism, other violations, and retractions do
not get lost in the interstices of a loosely articulated communication system.
The blogs rely not only on the visible and widely available publication and
archiving space they offer, but on the rapidity of response, and the search tools of
the Internet that allow more convenient and comprehensive tracking of the fate
of retractions and disputations. These blogs tighten the accountability noose.
They do not seem to change the nature of the articles themselves, however,
except by helping police that publications live up to long-standing expectations.
At what point and in what way this more intense house-cleaning may have
transformative consequences remains to be seen.
Sidler and Buehl’s cases, on their faces, similarly seem to be only speeding
up and intensifying postpublication evaluation processes. Each reports a contro-
versy that erupted in unrefereed blogs within a day or two after the appearance
of a highly controversial claim within a prestigious refereed journal. While for
centuries postpublication controversies could circulate informally among limited
groups in seminars, on the floor of conferences, in letters, and in other ad hoc
sites before they appeared in the refereed scientific literature, blogs have allowed
widespread publication and professional debate outside the reviewed publi-
cation system. In Sidler’s example, the appearance of extraordinary claims
in the Journal of the American Chemical Society that seemed to contradict
well-established findings led to immediate attempts at replication, including one
that was liveblogged with data, images, and comment posted in real time—all
self-published by the bloggers and commentators outside the review process.
The original article was rapidly discredited by the blog discussion, and there
was consternation as to how it passed prepublication review. For some, this
case suggested that blind prepublication review might better be replaced with
open peer review. Buehl’s case concerned the blog questioning of an article
appearing in the online version of Science. The article claimed discovery of life
forms that replaced phosphorous with arsenic; within two days, blog critiques
appeared and followed with such intensity that by the time the print version
appeared 6 months later, it was accompanied by eight technical comments and
an analysis of the controversy. It should be noted, however, that the publication of
the peer reviewed technical comments had the effect of bringing the discussion
back within the peer review system.
Rapid and unrefereed commentary is now also being invited on the same
page as refereed articles appear in online journals. Casper compares such notes
and comments in the online-only PLoS ONE with older forms of refereed and
edited letters to the editor in Science, which appear in both print and online
versions. The unrefereed notes and comments appear in proximity to the article
in both time and textual space; they tend to be shorter, more informal, and
more dialogic; they raise more questions about the production of work in contrast
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
275

to the more polite and formal e-letters and letters to the editor, which are more
concerned with the status of the knowledge claims of the article. As a result of the
dialogic interchange in the notes and comments, authors sometimes amend their
articles in subsequent notes also published in proximity to the article. These
postpublication commentaries therefore lead to revision of the published article in
ways similar to prepublication review. Casper also raises the possibility that
authors may write articles differently, anticipating the kind of intense interaction
that may occur in the new commentary environments, even as writers had pre-
viously come to write articles with an awareness of the review processes manu-
scripts would undergo. While it is too early to have clear evidence of such
changes in manuscript, this is precisely the process I found in early print journals
as certain kinds of issues became salient in the interactional space of journals
that got lost in the more distant interactions of books. To forestall criticisms,
authors preemptively wrote their articles to address concerns over conditions
of observations, methods of producing results, and precise details of results
(Bazerman, 1988). This process of finding more successful ways of creating
arguments that would be persuasive in the new more intense forum was one of
the key drivers of the emergence of what has now become standards of scientific
publication, reinforced by later-emerging reviewing and editorial practices.
The cases examined by Buehl, Sidler, Casper, and, to some extent, Gross all
point to a loosening of editorial control over the evaluative process and publi-
cation of critiques, but primarily postpublication, though we see some of the pre-
and postpublication lines blurring, with corrections and revisions on the basis
of postpublication commentary being made available with the original article.
Whether and how such processes might influence prepublication processes and
published articles is still unclear, but the effect on published critiques already
is becoming evident. The kind of informality, methodological critique, and
questioning of evidence Casper found in the notes and comments that appear
following articles also seem to pervade the blogs examined by Buehl, Sidler, and
Gross. Because all these comments are not preauthenticated by review processes,
the weight of argument must fall even more on precise and focused reasoning
in direct engagement with the articles being commented on. This intense discus-
sion, sorting out the reliability and value of claims within a rapid-fire public
space of contention, does seem to be a real change in the postreview evaluation
process. In the print world, although sometimes controversies erupted in print
over claims, the weight of postpublication evaluation depended on citation and
reuse, and eventual codification in review essays, handbooks, and textbooks.
While prepublication open peer review has only worked in a few fields (with
one of the major difficulties being the lack of voluntary labor needed to vet
the large number of not-yet-authenticated submissions), controversial claims
upsetting expectations within published articles seem to draw the attention of
critical audiences and foster heated discussion in more direct communicative
spaces without publisher intermediaries.
276
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

A potentially even more radical disruption of the encapsulated article may
be the open data archives described by Wickman. In the past, data notebooks or
archives were the responsibility of individual researchers or research teams and
were, in a sense, private resources for their own research—resources to be drawn
on selectively for evidence in publications authored by the individual or research
team. These data archives could have been shared or made public in particular
situations and by intentional actions, such as if research had been questioned and
other researchers wanted to confirm findings. Data archives could also have been
made public to support further research, but in such cases, the data would have
been organized and prepared as a special section of the publication to make them
useable and interpretable by future users. Responsibility and accountability for
the archives and the quality of the data would have remained with the initial
research group that published the archives. The OpenWetWare site that Wickman
examines adopts a Web 2.0 ideology and a wiki structure for the core data and
protocol pages, thereby distributing responsibility for the regulation, design,
contribution, and revision of datasets offered at the site. It also includes blog
spaces for commentary, software tools for creating notebooks, and pages for
groups and courses to post and share materials about their activities. The site also
includes specific procedural information for syntheses of particular substances
for those entering each problem area, to regularize procedures among researchers,
to standardize produced samples for investigation, and to assure a common
understanding of data. So the site goes far beyond a sharing of data to a shared
development of common ways of work and methods of interpreting findings.
The standardization of notebook formats also serves to standardize the reporting
of data. This degree of sharing and co-production of procedures and data prior
to publication may redefine what will count as the contribution of an individual
author or research group and what decisions the author(s) will be accountable
for and therefore need to argue for. Further, it is unclear how contribution to the
communal tools and communal database will count for professional contribution
and establish the value of each person or group’s accomplishment. This may
also change the balance between competition and cooperation, which has defined
relationships among researchers, and the device for distribution of rewards and
opportunities. In many ways, the developments being observed in the case of
the open data notebook movement resemble some of Joseph Priestley’s proposals
made for scientific communication two and a half centuries ago, driven by a
communitarian, democratic, millenialist philosophy, relying more on communal
cooperation than individual achievement (see Bazerman, 1991). Indeed, all of
the cases in the first half of this volume contain elements of Priestley’s vision,
which included advocacy of a less formal and less distant style; greater recog-
nition of paths of development, false turns, and mistakes; fuller sharing of data
and methods; critical inspection of machines and procedures; less focus on star
achievers and greater recognition that knowledge comes from taking into account
the experience of all; greater focus on sharing of reasoning and experience in
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
277

more narrative publications; and less attempt to create irrefutable arguments.
He argued against the hoarding and hiding of unique methodological and intel-
lectual resources that accumulate advantage for one group over the other (as
evident in his faulting of Newton for being like the one who paints the ceiling of
a great cathedral and then removes the ladder so no one can re-create such a
magnificent accomplishment). Priestley, just as the OpenWetWare site, provided
means for the recruitment and training of young scientists and the collaborative
development of common standards, methods, and modes of interpretation. While
some of Priestley’s vision had been incorporated in the intervening years (such
as in expanded citation and review of literature practices that create narratives
of the field’s communal advance and collaborative construction of knowledge),
the competitive empirical argument for claims became the basis of an encapsul-
ated form rather than the more open-ended inquiry narrative Priestley espoused.
Whether the Internet will provide robust tools and Science 2.0 philosophy will
be robust enough to push science further along communitarian paths and forms
of presentation will be interesting to watch.
The democratic engagement of wider publics in science and the textual means
for accomplishing public engagement are most directly the themes of the latter
six studies in this volume. While such cases might be viewed as a continuation
(through more robust, accessible, and interactive means) of prior science popular-
ization, social changes as well as changing affordances of the technology are
producing higher levels of engagement—with possible consequences for further
significant reconfiguration of communication. The case furthest on the popular-
ization spectrum is Wardlaw’s study of the NPR weekly broadcast Radiolab (with
a radio listenership of about one million and an additional podcast download
audience of 1.8 million weekly). Comparing a popular science book on the same
topic as on one Radiolab episode, Wardlaw finds the show emphasizes the
emotional potential of science stories as a form of entertainment over the trans-
mission of scientific content. The display of emotionally exciting wonders for
popular consumption goes back at least as far as Renaissance wondercabinets
and continued through Barnum’s 19th-century museums of spectacles. Ripley’s
Believe it or Not still survives in museums in tourist districts. Although Wardlaw
emphasizes the emotionality as a corrective to theories of more sober science
popularization, what I find most notable is the way the emotional entertainment
is designed for an already educated audience, ready to be amused by playing with
science; further, the segments of the show are sequenced to bring the audience
into deeper engagement with the topic of the week. As Wardlaw comments, the
episode “initially invokes a visceral disgust for parasites only to later instill
wonder and admiration for their complexity.” Further, based on the specifics of
the episode Wardlaw cites, it appears the visceral elements of the show achieve
their amusing over-the-top effect by an ironic and knowing stance. So the
show allows the sophisticated audience to indulge in emotions they in a sense
know better than as a prelude to more serious and even more engaging content
278
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

appropriate to their level of education and sophistication. Play with scientific
knowledge turns into scientific knowledge as the ultimate play.
Pigg, Hart-Davidson, Grabill, and Ellenbogen in their study of Science Buzz,
an interactive science popularization blog run by a science museum, point to the
way a nonscientific but educated audience engages science through practical
reasoning in order to solve ordinary life problems. As the college-educated
science-literate population has grown and continues to grow, we can expect more
serious and more extensive public engagement in science for more and more life
issues. This is a process that has been building at least since the 19th century, but
which got an enormous boost in the postwar expansion of higher education and
the post-Sputnik focus on science education. The extensive and in-depth
resources that can be made available on the Internet, rapid communication of
science news afforded by the Internet, the concern of scientists themselves to
engage publics, and the Internet’s opportunities for interactivity are perhaps
supporting another moment of growth in public engagement of science to address
practical challenges of life, consumption, and health.
Fahnestock documents the complexity of educated audiences seeking informa-
tion on the Web and the multiplicity of resources by which information is now
being made available to meet multiple needs. She examines the reporting of the
discovery of adult neurogenesis and the attendant controversy in a range of web-
sites from open access scholarly journals (with new supplementary and simplified
summaries for the public), the official websites of scientific organizations, Wikipedia,
science news sites, health forums, patients groups, and the health and wellness
industry websites. She finds that the variety of resources, the speed of dissemin-
ation of findings through the tiers of representation, and interactivity support
engagement and the varied uses of the many groups. But she also finds that con-
troversies refract through varied interests and may remain active long after
consensus is reached among scientists. In short, scientific debate takes on a life
of its own among the many interested constituencies who recognize a stake in
scientific findings.
Increasingly sophisticated citizens ready to look for science to reason about life
problems also form the audiences for the kinds of interactive disaster information
websites documented by Kostelnick and Kostelnick. These websites, using multi-
tiered visualizations, allow users to investigate past disasters, track the impact of
current disasters, and gain information about possible future ones. The interac-
tivity allows users to study specific locations with which they have an interest, to
pursue the data in great detail, and to customize the interface around their con-
cerns. Because of the potential impact of disasters for website users and the strong
empathetic emotions that might be aroused in constructing the effects on others,
these websites may arouse great engagement and emotions, despite the factual docu-
mentary character of the presentation. The interactivity and navigable data depth
afforded by the technology provide an interactive space for people to pursue
their engagement and interests, drawing them further into scientific knowledge.
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
279

Wynn examines visual representations of extremely exigent cases of disaster
information concerning nuclear power plant disasters for real-time evaluation
of threat and action decisions. In comparing older print media (New York Times
and Washington Post) representation of the unfolding Three Mile Island and
Chernobyl disasters and aftermath with recent Internet representations of a tradi-
tional news outlet (New York Times) and a citizen-based website (Safecast),
he finds that representations vary according to material, sociopolitical conditions,
and rhetorical agendas, as one might expect. But he also finds that technology
matters, with the Internet having a transformative effect. Part of that effect
is in the multilayered display of information, allowing greater depth and com-
bination of information, which can be pursued according to readers’ needs and
interests in both the traditional news outlet and the citizen-based website. An
even greater effect of technology, however, is the communicative and collab-
orative power afforded to noninstitutional actors to create and distribute repre-
sentations that reflect the needs and interests of citizens’ groups rather than
of institutional actors. This collaboration extends even to the collection of scien-
tific data. In the wake of the Fukushima earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear power
plant meltdown, the team that produced Safecast as an online radiation mapping
tool collaborated with a citizen-science group wanting to provide citizen infor-
mation. The initial motive of data visualization soon turned into citizen data
gathering, as more local and changing data were needed in the turbulent,
evolving disaster. Standardized inexpensive Geiger counters were designed
and distributed, and reporting tools created. Also, to serve needs of individuals
assessing personal risk, richer and deeper visualization tools were created,
including contextual information, so one could locate that data by on-the-ground
landmarks rather than just geographical coordinates.
In a related chapter, Kelly and Miller look further into the citizen needs
for detailed, accurate, and up-to-the-minute data about the Fukushima nuclear
meltdown and fallout. They examine the role and evolving content of the
multiple platforms used to meet the exigence at different moments in the
evolving situation, including Twitter, science blogs, Wikipedia, and Safecast.
They also note how the need for data reorganized the flow and control
of information from scientist-originated to citizen-originated. As they note,
the citizen data-gatherers were not organized as teams working under the
supervision of scientists who vetted and controlled their work, but were
independent operators, motivated to contribute to the common good. None-
theless, the distribution of standardized Geiger counters served to disci-
pline and control the work of the citizen participants and assure the produc-
tion of reliable data that could be coordinated and compared with the data
reported by others. Well-designed and reliable technology appear in some
focused circumstances to obviate the need for extensive training and control.
This may have important consequences for citizen participation in science
in the future.
280
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Citizen participation in science around issues important to their life has
been a growing movement since the early days of opposition to nuclear testing,
when alliances were forged between citizen groups and scientists to make
available information that would serve the needs of citizens. Further, in this
early movement, citizens became involved in research by contributing baby teeth
to document the increasing incidence of radiation in children’s bones, though
these samples were still to be collected and analyzed by trained scientists (see
Bazerman, 2001). The environmental movement, which was a direct descendant
of this earlier movement, continued to engage people in collecting data and in fact
to become more trained as scientists to pursue policy-related inquiries. This
engagement of science with citizen interests and citizen participation transformed
the ethos and goals of some existing specialties and helped form others. But the
reach, speed, and interactivity of the Internet has greatly expanded the potential
for building citizen science and creating productive research collaborations
between scientists and citizens when there is public exigence.
Cases in this volume indicate multiple social forces and dynamics are rearrang-
ing scientific communication, particularly with respect to the locus of control
over postpublication evaluation of scientific; the broader cooperative production
of data and forging of greater collaborative ethos among formerly competitive
scientific teams; and of engaged, educated, informed citizenry asserting its
needs for science, becoming a market for science, and even collaborating in the
production of science for its own needs. Nevertheless, while some chapters in
the volume take examples from open access academic publishing, this volume
does not examine how digital production and distribution through the Internet
are changing the economics of academic publishing, particularly in a time
when university libraries are challenged financially by corporate acquisition
and marketization of traditionally boutique academic publishing that was cul-
turally congruent with academic culture. All this is challenging the information
chain that supported the emergence of the encapsulated scientific article. How
disruptive these new dynamics will be for already existing forms of scientific
communication is uncertain. What does seem certain is that there is a proliferation
of new communicative forms and forums to forge new relations, serve new needs,
and exploit the potential of the Internet. Whether these emerging communicative
channels and dynamics will rely on and reinforce the encapsulated article as
a core reference point, whether they will displace it, or they will push it in new
directions remains to be seen.
REFERENCES
Bazerman, C. (1985). Physicists reading physics: Schema-laden purposes and
purpose-laden schema. Written Communication, 2(1), 3–23.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin
Press.
AFTERWORD: SOCIAL CHANGES IN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
/
281

Bazerman, C. (1991). How natural philosophers can cooperate: The rhetorical technology
of coordinated research in Joseph Priestley’s History and Present State of Electricity.
In C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions (pp. 13–44).
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Bazerman, C. (2001). Nuclear information: One rhetorical moment in the construction
of the information age. Written Communication, 18(3), 259–295.
Owen, J. M. (2002). The new dissemination of knowledge: Digital libraries and
institutional roles in scholarly publishing. Journal of Economic Methodology, 9(3),
275–288.
Owen, J. M. (2007). The scientific article in the age of digitization. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Springer.
282
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Editors’ Biographies
Alan G. Gross is an emeritus professor at the
University of Minnesota–Twin Cities. He is
the author of The Rhetoric of Science and its
extensive revision, Starring the Text. With
his long-term collaborator Joseph Harmon,
he has written Communicating Science, The
Scientific Literature, The Craft of Scientific
Communi- cation, and Science from Sight to
Insight: How Scientists Illustrate Meaning.
Oxford University Press will soon publish
their latest book, The Internet Revolution in
the Sciences and Humanities.
283
Jonathan Buehl is an associate professor
and the director of Business and Technical
Writing in the Department of English at
The Ohio State University. His research
interests include the rhetoric of science,
visual rhetoric, research methodology, and
digital media studies. He is the author of
Assembling Arguments: Multimodal Rhetoric
and Scientific Discourse (University of South
Carolina Press) and essays published in
College Composition and Communication
and Technical Communication Quarterly.

This page intentionally left blank

Contributors
Charles Bazerman, professor of education at the University of California,
Santa Barbara, is the author of numerous research articles and books on the
history and practices of scientific writing, the social role of writing, academic
genres, and textual analysis, as well as textbooks on the teaching of writing.
Most recently he has published a two-volume work on the theory and rhetoric
of Literate Action.
Christian F. Casper is a lecturer in technical communication in the College
of Engineering at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, where his peda-
gogical interests lie in the first-year experience and communication in the fields
of chemical, biomedical, and aerospace engineering. His chapter in this volume is
based on his PhD dissertation, directed by Carolyn R. Miller in the Program in
Communication, Rhetoric, and Digital Media at North Carolina State University.
Kirsten Ellenbogan is president and CEO of the Great Lakes Science
Center in Cleveland, Ohio. She currently serves as co-principal investigator of
the Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education, which collaborates
with the National Science Foundation to advance the field of informal STEM
education. She began her work in museums at the Detroit Science Center in
1987 and has worked as a demonstrator, hall interpreter, exhibit developer,
evaluator, and researcher. Before joining the Great Lakes Science Center, she
was senior director for lifelong learning at the Science Museum of Minnesota.
Jeanne Fahnestock, professor emeritus in the Department of English at the
University of Maryland, is a Fellow of the Rhetoric Society of America. She is
the author of Rhetorical Style: The Uses of Language of Persuasion (2011) and
Rhetorical Figures in Science (1999/2002), and she coauthored A Rhetoric of
Argument (3rd edition, 2004). Fahnestock has published essays on rhetorical
theory, argument, language analysis, and the rhetoric of science. She served
on the board of directors of the Rhetoric Society of America (co-organizing
its conference in 2000) and on the council of the International Society for the
History of Rhetoric.
Jeff Grabill is a professor of rhetoric and professional writing and chair of
the Department of Writing, Rhetoric, and American Cultures at Michigan State
University, and is a senior researcher with WIDE Research (Writing in Digital
Environments). He is also a cofounder of Drawbridge LLC, an educational
285

technology company. As a researcher, Grabill studies how digital writing is
associated with citizenship and learning, including studies on informal learning
in collaboration with museum partners. He has published two books on com-
munity literacy and articles in College Composition and Communication, Tech-
nical Communication Quarterly, Computers and Composition, English Educa-
tion, and other journals.
Joseph E. Harmon is a coordinating science writer/editor at Argonne
National Laboratory and has written extensively on scientific communication
from a historical perspective. For the past two decades, he has had the good
fortune of collaborating with Alan G. Gross on four books, the latest being
Science from Sight to Insight: How Scientists Illustrate Meaning (University
of Chicago Press, 2013). A manuscript for a fifth book—on how the Internet is
transforming the communicative practices in the sciences and the humanities—
is nearing completion.
Bill Hart-Davidson is associate dean for graduate studies in the College
of Arts & Letters and a senior researcher in the Writing in Digital Environments
research center at Michigan State University. He is co-editor, with Jim Ridolfo, of
Rhetoric & the Digital Humanities, published in 2015 by The University of
Chicago Press.
Ashley Rose Kelly is an assistant professor in the Department of English
Language and Literature at the University of Waterloo, in Canada. Kelly’s
research examines how different communities engage in scientific research and
how science communication genres are changing, especially in response to
emerging networked technologies.
Charles Kostelnick is a professor in the English Department at Iowa State
University, where he has taught business and technical communication and
a graduate and an undergraduate course in visual communication in profes-
sional writing. He is coauthor of Shaping Information: The Rhetoric of Visual
Conventions and Designing Visual Language: Strategies for Professional
Communicators. He has also published articles on visual communication in
several journals.
John Kostelnick is an associate professor of geography at Illinois State Uni-
versity. His research interests include geovisualization issues related to hazards/
risks and the integration of Geographic Information Science (GIScience) in
the social and natural sciences. His published research has examined the role
of cartographic issues for communicating hazard and risk in various contexts,
including sea-level rise and humanitarian demining (landmine removal).
Carolyn R. Miller is SAS Institute Distinguished Professor of Rhetoric
and Technical Communication, Emerita, at North Carolina State University,
where she taught from 1973 to 2015. Her professional service includes terms as
president of the Rhetoric Society of America and editor of its journal, Rhetoric
Society Quarterly. She is a Fellow of the Rhetoric Society of America and a
286
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Fellow of the Association of Teachers of Technical Writing. She has published on
rhetoric of science, rhetorical theory, genre theory, and digital rhetoric.
Stacey Pigg is an assistant professor of scientific and technical communication
at North Carolina State University, where she serves as associate director of
the Professional Writing program. Her research analyzes the impact of mobile
and networked writing technologies on learning, work, and engagement and
has appeared in journals such as College Composition and Communication,
Rhetoric Society Quarterly, Technical Communication Quarterly, and Written
Communication.
Michelle Sidler is an associate professor in rhetoric and composition at
Auburn University. She is coeditor of the collection Computers in the Compo-
sition Classroom: A Critical Sourcebook, and she has published numerous book
chapters as well as articles in Rhetoric Review, Computers and Composition,
and other journals. Sidler’s research explores the intersections between rhetoric,
technology, and science.
Sarah Wardlaw is a PhD candidate in neurobiology and behavior at the
University of Washington; she has an active interest in science communication.
She studies the interaction between circadian rhythms and memory in mice.
Wardlaw developed her chapter in this volume while in the graduate seminar
“The Rhetoric of Science,” with the guidance of Leah Ceccarelli.
Chad Wickman, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of English
at Auburn University. His research locates rhetoric in the process of scientific
inquiry and explores how open-access textual practices have begun to shape
the epistemological dimensions of writing and knowledge making in the
biological sciences. Chad’s work on rhetoric of science has been published in
range of venues, including the journals Written Communication, Technical
Communication Quarterly, Journal of Business and Technical Communication,
and Rhetoric Review.
James Wynn is an associate professor of English and rhetoric at Carnegie
Mellon University. His interest is in the study of rhetoric, science, and
mathematics. His first book, Evolution by the Numbers (2012), examines how
mathematics was argued into the study of variation, evolution, and heredity in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In his most recent scholarship,
he has focused on citizen science in the digital age and how it is reshaping
the relationships between scientists, laypersons, and governments.
CONTRIBUTORS
/
287

This page intentionally left blank

Page references followed by f indicate an
illustrated figure, by n indicate a
note, and by t indicate a table.
4 Mind 4 Life blog (Drew), “7
Scientifically Proven Ways to
Stimulate Brain Cell Growth”
(Drew), 132
9-BDH (blog commenter), Totally
Synthetic, 105
Aaron, J., 210
Abnormal Science blog (Zwirner), 59–73,
274–275
error detection by others, 62
fraud reported by, 62
investigative journalism, 60, 69–72
limitations of, 72
plagiarism reported by, 62
purpose of, 62
abstract section in journal articles, 40,
41f, 42f
Abumrad, Jad
host of Radiolab, 144
Radiolab Parasites episode, 146–149,
151–152
Academic Spring movement, 12n, 28
Acar, A., 227
Acord, S. K., 56
adult human neurogenesis controversy,
117–138
controversies on the Internet, 8,
125–136, 279
controversy definition, 118–119
[adult human neurogenesis controversy]
controversy means of resolution, 119
disease advocacy sites, 131–132
health and wellness websites, 132
hippocampus, 121–124, 127, 130, 132
history of, 119–125
interactivity and facility of feedback
with Internet, 135–136
interactivity of Internet defined, 126,
135
Internet affordances different from
other media, 125–126
Internet search engines and, 126–127
language complications with, 127–129
news and health websites and, 130
reach and proliferation of online
niches, 126–132
reach of Internet defined, 125–126
refraction defined, 118
speed and eruption of authorizing sites,
133–135
speed of Internet communication
defined, 125–126
stem cell research and, 125
web refraction and prolonging
controversies, 130, 137–138
Wikipedia and Scholarpedia, 129–130
“Adult Neurogenesis in Mammals: An
Identity Crisis” (Rakic), The Journal
of Neuroscience, 122
AEC (U.S. Atomic Energy Commission),
198–199f
Agarose Gel Electrophoresis (AGE)
protocol case study, 18, 22–23
289
Index

AGE (Agarose Gel Electrophoresis)
protocol, 18, 22–23
Agrest, S., 198n
Aimone, J. B., 130
air quality monitoring, 239
AJ (Astrophysical Journal), 36t, 49
Akiba (Wang, Christopher), 210
Alborn, A., 121
Alderman, Kenneth L., 202
Alien, 147
Allum, N., 250
Altman, D. G., 67
Altman, Joseph, 120n, 125
“Are New Neurons Formed in the
Brains of Adult Mammals?”
(Science), 120
Alvarez, Marcelino
RDTN.org founding, 235n
Safecast history, 235–236
Uncorked Studios (blog), 209
Alzheimer’s Reading Room, 126, 131
American Chemical Society (ACS), 100
American Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The, 41f
American University’s Biomaterials
Design Lab (BDL), 24
Ames, Iowa, 170, 173f, 179
Anderson, 67
Anderson, L., 125
Andrianantoandro, E., 19
Angewandte Chemie (German chemical
society journal), 105
anonymous informants, 59, 69
anthropomorphizing, 148–149, 152
Aoki, Naohito, 61, 68
Applied Physics Letters (APL)
abstract example from, 42f
byline includes map of author’s
location, 39
displaying images and text on web, 40,
42
journal included in case study, 35, 49
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
ApSimon, H., 198
Arango, 134
Arbitron, 145
“Are New Neurons Formed in the Brains
of Adult Mammals?” (Science), 120
Aristotle, 159
Armitage, J. O., 67
Aron, L., 37, 40, 43–45, 49–50
arsenic metabolizing bacteria
controversy, 1–4, 119, 274–276
Art of Scientific Writing: From Student
Reports to Professional Publications
in Chemistry and Related Fields, The
(Ebel, Bliefert, Russey, (Eds.)),
11–12
arXiv (physics preprint archive), 53
As Soon as Publishable (ASAP), 107–108
Associated Press, “Radiation Effects” (on
Cincinnati), 196
asteroids striking Earth, probability of,
182
Astrophysical Journal (AJ), 36t, 49
Atkinson, D., 14
audio communication styles
content in radio and podcasts, 145
voices in podcasts, 151
auditory information, 144–146
Austin, J. L., 81, 87
Australia, 165, 166f
authorship of science journals, 37–40,
273
Baer, J., 195
Bakhtin, M. M., 93, 223, 228
Barron, B., 248
Barthes, R., 93, 205
Bartnato, S. E., 67
Barton, B. F., 158, 187
Barton, M. S., 158, 187
Basu, S., 19
Bauer, M. W., 250
Bayer, Shirley, 120, 129
Bazerman, Charles
assessment of rhetoric of science in
Internet era, 9
difference between books and journal
articles, 95, 276
early involvement of public in science,
281
genre with scientific texts, 77–78, 95
290
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Bazerman, Charles]
open data notebook movement
resembling Joseph Priestley’s
proposals, 277
readers don’t read article fully or in
chronological order, 269
study of scientific writing, 14
BBC (British Broadcasting Company),
145
BDL (American University’s
Biomaterials Design Lab), 24
Beall, J., 134
Beck, U., 223
Beck, Ulrich, Risk Society, 191
Bell, P.
coding results from National
Academies Report, 252
discursive pattern in online threads,
254
learning and importance of everyday
experiences, 247–248
“Learning Science in Informal
Environments” (National Academy
of Sciences), 247, 252, 254, 259
science arguments important to
learning science, 250
Benner, S. A., 19
Bennett, C. L., 67
Benriass, A., 125
Bentley, Callan, 229
Berkenkotter, C., 14, 77, 89, 101, 224
Bernstein, M., 34
Bero, L. A., 67
Berry, R., 145
bGeigie (radiation measuring device),
210, 213, 238, 239n
Bhardwaj, R. D., 123–124, 135
Bickerstaff, K., 249
“Big Data,” 236–236n
Bikini Atoll tests, 196
Binder, A. R., 227, 228
Biobricks Foundation, 19, 20
biology, synthetic, 11, 19, 21
biomedical journals, fraud in, 67
Birch, H., “Podologues: Conversations
Created by Science Podcasts” (New
Media & Society), 155
Birdsell, D., 194
Bitzer, L. F., 225
Björk-Eriksson, T., 121, 123
Blair, J. A., 205
Blair, W., 196
Blakeslee, A. M., 95
Blakeslee, S., 122
Bliefert, C., The Art of Scientific Writing:
From Student Reports to
Professional Publications in
Chemistry and Related Fields, 11–12
Bloch, M., 208, 213
blogs
4 Mind 4 Life (Drew), 132
Abnormal Science (Zwirner), 59–73,
274–275
Carbon-Based Curiosities (Excimer),
112
chemistry liveblogging replication
experiments, 99–114, 274–276
commenters, 71–72
creating collective memory, 251
editorializing in, 70
as form of peer review, 3–5
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) nuclear
disaster and, 228–231, 280
irony, structural and verbal, 69–71
limitations of, 72
narrative use by, 69, 71, 108
Nature News Blog, 229
Neurophilosophy, 126
Neuroskeptic, 126
Not Exactly Rocket Science (Discover
Magazine), 126, 135
persuasion in, 68–72
responding to journal article, 51,
59–73, 274–275
response speed to journal articles,
134–135
Retraction Watch (Oransky and
Marcus), 7, 59–73, 274–275
RRResearch (Redfield), 4–7
sarcasm and ridicule in, 70
Science Buzz (Science Museum of
Minnesota), 9, 247–264, 279
as social media, 250-251
tone in, 70
INDEX
/
291

[blogs]
Totally Synthetic (Docherty), 103–114
Uncorked Studios (Alvarez), 209
used by podcasts, 146
Blok, C., 163
Blum, J. S., 1
Bodin, K., 48
Boehm, B., 48
Bohlen, C., 202
Boldrini, M., 134
Bolter, D., 208
Bonner, Sean, 209–211, 214, 235–235n,
239
Borger, G., 198n
Borgman, C., 13
Boston, Greater Boston Civil Defense
Manual, 195
Boswell, James, Boswell’s London
Journal, 59
Botanical Magazine, 46
Boutron, I., 67
Bowker, G., 107
Bradley, Jean-Claude, 11–12, 16n, 27,
112–113, 116n
brain and human neurogenesis
controversy. See adult human
neurogenesis controversy
Brasseur, L. E., 158
Brasseur, Lee, 192n
Brazil, 39
Brazilian Electronic Journal of
Economics, 35
Brenner, J., 224
Bricker, L. A., 250
Brienza, C., 12n
British Broadcasting Company (BBC),
145
Bronx, New York, 179
Brooke, C., 236n
Brossard, D., 222
Brown University, 136
Brumfiel, Geoffery, 230
Bucchi, M., 222, 230
Buchholz, B. A., 123
Bucket Brigade, 239
Budagian, Vadim, 64
Buehl, Jonathan, 274–276
Bulanova, Elena, 64
Bulbulia, J., 48
Bulfone-Paus, Silvia, fraud in journal
articles, 63–69, 72–73
bull’s-eye overlay
criticisms of, 197–198, 200, 213–214
isopleth compared to, 198–199
on maps, 195–198, 200–203, 205–207,
213–214
persuasion using, 201–203, 204f,
205–206
Safecast mashup map compared to,
213–214
U.S. civil defense documents and, 195,
197, 199
Burke, Edmund, 186
Burke, K., The Philosophy of Literary
Form, 226
Butler, D., 15, 134
Butler, Declan, 230
Byelorussia, 203
C&EN (Chemical & Engineering News),
99–100, 224
Cajal. See Ramón y Cajal, Santiago
Caldwell, M., 125
California and Nevada earthquakes over
seven days, 170, 172f
California Institute of Technology, 143
California Institute of Technology
Southern California Earthquake Data
Center, 170, 172f
Cammack, R. G., 163
Campbell, J. A., 14
Canterbury Tales (Chaucer), 60
Caplan, H. L,, 119
Carbon-Based Curiosities blog
(Excimer), 112
Cargill Corporation, sponsor of The
Wellness Advisor (website), 132
case study research, 270
Casper, Christian, 7, 103, 274–276
Cavallo, A. M. L., 248
Ceccarelli, L., 102, 222, 241
Chan, A., 67
Charney, D., 49, 102
Chaucer, G., Canterbury Tales, 60
292
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Chemical & Engineering News (C&EN),
99–100, 224
chemistry liveblogging replication
experiments, 99–114, 274–276
introduction, 99–101
liveblogging and scientific reception,
105–110f
Paul Docherty’s blog, 103–105
peer review process and reception
studies, 101–103
proof of concept for online peer
review, 111–113
witnessing the (r)evolution, 113–114
Chemistry World, 106
Chemistry World podcast, 111
Chen, Y., 130
Chernobyl (Russia) nuclear accident
bull’s-eye map of radiation risk to
surrounding population, 203, 204f,
206, 215
compared to Fukushima Daiichi
disaster, 225
events and news reporting, 191–192,
200–208, 280
See also visualizations, radiation risk
Cherry, S., 237
Chicago, 168
“Chicken and Egg, The” blog post
analysis methods by authors, 252, 254
blog comments engaging in scientific
reasoning through questions,
258–261
blog post comments analysis, 253–264
chicken eggs and incubation, 248
“Chicken Thread,” 248
discourse of engagement and learning,
254–258
dissonance between stakeholders,
261–263
participation reasons, 252–253
public science meeting online
participation, 251–253
reasoning styles in conflict, 261–264
recurring questions as forum of
reconstruction, 260–261
role of rhetoric, 254
[“Chicken and Egg, The” blog post]
Science Buzz blog (Science Museum of
Minnesota), 247, 253–264
scientific process in comments, 252,
254
Chile, 161
Chin, E., 14
China, 39
Choi, J., 145
Chowdhury, A., 227
Cincinnati, Ohio, 196
citizen-scientists
as data gatherers, 238–239, 280
social media and, 172–175, 224
See also Safecast
Cochran, T., 198
Cohn, J. P., 238
Cohn, V., 195
College Composition and
Communication, 55
Collier, N., 227
colors
in journal articles, 44–46
in visualizations, 184, 187, 211–213
Columbia Journalism Review, 62
Communicating Science: The Scientific
Article from the 17th Century to the
Present (Gross, Harmon, and Reidy)
abstracts for scientific journal articles,
40
analysis of science journals from 1665
to mid-1990s, 34–35
color used in scientific journal articles,
46
evolution of citations in scientific
journal articles, 42
evolution of structure for scientific
journal articles, 48–49
internal communications, 222
intratextuality of scientific journal
article, 44
scientific communication more
complex and specialized, 40, 53
voice in scientific publications, 108
communication styles
audio content in radio and podcasts,
145
INDEX
/
293

[communication styles]
voice in scientific publications, 108
voices in podcasts, 151
Condit, C. M., 222
conference proceedings, 20
confidence level predictions, 182
Configurations, 55
Consolidated Appropriations Act (NIH),
12n
controversy, defined for adult human
neurogenesis controversy, 118–119
Cook, D., 197, 206
Cook, W. J., 198n
Cooke, R. M., 222
Coover, Robert, 33–34
Corbyn, Z., 118
cortical neurogenesis. See adult human
neurogenesis controversy
cosmic rhetoric of the sublime, 185–186
Cox, A., 207, 208
Craft of Scientific Communication, The
(Harmon and Gross), 40
Crane, D., 94
Crawford, S. Y., 78n
Creative Commons Universal license, 237
Crick, N., 14
Culotta, E., 119
Curtis, M. A., 123
Curtz, T., 16
Cyranoski, D., 229
Dana Foundation, 126
Danishefsky, S., “Total Synthesis and
Structural Revision of
(±)-Tricholomalides A and B”
(JACS), 106
data
“Big Data,” 236–236n
macro and micro level, 159
Safecast collecting radiation readings,
236–239
See also visualizations
databases, 237
Davidson, T. J., 47
Davisson, A, 192
de Laet, M., 17
de Vries, 67
Debalini, M. G., 67
“deconstruction of impact talk” category
(VKS), 5–7
Deep Water Horizon disaster, 191
Demicheli, V., 67
Denton, Harold, 202
design issues, visualizations, 160, 173,
175, 186–187
“detailed empirical description” category
(VKS), 5–7
Detroit, 194n
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(German Research Society), 64
Devitt, A. J., 77–78, 91, 93
dialogue, informal, 150
Diary of Anne Frank, The (Frank), 59
Dierking, L. D., 248
digital media, impact on science rhetoric,
1–9, 274–276
Digital Object Identifier (DOI), 107–108,
113
digital rhetoric. See rhetoric, digital
disasters and hazards visualizations. See
visualizations, natural disasters and
hazards
discourse
electronic annotation and discussion,
78
Internet communities, 127
Discover Magazine, Not Exactly Rocket
Science blog, 126, 135
discursive environments, 78, 92–95
discursive practices, 4
disease advocacy websites, 131–132
DIY (do-it-yourself) community and
culture, 238, 240
Doan, S., 227–228
Docherty, Paul, 99–100, 103–114
See also Totally Synthetic blog
(Docherty)
DOI (Digital Object Identifier), 107–108,
113
do-it-yourself (DIY) community and
culture, 238, 240
Dorman, W., 201
Dotsenko, I., 48
Dragga, S., 167
294
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Drahl, Carmen, 99–100
Drew, “4 Mind 4 Life” (blog), 132
Drexel University, 112
Driedger, C. L., 184, 185f
drought in U.S. map, 163, 164f, 165
Duesberg, Peter, 118
Duschl, R., 250
Dutton, S., 67
Dwork, A. J., 134
Dworkin, T. M., 69
Earl-Novell, S., 56
earth sciences visualizations, 157–188,
279
earthquakes
over seven days in California &
Nevada, 170, 172f
probability map for Los Angeles, CA,
177, 179, 180f
public reporting earthquakes on
website, 175
Richter scale of 2.5 or greater over
seven days, 170, 171f
size treemap, 161, 162f, 165, 167
Eastmond, E., 16
Ebel, H. F., The Art of Scientific Writing:
From Student Reports to
Professional Publications in
Chemistry and Related Fields, 11–12
ebook, 133
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne (Switzerland), 133n
ecosystem of genres, 78
ecosystem of texts, 77
Ecuador, 161
Edison, Thomas, 79
Edison Research, 145
Egypt, 39
Eisenhart, C., 252
El Niño (Pacific Ocean event), 179–180
electronic articles and journals, 6–8
Ellenbogen, Kirsten, 9, 250, 279
Elliot, M. H., 15
Elliott, M. R., 130
Ellmerich, S., 48
Elsevier Publishing, 55
email alerts, 175
encapsulization, 78, 95, 272–273
Encinas, J. M., 121
Endipedia, 20
Endy, D., Biobricks Foundation founder,
19–20
Engelhardt, H. T., Jr., 119
England, 65
Environmental Systems Research
Institute (ESRI), 174, 174f
epistemological affordances, 3
Ericson, M., 207, 208
Erik (blog commenter), 3
Eriksson, P. S., 121
erosion of boundaries, 221, 230–231,
239–241
error detection by others, Abnormal
Science blog (Zwirner), 62
escience.com, 130
ESRI (Environmental Systems Research
Institute), 174, 174f
ethical issues
anonymous informants, 59, 69
misconduct in science, 59–73, 274–275
for visualizing predictions, 175,
186–187
ethos in communication, 104–105, 111
Ettema, J. S., 69
Europe, 161
European Respiratory Journal, 63
Evans, J. A., 39
evil, portraying subject as, 147–149, 152,
154
Ewald, D., 215
Excimer, Carbon-Based Curiosities blog,
112
exigency, 167–170
Facebook, 8, 51, 175, 227
Fahnestock, Jeanne
“Accommodating Science” (Written
Communication), 143–144, 146–148,
231, 261–262
chapter author, 8, 279
reasoning towards decision rather than
sense of wonder, 254
rhetorical stasis theory, 258n
substitution with hypernyms, 127
INDEX
/
295

Falk, J. H., 248
Fallout Protection (U.S. Department of
Defense), 195n, 199
Fang Shimin, 71
Farrell, T., 192
Farrell, T. B., 222, 241
Favro, D., Journal of the Society of
Architectural Historians, 56
fear of being controlled, 147
Feder, M. A., “Learning Science in
Informal Environments” (National
Academy of Sciences), 247
Fennell, B., 192
Fenno, L. E., 47
figures in journal articles, 46, 47f
Fink, D., 123
Finney, J., 194n
fires in Australia, Malaysia, Indonesia &
Oceania map, 165, 166f
Fisher, D., 163
Flickr images, 174–175
Flores hobbit controversy, 118–119, 137
Florida
sea level rise for south, 182–183f
storm risk, 177
stream gauge readings, 168, 169f, 170
Flügge, G., 122
Folsom, E., 237n
forum of reconstruction, 260–261, 264
Fox-Dobbs, C., 16
France, 39
Frank, Anne, The Diary of Anne Frank,
59
Franken, Pieter, 209–210, 235–235n,
238n
Franklin Institute, 128
fraud, 59–73
Abnormal Science blog (Zwirner), 62
Bulfone-Paus articles, 63–69, 72–73
characteristics of journal articles, 63
counter-claims of libel, 64
in biomedical journals, 67
in scientific journal articles, 59–73,
274–275
ineffectiveness of proper channels for
investigating, 68–69
[fraud]
Journal of Immunology and Molecular
and Cellular Biology, 64
motivations for, 65, 67
retractions due to, 63
whistle-blower legislation, 69
Wiebauer’s mashup illustrating fraud in
an article by Bulfone-Paus, 65, 66f
Friedman, S. M., 223
Frontiers in Neurogenesis, 133–134
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 133–134
Frontiers journals enterprise, 126,
133–135
Frost. Martin (pseudonym), 63, 64
Fuchs, E., 122
Fuhrmann, S., 163
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) nuclear
disaster
compared to Chernobyl accident, 225
events and news reporting, 8, 191–192,
280
history of, 207–215, 225
Safecast map of radiation
visualizations, 211, 212f, 213–214
See also visualizations, radiation risk
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) nuclear
disaster, online communications
events, 225
exigence 1 and need for information,
226–234, 240
exigence 2 and need for data, 234–240
final remarks, 239–241
introduction, 221–225
Safecast, 235–239, 280
Safecast and New York Times
visualization differences, 211–216
science blogs, 228–231
Twitter, 226–228
Wikipedia, 231–234
Fung, H., 233n
future temporal mode, 158–160, 175
Gage, Fred H., 119, 121, 123, 123n, 130,
132
Gamson, W., 194n, 195
Garvey, W. D., 78n
Garvin, S., 132
296
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Gaskins, R., 222
Geiger counters
bGeigie, 210, 213, 238, 239n
needed after Fukushima Daiichi
disaster, 235, 280
Geisler, C., 17, 26, 80
genres
antecedent, 86
as communicative action and
agreement, 223–224
development of, 268–269
dynamic and decentralized players, 94
ecosystem of, 78
how online research article evolves as,
77–96, 274, 276
online feedback tools and, 91
parascientific, 8, 221, 231, 239, 241
peer review and reception of scientific
works, 102
print journals, 95
protogenres, 221, 228
refractions and, 118, 130
scientific notebook, 14–17
study of comments and notes in PLoS
One and e-letters and letters to the
editor in Science, 78–79
Georgia, 165
Gerber, B. L., 248
German chemical society journal
(Angewandte Chemie), 105
German Research Center Borstel, 63, 65
German Research Society (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft), 64
Germany, 37, 65
GFAJ-1 bacteria controversy, 1–4, 119,
274–276
Gibson, J. J., 91
Gibson, William, 33
Gieryn, T. F., 222
Gil de Zuñiga, H., 192
Gilbertson, J. A., 48
Giles, J., 15, 112
Ginsparg, Paul, 53
Glasser, T. S., 69
Gleyzes, S., 48
Goldacre, Ben, 62
Goldman, S. A., 121, 125, 128
Goldman, S. R., 250
Golgi, Emilio, 118
Goodchild, M. F., 173
Gooding, D., 14
Goodman, H. M., PNAS 1962 article, 37,
40, 43–45f, 49
Goodnight, G. T., 222, 241
Goodnight, T., 192
Google, 131
Gordon, G. W., 1
Gøtzsche, P. C., 67
Gould, Elizabeth, 119–124, 127, 129,
134–136
“New Neurons Debate” (Science),
122
“Opinion” (Nature Reviews
Neuroscience), 124
Grabill, Jeff, 9, 248, 279
graph integrated into text, 44, 45f
graphics. See visualizations
Graziano, M. S. A., 122
Greater Boston Civil Defense Manual,
195
Griffith, B. C., 78n
Groarke, L., 194
Gross, Alan G.
chapter author, 7, 274–275
connecting conversation to rhetoric
studies, 250
Craft of Scientific Communication,
The, 40
forum of reconstruction, 260–261, 264
Starring the text: The place of rhetoric
in science studies, 14, 101–103
studies of relationships between words
and visuals, 193
substantive role for rhetoric, 254
visualizations examined historically,
158
Gross, Alan G., Communicating Science:
The Scientific Article from the 17th
Century to the Present (Gross,
Harmon, and Reidy)
abstracts for scientific journal articles,
40
analysis of science journals from 1665
to mid-1990s, 34–35
INDEX
/
297

[Gross, Alan G., Communicating Science:
The Scientific Article from the 17th
Century to the Present (Gross,
Harmon, and Reidy)]
color used in scientific journal articles,
46
evolution of citations in scientific
journal articles, 42
evolution of structure for scientific
journal articles, 48–49
internal communications, 222
intratextuality of scientific journal
article, 44
scientific communication more
complex and specialized, 40, 53
visualization in scientific journal
articles, 44
voice in scientific publications, 108
Gross, Charles G., 120n, 122–124, 134
“New Neurons Debate” (Science),
122
Gross, Harmon, and Reidy
(Communicating Science: The
Scientific Article from the 17th
Century to the Present),
visualization in scientific journal
articles, 44
Grusin, R., 208
Guardian, The, 62
Guilia, M., 251
Gulf of Mexico, 191
Gwertzman, B., 201
hacker, 238n
hackerspaces, 210, 238–238n
Hader, J., 42f
Hadlington, S., 106
Hagan, S., 193
Hahn, K. L., 78n
Hames, I., 106, 111
Harley, D., 56
Harmon, Joseph E.
chapter author, 7, 270, 273–274
Communicating Science: The Scientific
Article from the 17th Century to the
Present (Gross, Harmon, and Reidy),
14, 34, 108, 222
[Harmon, Joseph E.]
Craft of Scientific Communication,
The, 40
Harnad, Stevan, 33
Harris, R. A., 102, 222
Harrisburg, PA, 195
Harrison-Restelli, C., 125
Hart-Davidson, William, 9, 279
Hartings, Matt, 24–26
Hassett, M., 195
Hayakawa, S. I., 128
Hayasaka, R., 227
Hayes, D. P., 40
Hayes, Nancy L., 122–123, 134
hazards and disasters visualizations. See
visualizations, natural disasters and
hazards
health and wellness websites, 132
Hedley, N. R., 163
Hen, R., 134
Henke, M., 67
Herndl, C., 192
Herxheimer, A., 67
Hewitt, C., 67
High Plains Regional Climate Center
(Nebraska), 163, 164f, 165
Hilden, J., 67
Hinds, James W., 120
hippocampus, 121–124, 127, 130, 132
Hirsch, D., 201
Hive Group, 161, 162f
hobbit controversy, 118–119, 137
Hoblitt, R. P., 184, 185f
Hoeft, S. E., 1
Holmes, F. L., 14
Holstein, L. W., 222
Hopewell, S., 67
horror, use of, 143, 147–149, 152, 154
Hosselet, S. C., 15
Howard, J., 68
Howard, R. G., 81
Huang, X., “Total Synthesis of the
Akuammiline Alkaloid
(±)-Vincorine” (JACS), 104–105
Hubble telescope images, 186
Huckin, T., 14, 101
Huckin, T. N., 77, 89, 224
298
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

humanities journals on the web, 55–56
Hurd, J. M., 78n
Hurricane Irene map, 163, 163f
hydrograms, Squaw Creek (Iowa) at
Lincolnway water level, 170, 173f
Hyland, K., 81, 88
hypernyms, 127–128
Idaho, 194n
IEEE Spectrum, 237
IJG (International Journal of
Geosciences), 36t, 50
Illinois, 165, 179
“impact talk” category (VKS), 5–7
Indonesia, 161, 165, 166f
informal dialogue, 150
informal learning environments
blog comments engaging in scientific
reasoning through questions,
258–261
blog post and discourse of engagement
and learning, 254–258
blog post comments analysis,
253–264
blog showing public science meeting
online participation, 251–253
complexities of public science
conversation, engagement, and
learning, 249–251
discursive moves, 247, 252–254, 259
hierarchies between experts and
nonexperts, 257
learning through inquiry and
argumentation, 256–257
modeling process, 255
power dynamics, 257
reasoning styles in conflict, 261–264
Science Buzz blog (Science Museum of
Minnesota), 9, 247–264, 279
Institute of Museum and Library Services,
251
institutions, listed in journal article
bylines, 37
intellectual property, 12, 15, 28
interaction modes, online feedback tools
and journal articles, 92–94
interactions
scientists and general public, 8,
247–264, 279, 281
using OpenWetWare (OWW), 18, 22,
23–24, 25–26
interactivity of Internet defined, 126, 135
International Journal of Geosciences
(IJG), 36t, 50
International Nuclear Event Scale rating,
225
Internet
adult human neurogenesis controversy.
See adult human neurogenesis
controversy
affordances different from other media,
125–126
as authority, 186–187
blogs. See blogs
controversies, 125–136
controversy resolution, 118
direct advocacy sites, 131–132
GFAJ-1 bacteria controversy, 1–4,
274–276
health and wellness websites, 132
influence on risk communications, 192
interactivity and facility of feedback,
135–136, 274
interactivity defined, 126, 135
Kickstarter, 210
language complications, 127–129
mashup visualizations, 207–208
multimodal affordances, 5
near-instant access and scrutiny of, 100
new online journals can rapidly appear
as authorizing publication, 133–135
news and health websites, 130
protocols facilitating digital archiving
and memory practices, 107–108
reach and proliferation of online
niches, 125–132
reach defined, 125–126
refractions, 118, 130
rhetorical affordances, 7
rhetorical roles, 7
role in risk communication, 8, 191,
207–215
Scholarpedia, 126, 129–130
INDEX
/
299

[Internet]
search engines, 126–127
speed (of communication) defined,
125–126
unique role for investigating
misconduct in science, 72–73
website forums, 146
websites. See specific website
Wikipedia, 8, 126, 129–130, 137
wikis by students, 136
Internet Journal of Chemistry, 35
Internet-enabled rhetorical processes, 2
investigative journalism, 60, 69–72
Iowa, 170, 173f, 177, 178f
iPad, 34
iPhone, 109, 113
Iran, 39
Iraq, 39
irony, structural and verbal, 69–71
Irwin, A., 249
Isesaki, Japan, 211
Isis (Journal of the Society of History of
Science), 55
isopleths and graphic of radiation fallout,
198–199f
Israel, 65
Italy, 65
Ito, Joi, 209–210, 235–235n
Ito, K., 227n
Ito, N., 227
J (Totally Synthetic blog commenter),
106–108
JACS (Journal of the American Chemical
Society). See Journal of the
American Chemical Society (JACS)
Jamieson, K. M., 86
Japan, 161, 207–215, 225
JBC (Journal of Biological Chemistry).
See Journal of Biological Chemistry
(JBC)
Jefferson, T., 67
Jegindø, E.-M., 48
Jessberger, S., 130
Jiang, B., 163
Jiang, L., 125
Jimenez, S. A., 61
JMP (Journal of Modern Physics), 36t,
39, 50
JNCI (Journal of the National Cancer
Institute), 62
Johanson, C., Journal of the Society of
Architectural Historians, 56
Johnson, H., 163
Johnstone, B., 252
Jones, B. F., 37
Jones, M., 249
Jørgensen, A. W., 67
journal articles. See science journal
articles
Journal of Biological Chemistry (JBC)
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
author summary in web publication, 40
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
print publishing schedule, 36
web article navigation, 49
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
Journal of Cotton Science, 35
Journal of Immunology and Molecular
and Cellular Biology, 64
Journal of Modern Physics (JMP), 36t,
39, 50
Journal of Neuroscience, The, 126
“Adult Neurogenesis in Mammals: An
Identity Crisis” (Rakic), 122
Journal of Organic Chemistry, The, 112
Journal of Philosophy, 55
Journal of the American Chemical
Society (JACS)
discredited article in, 275
displaying images and text on web, 40
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 35, 36t
peer review, 105–106, 113
“Reductive and Transition-Metal-Free:
Oxidation of Secondary Alcohols by
Sodium Hydride,” (Wang, Zhang,
Wang), 99–100
sample home page, 51, 52f
300
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Journal of the American Chemical
Society (JACS)]
social media links, 53
“Total Synthesis and Structural
Revision of (±)-Tricholomalides A
and B,” 106
“Total Synthesis of the Akuammiline
Alkaloid (±)-Vincorine,” 104–105
web article navigation, 49
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
web multimedia center, 51
X. Wang’s article disproved by
liveblogging event, 99–100
X. Wang’s article retraction, 111
Journal of the Modern Language
Association (PMLA), 55
Journal of the National Cancer Institute
(JNCI), 62
Journal of the Society of Architectural
Historians, 56
Journal of the Society of History of
Science (Isis), 55
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 125n
Journal of Visualized Experiments, The, 5
Judson King, C., 56
Jung, J-Y., 223, 227
Juola, J. F., 163
Kageyama, Y., 238
Kahan, M. C., 48
kairos (timing)
current natural disasters visualizations,
167–170
earthquake probabilities mapping, 179
explanation of, 159
future disaster predictions, 175–176
in rhetorical process, 157
Kang, J., 125
Kaplan, Michael S., 119–120n, 129
Kaplan, S., 221, 224, 231
Karig, D. K., 19
Katz, S., 192
Katz, S. B., 81, 88
Keenan, J., 132
Keio Research Institute (Tokyo),
238n
Keio University (Tokyo), 209, 238n
Kelly, Ashley, 8, 280
Kemeny Report (President’s Commission
on the Accident at Three Mile
Island), 198
Kempermann, G. H., 121
Kendall, A., 102
Kendzicky, A., 61
Kennedy, J., 3
Keränen, L., 192
Kickstarter, 210, 235–235n
Kienzler, D., 186
Kiev, 202
Kiev Reservoir, 205–206
Kimball, M. A., 158
Kindle, 34
King, Rita, 229
Kipnis, 130
Kitzinger, J., 193
Klein, P., 37
Klein, R., 37
Klibanov, A. L., 130
Klokmose, C. N., 16
Knight, T. F., 19
knowledge artifacts, 81, 92, 96
Koch, S. W., 42f
Kolata, G., 122, 127
Kolb, David, 48
Konvalinka, I., 48
Korr, H., 125n
Kostelnick, Charles, 8, 158, 195, 279
Kostelnick, John, 8, 163, 279
Koussolakou, A., 163
Kozma, R., 14
Kramer, E. R., 37
Kress, G., 193–194
Krugler, D., 195n
Krulwich, R.
2008 commencement speech at
California Institute of Technology,
143–144, 154
host of Radiolab, 144
Radiolab Parasites episode, 146–147,
151–152
ktwop (alias for Krishna Pillai), blog
commenter on Retraction Watch, 71
Kuhn, G., 121
INDEX
/
301

Kuhn, Thomas, 222
Kulp, T. R., 1
La Niña (Pacific Ocean event), 179–180
laboratory notebooks, 11–28
as genre and textual object, 14–17
as “germ cells” of scientific literature,
12, 20, 27–28
digital vs. electronic, 16
electronic, 15–16
open notebooks combine print,
electronic and digital, 16
recording failure in, 20
technical, epistemical, and rhetorical
uses of, 17–18
traditional uses for, 12
transformations and evolution of genre,
15–17, 277
laboratory notebooks, print
documenting inquiry, 12
intellectual property ownership, 12, 15,
28
objectives of, 15
recording failure in, 20
Lafayette College, 136
Lai, S. Y., 67
Laird, J., 16
Lance Armstrong Foundation,
Livestrong.com, 132
Land, J. D., 163
Landlow, G. P., 48
language complications, 127–129
Lankester, Ray, 147
Latour, B., 17, 81, 93, 109, 113
Lawrence, S., 56
LCM (liquid chromatography) – mass
spectrometry, 109
LD (lunar distances), 182
Le, D., 16
learning. See informal learning
environments; public science;
science education
“Learning Science in Informal
Environments” (Bell, Lewenstein,
Shouse, & Feder), National
Academy of Sciences, 247
LeDoux, J., 121
Lee, G., 206
Lemke, J. L., 250
Lenhart, A., 250
Lentz, P., 195
Lewenstein, B., “Learning Science in
Informal Environments” (National
Academy of Sciences), 247
Lewis, G. E., 112
Lexchin, J., 67
libel law, 59, 64, 69
Lin, F., 227
liquid chromatography– mass (LCM)
spectrometry, 109
Liquidcarbon (Totally Synthetic blog
commenter), 106–108
listeners, consuming scientific
information, 145–146, 148
Lithuania, 203
Liu, S. B., 158, 160n, 174
Liu, Y., 227
liveblog, 108
liveblogging chemistry replication
experiments. See chemistry
liveblogging replication experiments
Livestrong.com, Lance Armstrong
Foundation, 132
Loesch, A., 48
London, 34
Lord, M., 198n
Lorenzoni, I., 249
Los Angeles, 179, 180f, 181, 239
Lu, Z., 130, 131
Luciana, M., 129
Luke, T., 201
lunar distances (LD), 182
Lunsford, Karen J., 102
Lynch, J., 222
Lyons, R., 197
Ma, J., 47, 47f
MacDougall, R., 145
Mackay, W., 16
macro level of data
defined by Tufte, 159
drought in U.S., 165
302
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[macro level of data]
Hubble telescope images, 186
seen as an abstraction compared to
micro level, 167
Madrid, 152
Malaysia, 165, 166f
Maletic-Savatic, M., 121
Mann, J. J., 134
Manovich, L., 236n, 237n
Mansfield, P., 67
maps. See visualizations
Marbach, W. D., 198n
Marcus, Adam
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
investigative journalism, 60
irony used by, 69, 71
narrative used by, 71
retraction reasons by journals,
62–63
Retraction Watch blog co-author,
61–62
writing tone by, 70
Marek, E. A., 248
Markram, Henry and Kamila, 133n
Marsh, B., 208
Martinson, 67, 68
Marx, N., 14
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), 18, 120
Media lab, 209, 235
Nuclear Science and Engineering
program, 230
Mathews, T., 198n
Matsuda, Tsukasa, 61, 68
Matsuo, Y., 227
May, Sanford, 2
McCabe, T., 112
McConkey, H., 125
McEwen, Bruce, 121, 122
McLean, A., 208
Medawar, P., 20
Medical News Today (website), 130
Medicine WikiProject, 129n
Medway, P., 26, 224
Merkel, Angela, 71
Merton. Robert K., 60, 63, 67
Mervine, Evelyn, 229
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 46
Miami, Florida, 177, 182
Michael, M., 249
micro level of data
defined by Tufte, 159
drought in U.S., 165
Hubble telescope images, 186
predicting at local level, 179
viewing earthquake data, 170
visible compared to abstract macro
level, 167
Microsoft Word, 16
Mid-Atlantic (U.S.), 168
Miller, C., 17
Miller, C. R.
agreements, their community and
genres, 224
blogs and genres, 228
contact zones between expert and
public forums, 224n
exigence, 225
genre as communicative action and
agreement, 223
new exigencies due to new media
platforms, 240
scientific genres, 77, 94
Miller, Carolyn, 8, 191–192, 280
Miller, Lulu, 148–149, 151–152
Miller, S., 250
Min, S., “Total Synthesis and Structural
Revision of (±)-Tricholomalides A
and B” (JACS), 106
Mirel, B., 158
Mirza, Khalid, 112
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology), 18, 120
MIT Media lab, 209, 235
MIT Nuclear Science and Engineering
program, 230
Mitchell, N., 67
modes of interaction, online feedback
tools and journal articles, 92–94
Modigliani, A., 194n, 195
Mol, A., 17
Moldavia, 203
Moloney, J. V., 42f
INDEX
/
303

Monmonier, M., 158, 175
Mono Lake (California), 1, 18, 22–23,
103
Montello, D. R., 163
Moritz, Marshall, 112
Moross, Joe, 237
Moscow, 205
Mount Rainier (Washington state), 184,
185f
Mount St. Helens (Washington state),
184
multicomponent figures in journal
articles, 46, 47f
multimedia technologies, 6, 51
Multiple Sclerosis Research Centre,
131
Muraki, Y., 227
Murray-Rust, P., 107, 111
Music Perception, 55
Myers, G.
narratives of nature, 148
narratives of nature and narratives of
science, 152
peer review, 89
review articles as genre, 95
science popularization, 143–144, 146
Myers, J. D., 15–16
“Myth Busted: Adults DO Grow New
Brain Cells,” (WrongPlanet.net),
131
Nakamura, L., 251
Naked Scientists, The (podcast), 146
narratives
instrument of cognitive and moral
understanding, 69
moral, 201–207
of nature, 143–144, 148, 152,
155
of science, 152
used by blogs, 69, 71
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration), 1–2, 165
NASA Goddard Scientific Visualization
Studio, 165, 166f
NASA Near Earth Object Program, 182
National Academy of Sciences
“Learning Science in Informal
Environments” (Bell, Lewenstein,
Shouse, & Feder), 247
Sackler Colloquium on “The Science
of Science Communication,” 222
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). See NASA
(National Aeronautics and Space
Administration)
National Drought Mitigation Center
(Nebraska), 163, 164f, 165
National Geographic, 229
National Institute for Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), 137n
National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, 126
National Library of Medicine PubMed
Central, 12n
National Oceanic Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). See NOAA
(National Oceanic Atmospheric
Administration)
National Public Radio (NPR), 143–146,
278
See also Radiolab
National Science Foundation (NSF), 20,
24
National Weather Service (U.S)
animated weather maps, 167
Florida stream gauge readings, 168,
169f
Hurricane Irene map, 163, 163f
microlevel precision on website, 170
National Centers for Environmental
Prediction, 179–181f
National Hurricane Center, 161
social media use by, 175
Squaw Creek (Iowa) at Lincolnway
water level hydrogram, 170, 173f
Squaw Creek (Iowa) prediction of
water level, 177, 178f
United States short-term drought
predictions, 179–181f
Nature
and Science, 79
displaying images and text on web, 48
304
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Nature]
editorial about Bulfone-Paus articles
and Martin Frost, 64
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) nuclear
disaster, 230
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
online access, 126
social media links, 53
synthetic biology, 19
web article links, 40
web article navigation, 49
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
web multimedia center, 51
Nature Chemistry, “Peer Pressure,”
112
Nature Neuroscience Reviews, “Opinion”
(Gould), 124
Nature News Blog, 229
Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
“Neurogenesis in Adult Primate
Neocortex: An Evaluation of the
Evidence” (Rakic), 122
Nebraska, 163, 164f, 165
NEJM (New England Journal of
Medicine), See New England
Journal of Medicine (NEJM)
Nelson, E. S., 163
networked science, 100–101, 103,
113
neurogenesis. See adult human
neurogenesis controversy
“Neurogenesis in Adult Primate
Neocortex: An Evaluation of the
Evidence” (Rakic), Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 122
Neurophilosophy blog, 126
Neuroskeptic blog, 126, 134, 135
neurowiki, 126
Nevada and California earthquakes over
seven days, 170, 172f
New Context Conference 2011 (Tokyo),
210
New England Journal of Medicine
(NEJM)
abstract design, 42
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
journals in case study, 35
social media links, 53
web article links, 40
web article navigation, 49
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
web multimedia center, 51
New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson School
of Medicine, 122n
New Madrid fault, 179
New Media & Society, “Podologues:
Conversations Created by Science
Podcasts” (Birch & Weitkamp), 155
New York City, 179
New York Times
1960s nuclear accidents, 194n
1962 essay predicting end of fiction
books, 33
Chernobyl (Russia) accident coverage,
201–203, 205–206
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster
coverage, 207–209, 211, 213–214
reporting audience for Radiolab, 146
Three Mile Island (U.S) accident
coverage, 195–198
Three Miles Island and Chernobyl
coverage, 192–193, 280
visualizations differences from
Safecast for Fukushima,
211–216
New York Times Science Times, 126
news and health websites, 130
Newsweek, 130
Neylon, C., 112
Nielsen, Michael
networked science, 100–101
Reinventing Discovery: The New Era
of Networked Science, 11, 14, 27,
100, 103, 113–114
INDEX
/
305

Nightingale, Florence, 192n
NIH (U.S. National Institutes of Health)
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 12n
questionable practices survey, 67–68
Nina, P. B., 41f
NINDS (National Institute for
Neurological Disorders and Stroke),
137n
NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance)
spectrometry, 109
“No More Cortical Neurons for You”
(Rakic), Science, 124
“No new brain cells for you—settling the
neurogenesis debate” (Yong), Not
Exactly Rocket Science blog, 135
NOAA (National Oceanic Atmospheric
Administration), 163, 163f, 168,
182
NOAA, Coastal Services Center,
182–183f
NOAA, National Weather Service. See
National Weather Service (U.S)
Nordborg, C., 121
Normal, Illinois, 179
Norman, D. A., 91
Norris, P., 67
Northern Great Plains (U.S.), 168
Not Exactly Rocket Science blog
(Discover Magazine), 126
Nottebohm, Fernando, 121, 125, 128
Nowakowski, Richard S., 122–123,
134
“Stable Neuron Numbers from Cradle
to Grave” (PNAS), 124
NPR (National Public Radio), 143–146,
278
See also Radiolab
nuclear accidents and disasters during
1960s, 194n
Bikini Atoll tests, 196
Chernobyl (Russia), 191–192,
200–207, 208, 215, 280
Chernobyl (Russia) accident map with
bull’s-eye overlay, 203, 204f
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan), 191–192,
207–215, 221–241, 280
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) radiation
map, 211, 212f. See also Safecast
[nuclear accidents and disasters during
1960s, 194n]
newspaper maps of radiation risk to
population surrounding Chernobyl,
206
Three Mile Island (U.S), 191–192,
194–200, 208, 215, 241, 280
Three Mile Island (U.S) map with
bull’s-eye overlay, 195, 196f
See also visualizations, radiation risk
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometry, 109
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. See
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission
NYT Science Times, 126
Oates, Joyce Carol, 34
object-referents, 18, 23
O’Brien, Miles, 214
Oceania, 165, 166f
Office of Civil Defense. See U.S. Office
of Civil Defense
Okazaki, M., 227
online discussions, 101
online feedback tools, affordances of, 91
online radiation mapping site
(RDTN.org), 208
online scientific journals, interactions
between existing and new genres,
77–96, 103, 274, 276
open access, 12, 239
open access academic publishing, 281
open access notebooks, 7
Open Humanities Press, 55–56
open notebook science
background, 11–14
collective approach rather than
competitive approach, 28
conclusions and directions, 26–28
definition by Jean-Claude Bradley,
12–13
self-interest versus communal interest,
28
open notebooks
blogs as, 109
can be modified by different users,
16
306
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[open notebooks]
combine print, electronic and digital
notebooks, 16
defined, 16n
designed exclusively for public
consumption and use, 16
fluid object, 17
note making as a telos, 28
OpenWetWare (OWW), 18–28
privacy issues, 15
public character of, 17
research affordances of, 20
shared praxis, 11, 14, 27
open online publishing
counterfeit journals and, 134
resistance from ACS, 100
Safecast radiation readings in Japan.
See Safecast
Open Science, 12
“open science” movement, 7
OpenWetWare (OWW), 18–28,
277–278
active negotiation of meaning in, 23
Agarose Gel Electrophoresis (AGE)
protocol case study, 18, 22–23
American University’s Biomaterials
Design Lab (BDL), 24–26
analysis of notebook templates, 18,
22–23, 25–28
analysis of structure rhetorical
dynamics, 18, 23, 25–26
as a pedagogical resource, 21, 23
description of, 18–20
for synthetic biology study and
application, 13, 19
Hartings, Matt, 24–26
interactions, 18, 22, 23–24, 25–26
National Science Foundation (NSF)
grant, 20, 24
note making standardized, 23–26, 28
notebook software program, 21
open notebook features, 20–23
public activity of, 26
recording failures, 20
scientific rhetoric training, 25–26
teaching novice scientists with, 24–26
Web-based scientific community, 11
wiki software, 20
“Opinion” (Gould), Nature Neuroscience
Reviews, 124
Oransky, Ivan
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
investigative journalism, 60
irony used by, 69, 71
narrative used by, 71
retraction reasons by journals, 62–63
Retraction Watch blog co-author,
61–62
writing tone by, 70
Organic Chemistry Portal, 116n
Orlikowski, W. J., 14, 77–78
Osborne, J., 250
O’Shea, D. J., 47
Ota, Japan, 211
O’Toole, T., 195
Ottawa Citizen, The, editorial on
scientific journal retraction, 62
Owen, J. M., The Scientific Article in the
Age of Digitization, 6, 14, 35, 53, 78,
95, 270–273
Owens, B., 229
Owens, K., 11–12
OWW (OpenWetWare). See
OpenWetWare (OWW)
Pacific Ocean events, 179–180
Palen, L., 158, 160n, 174
Palermo scale, 182
parascientific genres, 8, 221, 231, 239,
241
Parasite Rex (Zimmer)
differences from Radiolab, 146–147,
148–152, 155
narrative of nature used by, 143, 148,
152
wonder appeals by, 143, 148–150
Parasites (Radiolab episode). See
Radiolab
Paris, 34
Park, H., 208
past temporal mode, 158–159
Patriot-News, The (Harrisburg, PA), 195,
196f
Patton, D. K., 163
Paul, D., 102, 114
INDEX
/
307

PBS News Hour, 214
Peaudecerf, B., 48
pedagogy. See science education
“Peer Pressure,” Nature Chemistry,
112
peer review
blogs versus traditional journal, 3–5
chemistry liveblogging replication
experiments as proof of concept for
online, 8, 99–103, 108–109,
111–113
Owen’s study of, 272
PLoS One prepublication, 79
reception of scientific works genres,
102
“Total Synthesis and Structural Revision
of (±)-Tricholomalides A and B,”
105–106
“Total Synthesis of the Akuammiline
Alkaloid (±)-Vincorine,” 105–106
Pennisi, Elizabeth, “Concerns About
Arsenic-Laden Bacterium Aired”
(Science), 4
Pennsylvania, 179, 194–200
Penrose, A. M., 81, 88
Peplow, Mark, 230
Perfilieva, E., 121
Perrow, C., 223
persuasion
in blogs, 68–72
with risk maps, 175, 184, 201–203,
204f, 205–206
using bull’s-eye overlay on maps,
201–203, 204f, 205–206
Peru, 161
Peterson, B., 195
Peterson, C., 202
Peterson, D. A., 121
Peterson, M., 16
PetHW (blog commenter), 3
Pett-Ridge, J., 1
Pew Research Center, 224
Pfaltz, J. L., 237
Pham, T.-T., 37
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 179
Philosophic Transactions, 274
Philosophy of Literary Form, The
(Burke), 226
Physical Review, 35
Physical Review B (PRB), 35–36t, 40
Physical Review Letters (PRL), 36, 36t,
40
physics preprint archive (arXiv), 53
Picardi, I., 146
Pidgeon, N., 249
Piera-Velazquez, S., 61
Pierpoint, L., 230
Pietrantoni, C. D., 67
Pigg, Stacey, 9, 248, 279
Pillai, Krishna, blog commenter as ktwop
on Retraction Watch, 71
Pincus, Walter, 200
Pinney, A. J., 61
plagiarism, 59–73, 274–275
Abnormal Science blog (Zwirner), 62
definition, 63
NIH questionable practices survey,
67–68
whistle-blower legislation, 69
PLoS (Public Library of Science), 35, 79,
87
PLoS Biology
article reader comments and statistics,
50
article screen shot, 37–40, 44, 49–50
article Supplemental Information
section, 49
home page screen shot, 51, 54f
journal included in case study, 40,
49
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
no prepublication peer review, 79
PLoS Genetics, no prepublication peer
review, 79
PLoS Medicine
article reader comments and statistics,
50
article Supplemental Information
section, 49
journal included in case study, 40, 49
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
308
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

PLoS One
article reader comments and statistics,
50
article Supplemental Information
section, 49
authors commenting on their own
article, 87n, 92–95
changes in discursive environments,
92–95
comments and notes features in,
79–80n
formality and familiarity of
communications in, 83–88
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t, 40, 49
journal included in genre study, 77–96,
103, 275
open access journal, 126
prepublication peer review, 79
reader and author communications
about polyploidy, 89–91
textual form of articles, 95
PLoS website, 40
PMLA (Journal of the Modern Language
Association), 55
PNAS (Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences). See
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (PNAS)
podcasts
appeal to values in, 152
audience for, 145–146
available from science journals, 51
Chemistry World, 111
compared to radio shows, 144–145
emotional appeal used in, 144,
146–148, 150, 278
informal dialogue in, 150
making science more approachable
with, 146
The Naked Scientists, 146
narrative in, 144, 151
“Podologues: Conversations Created
by Science Podcasts” (Birch &
Weitkamp), 155
portraying subject as evil, 147–149,
152, 154
[podcasts]
Radiolab, 8, 143–156, 278
Scientificast, 146
This Week in Science, 146
use of drama in, 148
use of horror in, 143, 147–149, 152,
154
using blogs with, 146
voices in, 151–152
Poland, 203
popularizing science. See science
popularization
Porter, R., 196
Potter, R., 145
Pound, Ezra, 34
power dynamics, 257
PowerPoint, 46
Poynder, R., 13
PRB (Physical Review B), 35–36t, 40
predicting natural disasters and hazards
difficulty of, 157
lahars (mudflows) and lava flows for
Mount Rainier (Washington State),
184, 185f
plot showing potential consequences of
predicted natural disasters, 176–177
sea level rise for south Florida,
182–183f
See also risk communications
present temporal mode, 158–159
President’s Commission on the Accident
at Three Mile Island, Kemeny
Report, 198
Priestley, Joseph, 277–278
Prigge, M., 47
Princeton University, 121–122n, 124
Pringle, P. T., 184, 185f
print media, refractions, 118, 130
Pripyat (Russia), 201, 203
Pripyat River (Russia), 205–206
privacy issues, 15
PRL (Physical Review Letters), 36, 36t,
40
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (PNAS)
1962 article first page, 37, 39f, 40
1962 article graph and text, 44, 45f
INDEX
/
309

[Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (PNAS)]
1998 article on hippocampal
neurogenesis by Gould and
McEwen, 121–122
2010 article including multicomponent
figure with caption, 46, 47f
author summary in web publication, 40
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
podcasts, 51
“Stable Neuron Numbers from Cradle
to Grave” (Nowakowski), 124
web article navigation, 49
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
Protein Data Bank, 43
protocols facilitating digital archiving and
memory practices, 107–108
protogenres, 221, 228
Public Library of Science (PLoS), 35, 79,
87
public science, 247–264
argument framing in public
engagement discourse, 249, 256
blog comments engaging in scientific
reasoning through questions,
258–261
blog online participation and, 251–253
blog post and discourse of engagement
and learning, 254–258
blog post comments analysis, 253–264
complexities of conversation,
engagement, and learning, 249–251
“deficit model” of knowledge,
250
differences between scientists and
nonscientists as social convention,
250
engagement, 264
engagement during daily life, 248
engagement through online forums,
247, 248
learning requires complex synthesis of
evidence and knowledge, 261
[public science]
public challenges to scientific
expertise, 263–264
reasoning styles in conflict, 261–264
rhetorical stasis theory, 258n
Science Buzz blog (Science Museum of
Minnesota), 251–253, 279
scientists and general public, 281
Public Understanding of Science
(scholarly forum), 222
PubMed, 125–126
Puig-I-Abril, E., 192
Purcell, K., 250
Qin, Y., “Total Synthesis of the
Akuammiline Alkaloid
(±)-Vincorine” (JACS), 104–105
“Radiation Effects” on Cincinnati,
(Associated Press), 196
radiation measurement devices
bGeigie, 210, 213, 238, 239n
Geiger counters, 235, 280
needed after Fukushima Daiichi
disaster, 235
radiation risk visualizations. See
visualizations, radiation risk
Radin, J., 221, 224, 231
radio shows, 144–146
Radiolab
appeal to values in, 152
comments from listeners, 152–154
“In Defense of Cheats” segment, 144,
147–154
differences from Parasite Rex, 146,
148–152, 155
emphasis of horror and wonder, 143,
152, 154, 278
fosters emotional connection to science
stories, 146–148, 150, 153–155, 156,
278
hosted by Jad Abumrad and Robert
Krulwich, 144
narrative of nature used by, 143, 148,
152, 155
Parasites (episode), 143, 146–155, 278
production values of, 154
310
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Radiolab]
radio & podcast show from WNYC &
NPR, 143–144
wonder appeals by, 8, 143–144,
148–150, 155
Radiological Defense film (U.S. Office of
Civil Defense), 199
Rainie, L., 224
Rakic, Pasco
“Adult Neurogenesis in Mammals: An
Identity Crisis” (The Journal of
Neuroscience), 122
defining adulthood for species,
128–129
fetal neuronal development in
macaques, 121
“Neurogenesis in Adult Primate
Neocortex: An Evaluation of the
Evidence” (Nature Reviews
Neuroscience), 122
“No More Cortical Neurons for You”
(Science), 124, 135
rebuttal to Gould and Gross,
123
Yale School of Medicine,
122n
Ramón y Cajal, Santiago, 120
Rattan, A. K., 15
Rattue, G., 130
Ravaud, P., 67
Ravichandran, K. S., 130
Raviola, E., 118
RDTN.org (online radiation mapping
site), 209–210, 235
reach of Internet defined, 125
Redfield, Rosie, RRResearch blog, 4–7,
103
Redman, B. K., 67
“Reductive and Transition-Metal-Free:
Oxidation of Secondary Alcohols
by Sodium Hydride,” (Wang, Zhang,
Wang), Journal of the American
Chemical Society (JACS), 99–100
Reeves, A. J., 122
refractions, 118, 130
Regina, S., 146
Reich, D., 16
Reidy, M. S., Communicating Science:
The Scientific Article from the 17th
Century to the Present (Gross,
Harmon, and Reidy), 14, 34, 108,
222
Reimer, J., 39
Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of
Networked Science (Nielsen), 100,
103, 113–114
Renn, J., 14
Rennie, D., 67
Rennie, John, 62
research papers, 20
Retraction Watch blog (Oransky and
Marcus), 59–73, 274–275
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
background of, 61
comments by Krishna Pillai (ktwop),
71
investigative journalism, 7, 60, 69–72,
103
irony, structural and verbal, 69–71
journals retraction grades, 70
limitations of, 72
narrative used by, 69, 71
purpose of, 60–62
retractions
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
Canterbury Tales (Chaucer), 60
due to plagiarism and fraud, 63
due to self-correcting science, 62
journals retraction grades by Retraction
Watch, 70
reasons for, 70
Smith article in European Respiratory
Journal, 63
X. Wang’s article in Journal of the
American Chemical Society (JACS),
99–100, 111
Rheinberger, H.-J., 14
rhetoric
application appeal, 148
cosmic, 185–186
of fear and equanimity, 183–185
norms of the discourse community, 4–5
INDEX
/
311

[rhetoric]
persuasion with risk maps, 201–203,
204f, 205–206
reasoning towards decision rather than
sense of wonder, 254
romanticizing subject, 149–150, 152
of the sublime, 185–186
temporal modes, 158–160
tools, 6–7
training using OpenWetWare, 25–26
use of horror, 143, 147–149, 152, 154
values appeal, 152
wonder appeals, 8, 143, 148–150, 155,
278
rhetoric, digital
creative collaboration, 172–173
interactive displays, 158
kairos (timing). See kairos (timing)
participation, 172–173
persuasion with risk maps, 175, 184
Rhetoric of Risk, The (Sauder), 192,
192n
rhetoric of science
effects of Internet, 5–6, 9, 101
emotional appeals with natural
disasters visualizations, 157
online discussions, 101
popularizing science with emotional
appeal, 144, 146–148, 150, 278
stasis theory, 258n
using with general public, 254
rhetoric of uncertainty, 175–187
rhetorical affordances, 4, 7
Rich, A., PNAS 1962 article, 37, 40,
43–45f, 49
Richards, B., 195
Riken Brain Institute, 126
risk assessments, 186–187
risk communications
deficit model of, 230
Internet influence on, 192
nuclear accidents and disasters, 8,
191–216, 221–245
online visualizations of charting risk, 8,
157–188, 279
subspecialty of science
communications, 222
[risk communications]
visual representations and their role in,
192
risk maps, 175–187, 191–216
risk scholarly literature, 191–192
Risk Society (Beck), 191
risk visualizations. See visualizations,
radiation risk
Rivetti, A., 67
Rockefeller University, 121
Rodero, E., 145
Rojas, H., 192
romanticizing subject, 149–150, 152
Ropeik, D., 193
Rosoklija, G. B., 134
Rowan, Chris, 229
Roy, N. S., 125
Royal Society National Forum, 249
RRResearch blog (Redfield), 4, 6
Rubacha, M., 15
“Runaway Reactor,” Time, 194n
Russell, J., 14
Russey, W. E., The Art of Scientific
Writing: From Student Reports to
Professional Publications in
Chemistry and Related Fields, 11–12
Russia, 39
Rybarczyk, T., 48
Sackler Colloquium on “The Science of
Science Communication” (National
Academy of Sciences), 222
Safecast
bGeigie (radiation measuring device),
210, 213, 238, 239n
citizen-scientists, 224, 238–239, 280
criticizing institutional risk
visualization, 200
developed information for public, 280
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster
radiation map, 211, 212f
history of, 209–211, 235–239
Internet mashup visualizations,
207–209
Kickstarter campaign for Geiger
counters, 210, 235–236
312
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Safecast]
as social media, 240
study method included, 193
visualization differences from New
York Times, 192, 211–216
Safecast Air, 239
Sakaki, T., 227
Salk Institute, 121
Sartor, O., 67
Sasakura, K., 52f
Sauer, Beverly, The Rhetoric of Risk, 192,
192n
Sayrin, C., 48
Scanning the Earth project, 238–238n
Schiermeier, Q., 119
Schjødt, U., 48
Schmemann, Serge, 201–202
Schmitz, C., 125n
Schneider, F., 47
Scholarpedia, 126, 129–130
Schryer, C. F., 14, 77
Schwidder, J., 16
Science
“Are New Neurons Formed in the
Brains of Adult Mammals?”
(Altman), 120
articles available on web or as PDF, 49
authors commenting on their own
article, 87n
editorial policies for letters to the editor
and e-letters, 86–87
e-letters and letters to the editor in, 79
formality and familiarity of
communications in, 83–88
GFAJ-1 bacteria controversy, 2, 4–5,
274–275
journal included in case study of print
and online articles, 36t
journal included in genre study, 77–96
“New Neurons Debate” (Gould and
Gross), 122
“New Neurons: Extraordinary
Evidence or Extraordinary
Conclusion?” letter (Nowakowski
and Hayes), 122
“No More Cortical Neurons for You”
(Rakic), 124
[Science]
online niche, 126
social media links, 53
textual form of articles, 95
web article links, 40
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50
web article Supplemental Information
section, 49
web multimedia center, 51
Science 2.0, 12, 19, 278
Science Buzz blog (Science Museum of
Minnesota), 247–264
activity and community, 252
blog comments engaging in scientific
reasoning through questions,
258–261
blog post and discourse of engagement
and learning, 254–258
blog post comments analysis,
253–264
“The Chicken and the Egg” blog
posting, 247, 253–264
conversations about current science,
248
informal learning environments, 9,
252–253
public science meeting online
participation, 251–253, 279
reasoning styles in conflict, 261–264
science communication
areas of study, 222
blogs. See blogs
digitization and increased complexity
of, 271
discourse and disruptions due to
X.Wang experiment, 102–103
ebook, 133
erosion of boundaries, 221, 230–231,
239–241
ethos, 104–105, 111
evolution of standard forms of,
267–269
focus on creating engaging and useful
learning environments, 248
formality and familiarity of
communications in, 83–88
INDEX
/
313

[science communication]
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster,
221–241
increased response speed, 134–135
journal articles compared to books, 95,
276
journals, 20, 33–58, 270, 273–274
laboratory notebooks. See laboratory
notebooks
open notebooks. See open notebooks
open online publishing. See open
online publishing
OpenWetWare (OWW). See
OpenWetWare (OWW)
parascientific genres, 8, 221, 231, 239,
241
podcasts. See podcasts
protogenres, 221, 228
public communication of science,
263–264
radio shows, 143–156, 278
refractions, 118, 130
research papers and conference
proceedings, 20
risk communications is subspecialty of,
222
Sackler Colloquium on “The Science
of Science Communication”
(National Academy of Sciences),
222
science journal articles. See science
journal articles
scientists discussing science with
general public, 143–156, 278
social changes, 267–281
See also chemistry liveblogging
replication experiments; science
writing
science education
learning through inquiry and
argumentation, 250, 256–257
lifelong self-motivated activity,
248
modeling process for learning,
255
need for developing mindful habits and
ongoing interaction with science, 250
[science education]
need for developing mindful habits and
ongoing interaction with science, 250
OpenWetWare (OWW) as a
pedagogical resource, 21, 23
social writing platforms may facilitate
learning, 250
See also informal learning
environments; laboratory notebooks;
open notebooks; public science
science fiction, 147
science journal articles
abstract of abstract screen shot, 40, 41f
abstract screen shot from APL contents
page, 42f
abstract section, 40–42
argumentative structure, 48–50
authors commenting on their own
article, 87n
authorship, 37–40
automatic bibliometry showing
importance of research, 134
case study of print and online articles
changes in 21st century, 33–58, 270,
273–274
citations, 42–44, 124, 134
color used in, 44–46
Comment sections quickly raising valid
criticisms of, 134–135
compared to books, 95, 276
contents pages, 50–53
differences in formality of reader
communication between online and
print, 83–88
diversity of relationships in, 94
error detection by others, 59–73,
274–275
how online texts interact with feedback
tools, 92–94
inter- and intratextuality, 42–44
knowledge artifacts, 81, 92, 96
multicomponent figure with caption,
46, 47f
original work definition, 63
paying for publication, 133
PLoS Biology article screen shot,
37–40, 44–45, 49
314
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[science journal articles]
PNAS 1962 article first page, 37, 39f,
40
PNAS 1962 article graph and text, 44,
45f
readers don’t read article fully or in
chronological order, 269
tables and figures, 44–48
textual form, 95
video and interactive images, 46–48
visualization, 44–48
web article reader comments and
statistics, 50, 55
web article Supplemental Information
section, 48, 49–50, 55, 94
See also specific journal
science journal articles, fraud in, 59–73,
274–275
Abnormal Science blog (Zwirner), 62
biomedical journals, 67
Bulfone-Paus articles, 63–69, 72–73
characteristics of articles, 63
counter-claims of libel, 64
ineffectiveness of proper channels for
investigating, 68–69
Journal of Immunology and Molecular
and Cellular Biology, 64
motivations for, 65, 67
NIH questionable practices survey,
67–68
retractions due to, 63, 69
whistle-blower legislation, 69
Wiebauer’s mashup illustrating fraud in
an article by Bulfone-Paus, 65, 66f
science journal articles, genre study,
77–96
antecedent genres, 86
authors commenting on their own
article, 87n
coding scheme, 81–83
differences due to editorial policies,
86–87
diversity of relationships in, 94
formality and familiarity of
communications in, 83–88
genre ecosystem of science, 94
genres in network discussion, 89–96
[science journal articles, genre study]
how online texts interact with feedback
tools, 92–94
implications for, 95–96
knowledge artifacts, 81, 92, 96
methodology, 78–83
primary code corresponding to speech
acts, 82t
quantitative textual analysis, 87–89
reader and author communications
about polyploidy in PLoS One,
89–91
secondary codes corresponding to
objects of discussion, 83t
secondary codes (objects of
discussion), 83
speech acts primary codes, 81–83
speech acts textual analysis, 87–88
speech acts variety, 91
study design, 79–83
study of comments and notes in PLoS
One and e-letters and letters to the
editor in Science, 78–79
study results, 83–89
textual analysis of objects of
discussion, 88–89
textual form, 95
science journal articles, plagiarism in,
59–73, 274–275
Abnormal Science blog (Zwirner), 62
NIH questionable practices survey,
67–68
whistle-blower legislation, 69
science journals, 33–58
automatic bibliometry showing
importance of research, 134
blurring between manuscript and
published work, 99
counterfeit, 134
electronic journal impact, 6
institutions and, 37–38
new online journals can rapidly appear
as authorizing publication, 133–135
Owen’s study of, 270, 273–274
peer review, 79
podcasts. See podcasts
publication cycle, 95–96
INDEX
/
315

[science journals]
publish only successes and completed
projects, 20
sample issue home page from Journal
of the American Chemical Society,
51, 52f
social media, 51, 53, 54f, 55
As Soon as Publishable (ASAP),
107–108
table of journals analyzed and year
founded, 35, 36t, 39, 44, 49–50
tiered, 133–135
transparency protocols, 59, 62, 67, 70,
103
undue influence on, 67–68
videos, 51
web multimedia center, 51
web slide shows, 51
webinars, 51
See also humanities journals on the
web; specific journal
science journals, retractions in
Aoki and Matsuda 2000 article
retracted in 2011, 61, 68
due to plagiarism and fraud, 63
due to self-correcting science, 62
journals retraction grades by Retraction
Watch, 70
reasons for, 70
Smith article in European Respiratory
Journal, 63
X. Wang’s article in Journal of the
American Chemical Society (JACS),
99–100, 111
science learning. See science education
Science Museum of Minnesota. See
Science Buzz blog (Science Museum
of Minnesota)
Science News, 126
science notebooks
as genre and textual object, 14–17
transformations and evolution of genre,
15–17
See also laboratory notebooks; open
notebooks
science popularization
appeal to values in, 152
[science popularization]
emotional appeal used for, 143–144,
146–148, 150, 278
listeners and, 145–146, 148
romanticizing subject, 149–150, 152
storytelling used for, 146, 148, 152
science research
error detection by others, 59–73,
274–275
institutional imperatives and norms, 60
intellectual property ownership, 12, 15,
28
laboratory notebooks, 11–28
misconduct in, 59–73, 274–275
norms for proper conduct of, 65
note making, 13–14, 23–26, 28
open notebooks, 18–28
privacy issues, 15
Science Times, 127
science writing
emergent contexts, 17–26
error detection by others, 59–73,
274–275
journal articles compared to books, 95,
276
laboratory notebooks as “germ cells,”
12, 20, 27–28
language complications, 127–129
misconduct in, 59–73
public encounters and, 248
transparency protocols, 59, 62, 67,
70
voice in, 84, 108, 130, 151
science writing publication process
blogs new roles, 3
Digital Object Identifier (DOI),
107–108
digitization of, 269, 271
no longer a linear process, 107–109
peer review, 101–102, 109
public access and, 12n
science journal publication cycle,
95–96
As Soon as Publishable (ASAP),
107–108
speeding up of, 108–109, 133
sciencenewsdaily.com, 130
316
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Scientific American, 62, 130, 224n, 229
Scientific Article in the Age of
Digitization, The (Owen), 6, 14, 35,
53, 270–273
scientific knowledge production
collective approach rather than
competitive approach with open
notebook science, 28
digitization affecting, 209, 269, 271
driven by interest and identities of
participants, 248
happening outside of traditional journal
publications, 101, 108, 248
notebooks organizing research activity,
16
open notebook as new way of thinking
about, 20
OpenWetWare (OWW) and, 20
public need for practical questions and
answers, 249
refractions, 118, 130
writing is essential component of, 12
scientific notebooks
as genre and textual object, 14–17
transformations and evolution of genre,
15–17
See also laboratory notebooks; open
notebooks
scientific practice changes, 2
Scientificast (podcast), 146
scientists
arsenic metabolizing bacteria
controversy, 1–4, 119, 274–276
citizen-scientists and social media,
172–175, 224, 280
as data gatherers, 238–239
discussing science with general public,
8, 143–156, 247–264, 278, 279
encouraging links between scientific
knowledge and local concerns,
247–248
hierarchies between experts and
nonexperts, 257
public challenges to scientific
expertise, 263–264
time constraints for, 113–114
See also adult human neurogenesis
controversy; blogs; fraud; laboratory
notebooks; open notebooks;
OpenWetWare (OWW); peer
review; plagiarism; public science;
retractions; science communication;
science education; science research
Scott, K. M., 184, 185f
Searle, J. R., 81, 87
Seeger, Werner, 64
semiotics, 14, 21
Sendai, Japan, 225
Shankle, W. R., 125n
shared praxis, 11, 14, 27
Shen, L., “Total Synthesis of the
Akuammiline Alkaloid
(±)-Vincorine” (JACS), 104–105
Shepherd, D., 228, 240
Shouse, A. W., “Learning Science in
Informal Environments” (National
Academy of Sciences), 247
Sidler, Michelle, 5, 8, 274–276
Sierra, A., 121
Silverman, Craig, 62
Simons, Ariel Levi, 239
Sismour, M. A., 19
Skype, 236
slide shows, available from science
journal’s website, 51
Slocum, T. A., 163
Smith, A., 224, 250
Smith, Chris, 111
Smith, Reginald, 63
Smith, Zadie, 34
social actions, 7, 91, 234
social changes, 269
social conventions, 187, 250
social media
blogs. See blogs
changing rhetorical practices of, 6
citizen-scientists and, 172–175, 224,
280
communicating event news, 8
creating collective memory, 251
digital science journals, 51, 53,
55
email alerts, 175
INDEX
/
317

[social media]
encouraging links between scientific
knowledge and local concerns,
247–248
Facebook, 8, 51, 175, 227
Flickr images, 174–175
National Weather Service (U.S) using,
175
PLoS Biology home page showing, 51,
54f
Safecast as, 240
text messaging, 175
Twitter. See Twitter
Wikipedia. See Wikipedia
social writing platforms, may facilitate
science learning, 250
Society for Neuroscience, 126
SOI (Southern Oscillation Index), 179
Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), 179
Soviet Union, 203
See also Chernobyl (Russia) nuclear
accident
Spain, 152
Spalding, K. L., 123
speech acts, 81–88, 91
speed of Internet communication defined,
125–126
Spinuzzi, C., 77–78n, 94
Squaw Creek (Iowa) at Lincolnway water
level hydrogram, 170, 173f
Squaw Creek (Iowa) prediction of water
level, 177, 178f
“Stable Neuron Numbers from Cradle to
Grave” (Nowakowski), Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
(PNAS), 124
Steen, Grant, 63
stem cell research and human
neurogenesis controversy, 125
Stocking, S. H., 222
Storksdieck, M., 248
Suber, Peter, 56
subject romanticizing, 149–150,
152
Suda, H., 227
Swales, J. M., 77–78, 224
Sweden, 65
Switzerland, 133n
synthetic biology, 11, 19, 21
Tabard, A., 16
Tacoma, Washington, 184
Talbott, T., 16
Talia, N. N., 61
Tanapat, P., 122
Taubman, Philip, 203, 205
Taylor, C. A., 222
technological affordances, 6, 7
temporal modes, 158–160
temporal scales depicting passage of time,
165, 165n
Tennent, G. A., 48
text messaging, 175
Theoretical Possibilities and
Consequences of Major Nuclear
Accidents in Large Nuclear Power
Plants (AEC), 199, 199f
thinking spaces, 250, 257
This Week in Science (podcast), 146
Thomson, R., 227
Thomson Reuters, 35
Thornburgh, Richard, 197–198
Three Mile Island (U.S) nuclear accident,
191–192, 194–200, 215, 222, 241,
280
accident map with bull’s-eye overlay,
195, 196f
See also visualizations, radiation risk
time constraints for scientists,
113–114
Tóhoku earthquake in 2011, 225
Tokyo, 211
Tokyo Electric Power Company, 225
Tokyo Hackerspace, 210
Torgerson, D., 67
Torino scale, 182
Totally Synthetic blog (Docherty),
103–114, 116n
9-BDH (blog commenter), 105
blogging ends on, 114
Comments from blog post “Total
Synthesis and Structural Revision of
(±)-Tricholomalides A and B.,” 106,
107f
318
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[Totally Synthetic blog (Docherty)]
fizzing reaction from liveblogged
experiment, 109, 110f
homepage, 103, 104f
J (blog commenter), 108
Liquidcarbon (blog commenter),
106–108
liveblogging replication of X. Wang’s
experiment, 100, 108–110f
orange color reaction from liveblogged
experiment, 109, 110f
“Vincorine” blog post, 104
Toulmin, S., 222
transparency protocols, 59, 62, 67, 70,
103
treemap of earthquakes, 161, 162f, 165,
167
Trench, B., 221, 222, 230, 240
Tropical Storm Debby, 168, 169f
Tse, A., 207, 208
Tse, T. M., 208
Tsou, P., 61
Tufte, E. R., 159
Turkey, 39
Turner, P., 16
Turner, S., 16
Twitter
antecedent genres, 240
Doherty replacing blog with, 113–114
National Weather Service (U.S) using,
175
responding to journal article, 51
tweet about Retraction Watch, 62
use during Fukushima Daiichi disaster,
8, 224, 226–229, 280
wildfires information, 174–175
Tzou, C. T., 250
Ukraine, 203
Uncorked Studios (Alvarez), 209
Underwood, M. D., 134
United Kingdom, 37
United Press International (UPI), 202
United States
continental wind map, 168, 168f
defense of Bulfone-Paus, 65
earthquakes. See earthquakes
major player in scientific research, 37
[United States]
short-term drought predictions,
179–181f
wildfires map, 174, 174f
University of British Columbia, 2
University of Giessen, 64
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 163,
164f, 165
University of Virginia, 130, 132
UPI (United Press International), 202
U.S. See United States
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC),
Theoretical Possibilities and
Consequences of Major Nuclear
Accidents in Large Nuclear Power
Plants (AEC), 198–199f
U.S. Department of Defense, Fallout
Protection, 195n, 199
U.S. Department of the Interior, 184, 185f
U.S. Geological Survey
2011 Japanese earthquake, 225
Center for Earth Resources
Observation and Science, 163, 164f,
165
Earthquake Hazards Program, 170,
171f, 175
earthquake maps, 180–181
Geologic Hazards Science Center, 177,
179, 180f
National Drought Mitigation Center,
163
predicted lahars (mudflows) and lava
flows for Mount Rainier
(Washington State), 184, 185f
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 12n
questionable practices survey,
67–68
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
200, 202
U.S. Office of Civil Defense
maps using bull’s eye overlay, 195,
197, 199–199f
Radiological Defense film, 199
St. Louis, 195n
UsefulChem Project open-lab notebook,
18, 112
users
commenting on visualizations, 175
INDEX
/
319

[users]
contributing data to visualizations,
173–175
emotional response to visualizations,
159, 165–167, 179, 182–184
engagement with visualizations,
157–168, 170, 173–175, 182–183,
279
making decisions based on
visualizations, 175–187
UVAToday, 130
Uzzi, B., 37
Vail, N., 123
Vallance, J. W., 184, 185f
van Leeuwen, T., 194
Vectors: Journal of Culture and
Technology in a Dynamic
Vernacular, 55
VegDRI (Vegetation Drought Response
Index), 163, 164f, 165
VGI (Volunteered Geographic
Information), 173–175
video games, 216
videos
available from science journal’s
website, 51
available from student wiki, 136
embedded in science journal article on
web, 51
GFAJ-1 bacteria controversy, 2
in scientific journal articles, 46–48, 273
videographic journals, 5
YouTube, 8
Viégas, Fernanda, 168, 168f
Virtual Knowledge Studio (VKS), 5–7
visualizations
bull’s-eye overlay on maps. See
bull’s-eye overlay
colors used in, 184
critiques of hazard, 158
design issues, 160, 173, 175, 186–187
historical examinations, 158
hybrid print/online, 208–209
interactive, 161–175
role in risk communication, 192
[visualizations]
temporal scales depicting passage of
time, 165, 165n
users commenting on visualizations,
175
users contributing data to
visualizations, 173–175
users emotional response to, 159,
165–167, 179, 182–184
users engagement with, 157–168, 170,
173–175, 182–183, 279
users making decisions based on,
175–187
visualizations, natural disasters and
hazards, 157–188
accessing macro/micro data, 170–172
asteroids striking Earth, 182
certainty and uncertainty of predicting,
177–183
conclusions about, 187–188, 279
cooperative interaction in displays,
172–175
cosmic rhetoric of the sublime,
185–186
critiques of, 158
drought in U.S., 163, 164f, 165
earthquake probability map for Los
Angeles, CA, 177, 179, 180f
earthquake size treemap, 161, 162f,
165, 167
earthquakes in Nevada and California
over seven days, 170, 172f
earthquakes on Richter sale of 2.5 or
greater over seven days, 170, 171f
ethical issues for visualizing
predictions, 186–187
fires in Australia, Malaysia, Indonesia
& Oceania, 165, 166f
Florida stream gauge readings, 168,
169f
future, 175–187
Hurricane Irene, 161, 163f, 165,
167
introduction, 157–158
kairos (timing), 167–170, 175
level of confidence predictions, 182
past disasters, 161–175
320
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

[visualizations, natural disasters and
hazards]
plot showing potential consequences of
predicted natural disasters, 176–177
predicted lahars (mudflows) and lava
flows for Mount Rainier
(Washington State), 184, 185f
predictions and rhetoric of fear and
equanimity, 183–185
predictions of sea level rise for south
Florida, 182–183f
probability maps, 177–183
public reporting earthquakes on
website, 175
real time, 167–170
rhetoric of uncertainty, 175–187
rhetorical overview of three temporal
modes, 158–160
social media and citizen-scientist,
172–175
Squaw Creek (Iowa) at Lincolnway
water level hydrogram, 170, 173f
Squaw Creek (Iowa) prediction of
water level, 177, 178f
subdued pathos appeals, 165–167
United States short-term drought
predictions, 179–181f
United States wildfires map, 174, 174f
wind map of continental U.S., 168,
168f
visualizations, radiation risk
bull’s-eye overlay on maps. See
bull’s-eye overlay
Chernobyl (Russia) accident, 191–192,
200–207, 208, 215
Chernobyl (Russia) accident map with
bull’s-eye overlay, 203, 204f, 206
conclusions about, 215–216
criticisms of, 197–198, 200, 205,
213–214
data scarcity impacting, 199–200
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster,
207–215. See also Fukushima
Daiichi (Japan) nuclear disaster,
online communications; Safecast
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster
radiation map, 211, 212f
[visualizations, radiation risk]
Internet mashup by Safecast, 207–208
isopleth graphic of radiation fallout
from hypothetical nuclear accident,
199, 199f
methods used for studying, 193–194
moral narratives using, 201–207
nuclear accidents in 1960s, 194n
radiation cloud mapping, 200n
RDTN.org, 209–210, 235
reasons for variances in, 192
Three Mile Island (U.S) accident,
191–192, 194–200, 208, 215
Three Mile Island (U.S) accident map
with bull’s-eye overlay, 195, 196f
visualizations, risk. See visualizations,
radiation risk
VKS (Virtual Knowledge Studio), 5–7
Vo, B.-K. H., 227
volcanos
Mount St. Helens (Washington state),
184
predicted lahars (mudflows) and lava
flows for Mount Rainier
(Washington State), 184, 185f
Volunteered Geographic Information
(VGI), 173–175
Von Hippel, F., 198
Voss, D., 167
Wagers, M., 123
Walder, J. S., 184, 185f
Waldrop, M., 112
Waldrop, M. M., 15, 18
Walker, Rob, 146
Wallace, David Foster, 34
Wallot, S., 48
Walsh, J. T., 130
Waltham, M., 56
Wang, Christopher (Akiba), 210
Wang, D. Z., “Reductive and
Transition-Metal-Free: Oxidation of
Secondary Alcohols by Sodium
Hydride,” (JACS), 100
Wang, S., 125
INDEX
/
321

Wang, X., “Reductive and
Transition-Metal-Free: Oxidation of
Secondary Alcohols by Sodium
Hydride,” (JACS), 100, 103,
105–109, 111–113
Wang, Z., “Total Synthesis and Structural
Revision of (±)-Tricholomalides A
and B” (JACS), 106
Wardlaw, Sara, 8, 278
Warnick, B., 192
Washington (state), 184, 185f
Washington Post
Chernobyl (Russia) accident coverage,
201–202, 206, 215
Three Mile Island (U.S) accident
coverage, 195, 197–198, 200
Three Miles Island and Chernobyl
coverage, 192–193, 280
Wattenberg, Martin, 168, 168f
Watts, C., 125
Web 2.0
enabled science, 109
networked environments, 13
technologies, 8, 99, 100, 251,
277
tools and community, 113
webinars, available from science journal’s
website, 51
websites
disease advocacy, 131–132
health and wellness, 132
news and health, 130
Wikipedia. See Wikipedia
See also specific website
Weiss, R., 19
Weitkamp, E., “Podologues:
Conversations Created by Science
Podcasts” (New Media & Society),
155
Weller, A. C., 78n
Wellman, B., 251
Wellness Advisor, The (website), Cargill
Corporation sponsorship, 132
whistle-blower legislation, 69
whistle-blowers, Wiebauer, Karin, 64–65,
66f
Wickman, Chad, 7, 11, 14, 277
Wiebauer, Karin, 64–65, 66f
wiki software, 20
Wikipedia
Fukushima Daiichi (Japan) disaster
entries, 231–234, 240, 280
major online information source, 224,
279
neurogenesis, 129–130
parascientific genre, 8, 126
web refraction, 137
WikiProject, 129
WikiProject Neuroscience, 129n
wikis by students, 136
wildfires mapping, 174–175
Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, 106
Williams, A., 11–12
Williams, S. M., 250
Willinsky, J., 12
Wilson, J., 198
wind map of continental U.S., 168, 168f
Winderman, E., 222
Wired, 229
WNYC (radio station), 143–144, 146,
155
Wolfe-Simon, Felisa, 1–4
wonder appeals, 8, 143–144, 148–150, 155
Woolgar, S., 17, 109
writing rhetoric
anthropomorphizing, 148–149, 152
editorializing in, 70
informal dialogue, 150
irony, structural and verbal, 69–71
moral narratives with maps, 201–207
narratives in, 69, 71, 108, 151
narratives of nature, 143–144, 148, 152,
155
narratives of science, 152
portraying subject as evil, 147–149, 152,
154
rhetorical tactics between the e-letters
and the letters to the editor in
Science, 88
romanticizing subject, 149–150, 152
sarcasm and ridicule in, 70
tone in, 70
using horror, 143, 147–149, 152, 154
using sympathy, 148–150, 153
322
/
SCIENCE AND THE INTERNET

Written Communication,
“Accommodating Science”
(Fahnestock), 143–144, 146–148
WrongPlanet.net, “Myth Busted: Adults
DO Grow New Brain Cells,” 131
Wuchty, S., 37
Wurst, W., 37
Wynn, James, 8, 236n, 280
Wynne, B., 249–250, 262
Wyoming, 165
Xiao Chuang-Guo, 71
Xygalatas, D., 48
Yahoo! Japan, 238
Yale School of Medicine, 122n
Yang, W., 47, 47f
Yank, V., 67
Yates, J., 14, 77–78
“Yes, You Can Grow New Brain Cells!”
(Keenan), The Wellness Advisor
(website), 132
Yizhar, O., 47
Yong, Ed, “No new brain cells for
you—settling the neurogenesis
debate” (Not Exactly Rocket Science
blog), 135
YouTube, 2, 8, 174–175
Yu, L., 67
Zachry, M., 77–78, 94
Zander, P., 16
Zappen, J. P., 251
Zappen, James P., 172
Zhang, B., “Reductive and
Transition-Metal-Free: Oxidation of
Secondary Alcohols by Sodium
Hydride,” (JACS), 100
Zhang, M., “Total Synthesis of the
Akuammiline Alkaloid
(±)-Vincorine” (JACS), 104–105
Zhou, X., 48
Zickuhr, K., 224, 250
Ziman, John, 221
Zimmer, Carl
guest on Radiolab Parasites episode,
144, 146–152
Parasite Rex, 143–144, 150–153, 155
Zinegata (blog commenter), 2, 6
Zivkovic, Bora, 229
zu Guttenberg, Karl Theodor, 71
Zwirner, Joerg, 59–73
Abnormal Science blog author, 60, 62,
70–72
ineffectiveness of proper channels for
fraud investigation, 68–69
verbal irony by, 71
INDEX
/
323

