SE ARCH ANALY TICS FOR YOUR SITE 
Conversations with Your Customers
by LOUIS ROSENFELD
forewords by Steve Krug and Avinash Kaushik

Rosenfeld Media
Brooklyn, New York
Louis Rosenfeld
SEARCH ANALYTICS 
FOR YOUR SITE
CONVERSATIONS WITH YOUR CUSTOMERS
i
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com

ii
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
How to Use This Book	
ix
Frequently Asked Questions	
xiii
Foreword	
xix
section one 
Introducing Site Search Analytics
CHAPTER 1
How Site Search Analytics Can  
Save Your Butt	
1
The Brake Gets Pulled	
2
The Brake Gets Stuck	
4
Measuring the Unmeasurable	
6
The Before-and-After Test	
8
The Brake Works—Thanks to Site Search Analytics	
16
Moral of the Story: Be Like John	
20
CHAPTER 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell	
22
What Is Site Search Analytics?	
23
Why You’ll Want to Use SSA 	
27
It Always Starts with Data 	
28
George Kingsley Zipf, Harvard Linguist and  
Hockey Star 	
32
Ways to Use SSA (and This Book)	
37
What Gets in the Way of SSA? 	
41
Who Is Responsible for SSA? 	
43
Your Secret Weapon 	
47
Summary 	
54

iii
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
section two 
Analyzing the Data
CHAPTER 3
Pattern Analysis	
56
Analysis as a Form of Play	
57
Getting Started with Pattern Analysis	
61
Patterns to Consider 	
66
Finding Patterns in the Long Tail 	
86
Anti-Pattern Analysis: Surprises and Outliers	
90
Summary	
98
CHAPTER 4
Failure Analysis	
99
Study Failure with Care	
100
Queries That Return Zero Results	
102
Queries That Fail to Retrieve Useful Results	
111
Queries That Lead to Immediate Exits from the Site	
119
Beyond Generic—Evaluating Failures That  
Mean the Most	
122
Summary	
127
CHAPTER 5
Session Analysis	
128
Learning from Who Searched What and When	
130
Why Analyze Sessions?	
134
What’s a Session, Anyway?	
136
Analyzing a Short Session from TFANet	
138
Analyzing a Long Session from WW Norton	
142

iv
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Which Sessions Should You Analyze?	
147
How Granular Are Your Terms?	
149
Going Beyond Sessions: Looking at  
Individual Searchers 	
152
Summary	
156
CHAPTER 6 	
Audience Analysis	
158
Why Segment Your Audience?	
160
How to Segment Your Audience	
165
Comparing and Contrasting Segments	
175
What’s Next?	
178
Summary	
180
CHAPTER 7 	
Goal-Based Analysis	
182
Goal Tracking Is Good, but Search Metrics  
Make It Better	
184
Determining Goals and KPIs	
189
Summary	
198
section three 
Improving Your Site
CHAPTER 8	
Practical Tips for Improving Search	 200
Plugging Gaps in Your Search Engine’s Index	
201
Making Query Entry Easier by Fixing “the Box”	
202
Accommodating Strange Query Syntax	
205

v
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Determining What Your Best Bets Should Be	
208
Helping Searchers Auto-Complete Their Queries	
211
Improving a “No Results Found” Page	
214
Helping Searchers Revise Their Queries to  
Get Better Results	
216
Designing Search Results Around Specialized  
Query Types	
224
Designing Search Results Around Specialized  
Content Types	
228
Summary	
235
CHAPTER 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site  
Navigation and Metadata	
237
Improving Contextual Navigation for Specific  
Content Types	
238
Creating a Better Site Index	
246
Testing and Tuning Metadata Values Important	
249
Summary	
257
CHAPTER 10	
Practical Tips for Improving  
Content	
258
Determining Which Content You Should Get Rid of	
259
Plugging Content Gaps	
260
Making Relevant Content Even More Relevant	
263
Expanding Your Understanding of Users’  
Content Interests	
265
Getting Marketing to Do the Right Thing	
269

vi
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Getting Content Owners to Do the Right Thing	
272
Summary	
274
CHAPTER 11	
Bridging Web Analytics and  
User Experience 	
275
Data and Design: Never the Twain Shall Meet 	
277
The Case for Integrated Problem Solving 	
280
Creating a Single User Research Brain Within  
Your Organization 	
297
Site Search Analytics: The Natural Boundary Object	
308
Index	
314
Acknowledgments	
327
About the Author	
333

Search Analytics for Your Site:  
Conversations with Your Customers
By Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, LLC
457 Third Street, #4R
Brooklyn, New York
11215 USA
On the Web: www.rosenfeldmedia.com
Please send errors to: errata@rosenfeldmedia.com 
Publisher: Louis Rosenfeld 
Developmental Editor: Stephanie Zhong
Managing Editor: Marta Justak 
Interior Layout Tech: Danielle Foster
Cover Design: The Heads of State
Indexer: Nancy Guenther
Proofreader: Chuck Hutchinson
© 2011 Rosenfeld Media, LLC 
All Rights Reserved 
ISBN: 1-933820-04-7
ISBN-13: 978-1-933820-04-0
LCCN: 2011907226

viii
Dedication
DEDICATION
To Mary Jean, Iris, and Nate, who generously 
gave me the time to write this book.
And to my mother and father, whose talents at 
cheating time I hope to emulate.

ix
How to Use This Book
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Who Should Read This Book?
I wrote this book primarily for user experience 
practitioners—the people who are responsible 
for a Web site or intranet’s information 
architecture, content strategy, design, usability, 
and just about anything else that impacts a 
site’s users. I especially wanted to help those 
practitioners see how analyzing searchers’ 
behaviors is just another critical tool, like 
task analysis, personas, and field studies, that 
belongs in their user research toolkits. 
There are also many people in the web analytics 
community who haven’t turned their attention 
toward analyzing and improving site search. 
SSA belongs in their toolkit, so this book is for 
web analytics practitioners as well. 
Honestly, if your Web site or intranet has 
its own search engine, then you should find 
something here that’s worth at least the price of 
the book.

x
How to Use This Book
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
What’s in This Book?
If you’re new to SSA, read the first two 
chapters: they consist of a case study that 
demonstrates how SSA made a difference at 
The Vanguard Group and a quick one-chapter 
introduction to get you up and running.
If you’re ready to jump right in, the second 
section is full of tools and approaches to help 
you get the most out of analyzing your query 
data. Chapters 3–6 will be especially helpful if 
you want to gain new insights from your data. 
Chapter 7 will help you use the data to measure 
how well your site is performing against the 
goals you’ve already determined for it.
The third section introduces some of the very 
practical ways to improve your search system’s 
performance, as well as your site’s navigation, 
metadata, and content. You can start trying—and 
benefiting from—many of these tips right away.
The last chapter takes a step back from site 
search analytics and looks at how its parent 

xi
How to Use This Book
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
disciplines—user experience and web 
analytics—differ and ultimately complement 
each other in a surprisingly elegant way. If 
you’re looking to bridge these disciplines 
within your own organization, this chapter 
provides advice, and I hope some inspiration. 
Spoiler alert: SSA might be just the thing to 
bring the two of them together.
Section One: Introducing Site Search 
Analytics
Chapter 1: Site Search Analytics in Action
Chapter 2: Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Section Two: Analyzing the Data
Chapter 3: Pattern Analysis
Chapter 4: Failure Analysis
Chapter 5: Session Analysis
Chapter 6: Audience Analysis
Chapter 7: Goal-Based Analysis
Section Three: Improving Your Site
Chapter 8: Practical Tips for Improving Search

xii
How to Use This Book
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Chapter 9: Practical Tips for Improving 
Navigation and Metadata
Chapter 10: Practical Tips for Improving 
Content
Section Four: Coda
Chapter 11: Bridging Web Analytics and User 
Experience
What Comes with this Book? 
This book’s companion Web site (  http://
rosenfeldmedia.com/books/searchanalytics/) 
contains some templates, discussion, and 
additional content related to site search 
analytics. You’ll also find a calendar of my 
upcoming workshops and talks on site search 
analytics. I’ve also made the book’s diagrams 
and other illustrations available under a 
Creative Commons license (when possible) 
for you to download and include in your own 
presentations. You can find these on Flickr at 
 www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/sets/.

xiii
Frequently Asked Questions
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS
What is site search analytics (SSA)? 
If your Web site or intranet has a search 
engine, then you can log what users are 
searching for, tally queries to see what’s most 
important to your users, find out if they’re 
succeeding, and if they’re not, determine 
what might be getting in their way. Chapter 2 
provides a short introduction to SSA (which is 
often also known as search log analysis).
Isn’t SSA the same as SEO? 
Not at all. Search engine optimization looks for 
ways to make Web-wide searches (for example, 
via Google and Bing) more likely to find 
your site. SSA looks for ways to improve how 
searching works on your site, using your site’s 
own search engine. That said, SSA and SEO 
share much in common, and can influence 
each other; for example, pages 149-151 shows 
how SSA may help you determine better 
keywords to bid on.

xiv
Frequently Asked Questions
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS
How does SSA differ from other kinds of 
analytics?
SSA is based on data that comes from actual 
usage of your site, just like other forms of web 
analytics. But it’s far more semantic, as it is 
made of search queries—users’ expressions of 
what information they want from your site in 
their own words. That’s why SSA does a better 
job of depicting and helping you understand 
users’ intentions than any other form of web 
analytics. Chapter 3 provides some tools for 
analyzing and understanding users intentions.
Why do I need SSA?
Because SSA can help drive—and back up—
your design decisions. Because you already 
have query data and want to put it to good use. 
Because you want to make your search engine 
find content better (Chapter 8), make your 
site easier to navigate (Chapter 9), and make 
your content more effective (Chapter 10). And 
because your competitors aren’t using it, and 
you’d like to destroy your competitors. 

xv
Frequently Asked Questions
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS
Where does query data come from,  
and what tools do I need to analyze it?
When someone uses your site’s search engine, 
they type a query that the engine will try to 
match with your site’s content. That query 
can be (and likely is being) saved. It’s either 
logged in a text file by your search engine 
or intercepted and kept in a database by 
your analytics application. Search engines 
occasionally and analytics tools increasingly 
provide reports that help you analyze the 
data, but ideally you’ll explore and learn more 
from the data in a spreadsheet. Unfortunately, 
there’s no one way to get your hands on the 
data, because how you can get at the data often 
depends on what search engine you’re using. 
Talk to your organization’s IT people for help 
and show them this book if they ask why you 
need access to the data.

xvi
Frequently Asked Questions
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS
I’m not a “data person,” so why should I 
read this book?
Organizations are putting more and more 
pressure on designers to justify their decisions 
with evidence. Fortunately, SSA is real data 
that’s also semantically rich, so you won’t be 
just looking at numbers. And you won’t need 
to perform statistical tests to learn from it; in 
fact, it will be immediately obvious to you how 
it can help improve your design work.
This isn’t part of my job description  
(or anyone else’s) so who should do 
this work?
User researchers and the designers who rely 
upon user research—such as information 
architects, content strategists, interaction 
designers, and knowledge managers—should 
at least consider SSA as a part of their standard 
kits of research tools, even if it’s not something 
they use on a regular basis. The same goes 
for web analytics practitioners: SSA is an 
important tool, just like clickstream analysis. 

xvii
Frequently Asked Questions
The best part is that no one needs to do SSA as 
a job—it scales nicely, depending on the time 
you have available (see our discussion of the 
Zipf Distribution on pages 32-37).
How do I actually analyze query data?
First, “play” with the data by looking for 
patterns and surprises that suggest what’s 
important to your searchers and what kinds of 
content will best meet their needs (Chapter 3). 
Then identify and learn from searchers’ failures 
(Chapter 4). See what happens in the course 
of single search sessions (Chapter 5), and tease 
out what’s important to specific audiences of 
searchers (Chapter 6). Finally, measure your 
site’s performance better by injecting search 
metrics into how your site is performing at 
meeting its goals (Chapter 7).
How does SSA fit with other user 
research methods?
SSA is based mostly on quantitative behavioral 
data; therefore, it’s useful to combine it with 
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS

xviii
Frequently Asked Questions
your qualitative user research methods and 
tools. For example, use query data to help 
determine candidates’ tasks for your task 
analysis studies or to beef up your personas 
with real data. Chapter 11 talks about how 
SSA fits into the broader worlds of both user 
experience research and web analytics, and 
how it may be a great means for bringing 
them together.
If it’s so great, how come more people 
aren’t taking advantage of SSA?
Good question. Most people don’t know that 
query data even exists, much less that their 
organizations likely already own some. Those 
who do often run into political problems when 
they try to get their hands on the data, because 
it is usually owned by IT or some other 
group. (This is getting easier thanks to ever-
improving analytics tools.) Finally, there hasn’t 
been much practical information on how to 
analyze the data. Maybe this book will help.
FREQUENTLY 
ASKED QUESTIONS

xix
Foreword
FOREWORD
A funny thing happened the 
first time Lou and I teamed 
up to teach our day-long 
public workshops (mine 
on usability, his on information architecture), 
probably eight years ago now.
I went to his workshop—the day before 
mine—partly out of due diligence, but mostly 
because I’ve always enjoyed listening to Lou, 
and I knew I’d learn a lot.
Halfway through the day, Lou spent 10 
minutes talking about something I think 
he called “search log analysis” at the time. 
Basically, you get your hands on the log data 
for your site’s search engine so you can see 
what terms people are searching for most often. 
Then you take the most-searched-for items 
(say, the top 25) for the current month, execute 
the searches yourself, and see what you can 
learn from them. 

xx
Foreword
FOREWORD
For instance:
•	Were there any results? If not, maybe 
you need to add content, or at least figure 
out why people on your site are looking for 
something you don’t have.
•	If there were results, were they the best 
content your site has on the topic? If 
not, you may want to tweak your search 
engine or fiddle with some keywords.
•	And why were people using Search to 
find these things? Was it because it’s not 
obvious how to get to them through your 
navigation? 
Basically, Lou was suggesting that you spend a 
very small amount of time each month to see if 
people are finding the things they’re looking for 
on your site. Then you tweak your navigation, 
your content, or your search engine as needed 
to make sure they can. The next month, you do 
it again, with the new top 25.

xxi
Foreword
FOREWORD
The funny thing was that I’d been making 
almost exactly the same speech in my workshops 
for a long time, pretty much word for word.
When I mentioned it to Lou later, it turned 
out that even though the technique was really 
off-topic for both of our workshops, we both 
thought that we just had to tell people about it, 
because we thought it was the most cost-effective 
thing people could do to improve their site. Very 
little effort, very big payoff, and almost no skills 
required. And virtually no one knew about it.
Fast-forward, several years.
Besides starting up a publishing company, 
having two great kids, and relocating from 
Ann Arbor to Brooklyn, Lou decided to write 
a book. About this topic. Which he now called 
Site Search Analytics. 
Fast-forward several more years to today, when 
you’re holding the book in your hands. (Or 
reading it on a digital device that didn’t exist 
when this all started.)

xxii
Foreword
FOREWORD
Lucky you. You get the benefit of years of 
pondering, researching, inventing, and fine-
tuning by somebody as smart as Lou. (In this 
case, Lou.) 
One caution: Don’t be intimidated by the 
soup-to-nuts scope of the book. Even though 
Lou spells out a lot that you can do, you don’t 
have to absorb (or even read; sorry, Lou) all of 
it. I encourage you to just try a little bit; dip a 
toe in the water, if you will. 
With nothing more than this book, a few hours 
of your time, and perhaps a copy of Excel, you’ll 
be amazed at how much better your site can be. 
And once you see how much you can learn in a 
few hours, don’t be surprised if you get hooked 
and want to do a lot more. That’s when you’ll 
be glad Lou wrote the whole book.
Have fun.
—Steve Krug
  Author, Don’t Make Me Think! and Rocket 
Surgery Made Easy

xxiii
Foreword
I love internal site search data. 
Completely.
My love emanates from a singular 
fact: Of all the data we have access 
to, site search is the only place where we have 
direct access to visitor intent.
When people click on links to visit your Web 
site, you know the sites or search engines 
they come from. How much intent does that 
communicate to you? 10%. It is really hard 
to know from that data why people might 
be showing up. How much intent is there 
in the keywords that people type into search 
engines like Google, Bing, or Baidu? Maybe 
a bit more than 10%, but honestly not that 
much. Our beloved visitors are notorious for 
being deliberately vague when they use search 
engines.
Yet when people search Web sites, they 
become astonishingly precise about why they 
are there. The queries they type into site search 
FOREWORD

xxiv
Foreword
engines contain oodles of intent, just waiting 
for us to convert into insights that drive greater 
customer satisfaction.
Over the last couple of years, it’s been amazing 
to see how much valuable intent data is now 
available from almost all analytics tools, 
including Google Analytics. What words did 
people type? How many of them left your site 
because search results were so horrible? How 
many people had to refine their queries to 
get your search engine to cough up the right 
answer? Is there a material difference between 
conversion rates for people who use site search 
users and those who don’t? With site search 
analytics, all these questions and more can now 
be more easily answered.
So now that the data is available, how does 
your site go from merely okay to magnificently 
glorious? That’s where this lovely book by Lou 
comes into play.
FOREWORD

xxv
Foreword
Gently holding your hands, whispering 
soothing words, Lou will guide you through this 
rich and untapped world. You’ll start simple: just 
reading Chapter 2 will bring you 10x the return 
on what you paid for the book. Subsequent 
chapters will take you deeper and empower you 
to answer invaluable questions. How do you 
understand the patterns in your data (Chapter 
4)? How do you analyze the audience (Chapter 
7)? How do you achieve the nirvana of bridging 
the world of quantitative and the qualitative 
(Chapter 11)? All will be revealed using real-
world examples, practical actionable tips, and 
a precision that will yield immediate benefit to 
your website visitors (and long-term benefits to 
your own salary!).
Carpe Diem!
—Avinash Kaushik
  Author, Web Analytics 2.0 and Web 
Analytics: An Hour A Day.
FOREWORD

1
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 1
How Site Search 
Analytics Can 
Save Your Butt
The Brake Gets Pulled	
2
The Brake Gets Stuck	
4
Measuring the Unmeasurable	
6
The Before-and-After Test	
8
The Brake Works— 
Thanks to Site Search Analytics	
16
Moral of the Story: Be Like John	
20

2
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I 
could jump right into telling you all about 
site search analytics—after all, that’s the 
goal of the book. But a story might be 
a bit more instructive and interesting way to 
introduce the topic. So let’s start with a true 
story of how one large organization faced a 
grave problem with its search system—and 
how site search analytics saved the day, as well 
as some jobs. 
The Brake Gets Pulled
John Ferrara should have been satisfied. 
After all, his employer, financial services giant 
The Vanguard Group, had just purchased 
a powerful new search engine to make its 
intranet’s content searchable. Given its long 
history of investing in user experience, the 
company had asked John, an information 
architect on the staff, to help select the new 
engine and ensure that it served the end 
users. And, unlike many organizations, The 
Vanguard Group actually listened to its 
information architect’s advice. The installation 
was going swimmingly, and the technology 

3
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
seemed to be working. The search engine was 
running on a development server, the launch 
was scheduled, and it wouldn’t be long before 
Vanguard’s 12,000 employees were enjoying a 
far better search experience.
And yet, something didn’t seem quite right.
The project manager wanted to ensure the 
quality of the search results and asked John to 
do a review of the build on the development 
server. So he poked around and kicked the 
new engine’s tires, trying out a few common 
search queries to see what happened.
What happened wasn’t pretty. The search 
engine seemed to be retrieving results that 
made no sense; the results were far worse, in 
fact, than those of its predecessor. How on 
earth could all that time, money, and effort lead 
to an even worse search experience?
The launch deadline loomed just a few weeks 
out.

4
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The Brake Gets Stuck
So John pulled the chain to halt the process 
from going forward. With his project 
manager’s support, John described the problem 
to the IT staff who owned the project. They 
nodded their heads and listened patiently. 
And then they told John that they couldn’t see 
the problem. After all, the search engine was 
up and running, and had been set up as the 
vendor suggested. The vendor was experienced 
and clearly knew what it was doing, likely far 
more than anyone at Vanguard (John included) 
could possibly know about how a search 
engine should work. Anecdotal findings from 
one person’s poor search experience weren’t 
going to trump that knowledge. With the 
launch date just around the corner, the staff 
weren’t about to halt the project. 
Now, this may seem to be an unreasonable 
response. But most IT people would react 
in the same way, and with good reasons: 
technically, the search engine really was 
working quite well. And while Vanguard’s 
IT staff were uncommonly sensitive to user 

5
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
experience issues, it wasn’t clear that the 
problem John was intuiting actually existed. 
After all, he had no compelling proof to present 
that the search was broken. Combine these 
reasons with the pressures IT faced to get the 
project completed on schedule, and you could 
argue that the IT people were actually being 
very reasonable.
But as an information architect, John was 
concerned about the user experience of 
search. That’s why he’d been brought in to 
the search engine selection process in the first 
place—to make sure that the search engine 
actually served the end user, rather than just 
conforming to a set of technical requirements. 
But the new search engine already seemed 
too likely to fail miserably. John could already 
envision the hate mail coming in from users 
who were demanding that the old search 
engine be reinstated. And he could already 
hear the words from managers’ mouths: “What 
the hell happened here?” John had raised a 
red flag, but he failed to make a convincing 
argument.

6
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
So John wasn’t satisfied. He’d tried to put the 
brakes on the search engine’s launch to avert a 
disaster and had failed. 
Measuring the Unmeasurable
Of course, John wasn’t going to give up. 
Otherwise, this story would be a very boring 
way to kick off a book! Besides, a large IT 
investment—and people’s jobs—were at stake. 
When John first started working on the 
project, his goal was to introduce user-centered 
thinking to the search engine selection process 
to complement the technical tests that IT 
would be using. To do so in an environment 
that was both technical and, as a corporation, 
driven by the bottom line, he had to wade 
into some treacherous waters—he’d have to 
come up with some metrics to quantify the 
experience of using the current search engine.
Now you might wonder what the big deal was. 
Either the search engine found the damned 
thing, or it didn’t—should be pretty easy 
to measure, right? Well, not quite.... There 

7
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
certainly are searches that work that way, 
for example, looking up a colleague’s phone 
number in the Vanguard staff directory. But 
many—probably most—searches don’t have 
a single “right” answer. “Parking,” “benefits,” 
and “experts” are all common queries on the 
Vanguard Intranet. They are also questions 
that have many answers—some more right 
than the others, but none that are ideal 
or perfect. From the perspective of users, 
relevance is very often relative.
Most designers know that it’s difficult to 
measure search performance and, well, just 
about any aspect of the user experience. In 
fact, being asked to do so causes droplets of 
sweat to form on many a designer’s brow. It 
just doesn’t feel right. Experience is difficult to 
boil down to a few simple, measurable actions. 
Considering that most of those in the field 
don’t have advanced degrees in statistics—
and probably experienced similarly sweaty 
moments during high school algebra—it’s not 
surprising. 

8
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Yet, here was John Ferrara, with a bachelor’s 
degree in communications, sallying forth to 
measure the user experience of Vanguard’s 
search system.
The Before-and-After Test
John focused on analyzing a few really common 
search queries to see how well they were 
performing—queries that represented needs 
that huge numbers of Vanguard’s intranet 
searchers wanted addressed. If you’re familiar 
with the “long tail,”1 these would be considered 
the “short head.” (If you’re not, don’t worry—
you’ll learn the basics in Chapter 2, “Site 
Search Analytics in a Nutshell.”) John wanted 
to compare how well these queries performed 
before and after—with the original search 
system and now with the new one.
Next, John needed some metrics for these 
common queries so he could compare them. 
He knew that there wasn’t a single metric that 
would be perfect, so he hedged his bets and 
1	 Chris Anderson’s excellent book The Long Tail (Hyperion, 2006) described the long tail 
phenomenon and its impact on commerce sites like Amazon and Netflix.

9
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
came up with two sets of metrics respectively: 
relevancy and precision.2 Relevancy measured 
how well the search engine returned a query’s 
best match at the top of all results. Precision 
measured how relevant the top results were. 
(To be fair, John didn’t invent precision; he 
borrowed it from the information retrieval 
researchers, who have been using it for years.) 
Let’s take a closer look at these two sets of 
metrics and how John used them. 
So What’s Relevant?
John went through his list of common search 
queries. To test how relevant each would be, 
he had to make an informed judgment (also 
known as a guess) at what a reasonable searcher 
would want to find for each query. Reasonable, 
as in the results don’t seem like they were 
selected by a crazy person. 
We’ve already seen one good example of 
such a situation: finding a colleague’s phone 
number in the staff directory. There’s a clear, 
obvious, and correct answer to this question. 
2	 In web analytics, these are referred to as accuracy and precision. 

10
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
But in many cases where the answer wasn’t so 
obvious, John got out his red pen and deleted 
those queries from his relevancy test. He was 
now working with a cleaned-up set of queries 
that he was confident had “right answers”—
ones like “company address.”
John determined the best matches for each 
remaining query. He then tested each query 
by recording where the best match ranked 
among the search results. Then he measured 
performance a few different ways. Was it the 
first result? If not, did it make the top five 
“critical” results? Each of these measurements 
had something to say about how well queries 
were performing. They helped in two ways: 
they revealed outliers that were problematic, 
and they helped track overall search system 
performance over time. Figure 1.1 shows the 
former: queries, such as “job descriptions” that 
have high numbers stand out problematically 
from their peers and deserve some attention.

11
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 1.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690980802/
In a relevancy test, queries ideally find most reasonable results at 
position #1 on the search results page. A large distance from the top 
position suggests a poorly performing query.
John’s relevancy test turned out to be very 
helpful. As Figure 1.1 shows, we can see which 
queries weren’t retrieving their ideal result at or 
near the top of the search engine results page.
Yet there are two major limitations with 
relevancy testing: First, it leaves out many 
queries that don’t have a “right answer”—
queries that might be common and important. 
Second, this method relies on guessing 
what would be “right” for searchers, so it is 

12
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
a highly subjective measure. But a simple 
test like this one is a good starting point. It 
is consistent, and though it involves some 
subjective evaluation, it does so within a 
consistent framework. In this case, it allowed 
John to generate some simple test results from 
a representative sample. If the search engine 
failed this test—as Vanguard’s did—then you 
have some serious problems (which they did).
Precision: Getting Beyond Relevance
That’s why John decided to also introduce 
another set of metrics: precision. Precision 
measures the number of relevant search results 
divided by the total number of search results. 
It tells you how many of the search engine’s 
results are good ones. John specifically looked 
at the precision of the top five results—the 
critical ones that a searcher would likely scan 
before giving up.
To test precision, John developed a scale for 
rating each result that a tested query retrieved, 
based on the information the searcher 
provided. 

13
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Relevant (r): The result’s ranking is 
completely relevant. 
•	Near (n): The result is not a perfect match, 
but it’s clearly reasonable for it to be ranked 
highly. 
•	Misplaced (m): It’s reasonable for the 
search engine to have retrieved the result, 
but it shouldn’t be ranked highly. 
•	Irrelevant (i): The result has no apparent 
relationship to the query. 
Rather than guessing at what the searcher’s 
intent was, John was simply looking to assess 
how reasonable it was for the search engine 
to return each result, and whether or not the 
search engine put it in the right place. He 
recorded an r, n, m, or i for each result in a 
spreadsheet, as shown in Figure 1.2.

14
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 1.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690980818/
Each result for each query was rated as Relevant, Near, Misplaced, or 
Irrelevant.
John then used a few different ways to 
calculate precision for each query. He came up 
with three simple standards—strict, loose, and 
permissive—to reflect a range of tolerances for 
different levels of precision. 
•	Strict: Only results ranked as relevant were 
acceptable (r). 
•	Loose: Both relevant and near results were 
counted (r+n). 
•	Permissive: Relevant, near, and misplaced 
results were counted (r+n+m). 

15
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
You can see how each query scored differently 
for each of these three precision standards in 
Figure 1.3. For example, of the first five search 
results for the query “reserve room,” two were 
relevant (r), two were nearly relevant (n), 
and one was misplaced (m). In strict terms, 
precision was 40% (two of five results were 
relevant); in loose terms, 80% (four of five 
were relevant or nearly relevant); and all were 
relevant in permissive terms.
FIGURE 1.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405259/
Each query’s precision scores were then calculated in three different 
ways: Strict, Loose, and Permissive.

16
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The Brake Works—Thanks 
to Site Search Analytics
John’s two tests of the original search engine—
relevancy and precision—yielded two sets of 
corresponding metrics that helped his team 
compare the new engine’s performance against 
the old one (shown in Figure 1.4). The five 
relevancy metrics above the line were all 
based on how close to the top position the 
“ideal search result” placed. So the smaller 
the number, the better. For the “Target”—the 
benchmark figures based on the old search 
engine—the top queries’ ideal results placed, 
on average, three places below #1, where 
they ideally would have been displayed. John 
looked at the same data in different ways, using 
a median count, and three percentages that 
showed how often the ideal result was below 
the #1, #5, and #10 positions, respectively. 
John used different metrics for precision 
as well—the strict, loose, and permissive 
measures described previously. In this case, 
bigger numbers were better because they 
meant a higher percentage of the top five 

17
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
results were relevant. As mentioned, the 
“Target” scores were the benchmark; they 
showed how the old search engine was 
performing. And the “Oct 3” scores showed 
how the new search engine was performing. 
The verdict, as you can see in Figure 1.4, was 
not pretty. 
FIGURE 1.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405181/
The new search engine (“Oct 3”) performed worse than the old 
one (“Target”) for each metric.

18
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Ouch. The numbers didn’t lie—the new search 
engine, first measured on October 3, was 
performing worse on each metric than the old 
engine! 
John and his project manager now had the 
proof they needed to convince the IT folks 
that the new engine’s poor performance wasn’t 
just something that came to him after a hard 
night of partying. The problem was real and 
serious, dire enough that he thought people 
could lose their jobs if the new search engine 
launched as is. IT responded accordingly. 
While the staff still were obligated to make the 
same launch deadline, they eliminated some 
planned features in favor of fixing the problem. 
Over the coming weeks, they identified 
the sources of the problems. The primary 
culprit—a misconfigured configuration file 
that was missed by Vanguard’s search engine 
consultant—was fortunately a fairly simple fix. 
And it wouldn’t have been detected without 
site search analytics. 
You can see how their work progressed to the 
point where, by launch, they’d at least come 

19
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
close to getting the new search engine (as of 
October 16) to work about as well as the old 
one for each of the eight metrics, as shown in 
Figure 1.5.
FIGURE 1.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405199/
As the launch date approached, the new search engine’s performance 
improved dramatically—to the point where it had caught up with the 
old engine’s performance.
So John’s gut reaction was validated, and he 
had the numbers to back up his argument 
that some hard work was in line before the 
new engine launched. The search experience 
was measured, a problem was recognized and 

20
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
identified, the search engine was fixed, firings 
were averted, and egg-on-face was avoided. 
Since the launch, Vanguard has continued 
to monitor these metrics and fine-tune the 
engine’s performance accordingly. It’s now 
performing much, much better than the 
original search engine. And that’s where our 
happy story ends. 
Moral of the Story: Be Like John
There’s an important takeaway from this 
case study: that UX practitioners and other 
designers should not only pay more attention 
to the numbers, but it’s their responsibility to 
employ quantitative approaches to research 
and evaluate the user experience. If no one at 
Vanguard had taken on this responsibility, the 
entire project might have failed miserably.
And though it’s not a lesson, there’s another 
important point worth remembering: this is 
just the tip of the SSA iceberg. There’s much 
more that can and should be done with your 
site’s search query data.

21
Chapter 1
How Site Search Analytics Can Save Your Butt
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
In this book, I’ll cover many of the ways you 
can use SSA to better align your site with 
your business strategy, and I’ll show you how 
SSA can be used to diagnose problems with 
your site’s content, metadata, navigation, and 
search system performance. I’ll do my best to 
help you integrate SSA, which is an inherently 
data-driven way to analyze user behavior, into 
traditional, more qualitative user-centered 
design methodologies. SSA is a missing link 
and a goldmine of untapped riches for all kinds 
of designers. I hope my book will serve as 
a toolkit to help you mine the data and, like 
John, achieve a truly better user experience.

22
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 2
Site Search 
Analytics in a 
Nutshell
What Is Site Search Analytics?	
23
Why You’ll Want to Use SSA 	
27
It Always Starts with Data 	
28
George Kingsley Zipf, Harvard Linguist  
and Hockey Star 	
32
Ways to Use SSA (and This Book)	
37
What Gets in the Way of SSA? 	
41
Who Is Responsible for SSA? 	
43
Your Secret Weapon 	
47
Summary 	
54

23
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I
n the last chapter, I showed how 
Vanguard used (and continues to use) site 
search analytics to measure, monitor, and 
optimize its search system’s performance. Not 
to mention that it improves the overall user 
experience, as well as saves money, promotes 
jobs, and avoids disaster. Now it’s your turn to 
give it a try. The bulk of this book will teach 
you the nuts and bolts of SSA. Starting with 
Chapter 3, “Pattern Analysis,” I’ll show you 
how to analyze your data, gain actionable 
insights, and put them to good use so your 
organization can enjoy some of the same 
benefits as Vanguard. But before we go deep, 
we’ll go broad. In this chapter, I’ll briefly cover 
the nuts-and-bolts aspects of SSA: what it 
is, how it works, and why you would use it. 
Think of this chapter as an introduction to SSA 
in 20 pages or fewer. 
What Is Site Search Analytics?
Site search analytics is, at its simplest, the 
analysis of the search queries entered by users 
of a specific search system (see Figures 2.1 

24
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
and 2.2). What did they search? What do 
their searches tell you about them and their 
needs? How did their searches go? Does their 
experience suggest fixes or improvements to 
your site? Or does it raise follow-up questions 
to pursue through other forms of user research? 
Note that in this book, we’re exploring the 
searching performed on a Web site or intranet. 
We are not covering how people search the 
entire Web using Google or another search 
engine. There are certainly parallels, but as 
you’ll see in the table in Figure 2.3, they’re not 
the same; Referral Queries of the Michigan 
State University site came from Web search 
engines like Google; Local Queries were 
executed on MSU’s own search engine.

25
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 2.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690980708/
In SSA, you can analyze queries, like these frequent queries of the 
AIGA.org site, as reported by Google Analytics…
FIGURE 2.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405125/
...to learn about what your users want from your sites and your 
organizations.

26
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 2.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690980732/
Rich Wiggins of Michigan State University assembled, categorized, and 
even color-coded the most frequent queries from the open Web versus 
those generated locally to illustrate their differences.
Unlike people searching the Web, your 
site’s searchers typically have more specific 
needs. They also may be familiar with your 
organization, its products, and its content—
after all, they had to find their way to your 
site in order to use its search system. So the 
knowledge you’ll glean from SSA will be a 
bit different than (and complementary to) 
what you’ll learn from SEO (Search Engine 
Optimization) and SEM (Search Engine 
Marketing). Consider this analogy: if people 
searching the Web are essentially the leads you 

27
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
want to attract, people searching your site are 
the customers you hope to retain. 
Why You’ll Want to Use SSA 
SSA is unique: there truly is nothing like 
studying what people want from your site. It 
should be in your research toolkit—not by 
itself, mind you—but there’s no reason for 
it not to be there, unless your site somehow 
doesn’t have a search system. 
There are plenty of ways you can track and 
learn from users’ behaviors aside from SSA. 
For example, if you’re a web analytics person, 
you might rely on clickstream analysis; if you’re 
a user researcher, perhaps you perform eye-
tracking studies. They’ll all tell you something 
about user intent. 
But none of these methods will tell you what 
users want in their own words. SSA provides an 
unmatched trove of semantic richness—not just 
what users want, but the tone and flavor of the 
language they use to express those needs. And 
it’s without the biases introduced by testing 

28
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
and a lab environment. Plus, you have the data 
already. You certainly won’t find it anywhere 
else or acquire it any other way. 
It Always Starts with Data 
SSA starts with raw data that describes what 
happens when a user interacts with a search 
system. It’s ugly, and we’ll break it down 
shortly, but here’s what it typically looks 
like (this sample is from the Google Search 
Appliance): 
XXX.XXX.X.104 - - [10/Jul/2006:10:25:46 -0800] “GET 
/search?access=p&entqr=0&output=xml_no_dtd&sort= 
date%3AD%3AL%3Ad1&ud=1&site=All
Sites&ie=UTF-8&client=www&oe=UTF-
8&proxystylesheet=www&q=lincense+plate&ip= 
XXX.XXX.X.104 HTTP/1.1” 200 971 0 
0.02
This data gets captured in a search log file—
something your site’s search engine likely 
does automatically. Or the search activity 
gets intercepted, like other analytics data, 
by a snippet of JavaScript code embedded 
in each page and template. The intercepted 
data then gets stored in a database. That’s 

29
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
how Google Analytics, Omniture, Unica, and 
other analytics applications do it. You really 
don’t need to know much about how this code 
works, but now you can at least claim to have 
seen it.
<script type=”text/javascript”  
src=”http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js “>
</script><script type=”text/javascript”>_uacct =  
“UA-xxxxxx-x”urchinTracker();
</script> 
Although search engines and your analytics 
application may gather search data, they’re 
traditionally and disappointingly remiss at 
providing reports on site search performance. 
Even when they do, you still may want to get 
at the raw data to analyze and learn things that 
the reports—which tend to be quite generic—
won’t tell you.1 So it’s useful to know the basic 
anatomy of search data because it will help you 
understand what can and can’t be analyzed. 
We’ll cover just the basics here. (See Avi 
1	  Once you have the raw data, you’ll need to parse out the good stuff, and then use a spreadsheet or 
application to analyze it. Here’s a PERL script from the good people at Michigan State University 
that you can use to parse it: 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/searchanalytics/
content/code_samples/. And here’s a spreadsheet you can use to analyze it: 
 http://
rosenfeldmedia.com/books/searchanalytics/blog/free_ms_excel_template_for_ana/

30
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Rappoport’s more extensive coverage of the 
topic at the end of this chapter.) 
Minimally, your data consists of records of 
queries that were submitted to your site’s 
search engine. On a good day, your data will 
also include the numbers of results each query 
retrieved. On a really good day, each query will 
be date/time stamped so you can get an idea 
of when different searches were happening. 
On a really, really good day, your data will 
also include information on who—such as 
an individual, by way of tracking her cookie, 
or a segment of users that you determine by 
their login credentials—is actually doing the 
searching. 
Here’s a tiny sample of query data that must 
have arrived on one of those really, really good 
days. It comes from a U.S. state government 
Web site that uses Google Search Appliance. 
It’s really ugly stuff; so to make it more 
readable, we’ve bolded the critical elements: IP 
address, time/date stamp, query, and # of 
results: 

31
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
XXX.XXX.X.104 - - [10/Jul/2006:10:25:46 -0800] “GET 
/search?access=p&entqr=0&output=xml_no_dtd&sort= 
date%3AD%3AL%3Ad1&ud=1&site=
AllSites&ie=UTF-8&client=www&oe=UTF-
8&proxystylesheet=www&q=lincense+plate&ip= 
XXX.XXX.X.104 HTTP/1.1” 200 971 0 
0.02 
XXX.XXX.X.104 - - [10/Jul/2006:10:25:48 -0800] “GET 
/search?access=p&entqr=0&output=xml_no_dtd&sort= 
date%3AD%3AL%3Ad1&ie=UTF-
8&client=www&q=license+plate
&ud=1&site=AllSites&spell=1&oe= 
UTF-8&proxystylesheet=www&ip=XXX.XXX.X.104 
HTTP/1.1” 200 8283 146 0.16 
Even with a little bit of data—in this case, two 
queries—we can learn something about how 
people search a site. In this case, the searcher 
from IP address …104 entered lincense plate 
at 10:25 a.m. on July 10, 2006, and retrieved 
zero results (that’s the next-to-last number in 
each record). No surprise there. Just a couple 
seconds later, the searcher entered license plate 
and retrieved 146 results. 
These are just two queries, but they certainly 
can get you thinking. For example, we might 
reasonably guess that the first effort was a typo. 

32
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
If, during our analysis, we saw lots more typos, 
we probably ought to make sure the search 
engine could handle spellchecking. And we 
might want to make extra sure that, if license 
plate was a frequent query, the site contained 
good content on license plates, and that it 
always came up at the top of the search results 
page. There are many more questions and 
ideas that would come up from reviewing the 
search data. But most of all, we’d like to know 
if the users were happy with the experience. In 
this example, were they? 
Heaven knows. The data is good at telling 
us what happened, but it doesn’t tell why 
the session ended there. You’ll need to use 
a qualitative research method if you wanted 
to learn more. (We’ll get into this what/why 
dichotomy quite a bit in Chapter 11, “Bridging 
Web Analytics and User Experience.”) 
George Kingsley Zipf, Harvard 
Linguist and Hockey Star 
Of course, we’ve just been looking at a tiny 
slice of a search log. And as interesting as 

33
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
it is, the true power of SSA comes from 
collectively analyzing the thousands or millions 
of such interactions that take place on your 
site during a given period of time. That’s 
when the patterns emerge, when trends take 
shape, and when there’s enough activity to 
merit measuring—and drawing interesting 
conclusions. 
Nowhere is the value of statistical analysis 
more apparent than when viewing the Zipf 
Distribution, named for Harvard linguist 
George Kingsley Zipf, who, as you’d expect 
from a linguist, liked to count words.2 He 
found that a few terms were used quite often, 
while many were hardly used at all. We find 
the same thing when tallying up queries from 
most to least frequent, as in Figure 2.4.
The Zipf distribution—which emerges when 
tallying just about any site’s search data—
shows that the few most common queries 
account for a surprisingly large portion of 
2	 You may not have heard of Zipf, but you’ve probably heard of the 80/20 Rule, the Pareto 
Principle, or Power Laws. All relate to the hockey-stick curve’s dramatic dropoff from “short 
head” to long tail.

34
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
all search activity during any given period. 
(Remember in Chapter 1, “How Search Site 
Analytics Can Save Your Butt,” how John 
Ferrara focused exclusively on those common 
queries.) You can see how tall and narrow what 
we’ll call the “short head” is, and how quickly 
it drops down to the “long tail” of esoteric 
queries (technically, described as “twosies” and 
“onesies”). In fact, we’re only showing the first 
500 or so queries here; in reality, this site’s long 
tail would extend into the tens of thousands, 
many meters to the right of where you sit. 

35
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 2.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405271/
The hockey-stick-shaped Zipf Distribution shows that a few queries are 
very popular, while most are not. This example is from Michigan State 
University, but this distribution is true of just about every Web site 
and intranet.
It’s equally enlightening to examine the same 
phenomenon when presented textually, as 
shown in Table 2.1
The most common query, campus map, 
accounts for 1.4% of all the search activity 
during this time period. That number, 1.4%, 
doesn’t sound like much, but those top queries 

36
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
add up very quickly—the top 14 most common 
queries account for 10% of all search activity. 
(Note to MSU.edu webmaster: better make 
sure that relevant results come up when users 
search campus map!) 
TABLE 2.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5825543717/
Note how few queries are required to account for 10% of all search activity. (This data is also from 
Michigan State University.) 
That’s incredible—it means that if you 
invested the small amount of effort needed 
to ensure that the top 14 queries performed 
well, you’d improve the search experience for 
10% of all users. And if, say, half of your site’s 
users were search dominant,3 then you’ve 
3	 Usability expert Jakob Nielsen suggests that this is the case; see www.useit.com/
alertbox/9707b.html

37
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
just improved the overall user experience by 
5% (10% × 50%). Numbers like this can and 
should be challenged, and 5% may not sound 
like much. But 5% here, 3% there… these 
quickly add up. 
It bears noting that we just started with a 
simple report—presented both visually and 
as a table—and quickly drew some useful 
conclusions based on the data presented. That 
there, folks, is analysis. And that’s why reports 
are only means, not goals.
And equally important, this analysis scales 
beautifully. Have the time and resources to 
go beyond the top 14 queries? No problem—
tuning the top 42 queries will get you to the 
20% mark. About a 100 gets you to 30%, and 
so on. 
Ways to Use SSA 
(and This Book)
So what’s the message here? That SSA is an 
incredibly important tool for helping you 
understand what users want from your site. 

38
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
And once you have a sense of what they want, 
you can evaluate and improve all sorts of things 
that are there to help users get what they want. 
For instance, you can improve your site as 
follows: 
•	Search system: SSA will help you 
understand how people entered searches, 
where they were when they entered them, 
and how they interpreted the search results. 
(We cover this in Chapter 8, “Practical Tips 
for Improving Search.”) 
•	Navigation and metadata: Do certain 
pages generate a lot more search activity 
than others? What kinds of searches? And 
does this suggest that certain navigational 
options are missing or labeled in a 
confusing way? SSA will also give you tips 
on how to shore up your site’s navigation 
and metadata. (We cover this in Chapter 
9, “Practical Tips for Improving Site 
Navigation and Metadata.”) 
•	Content: For example, you can study 
queries that retrieve zero results. Is this 

39
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
because there isn’t content on the topic? 
Should there be? Or is the relevant content 
mistitled? Or poorly written? SSA will help 
you determine what content is missing and 
what to do to existing content to make sure 
it gets found. (We cover this in Chapter 10, 
“Practical Tips for Improving Content.”) 
Whatever design challenges you face, SSA—
like any other data analysis—will back up your 
design decisions with actual facts. 
Of course, as much as you’d like to make users 
happy, you also have to make your employers 
happy. They have goals—for your organization 
and for the site itself. (They ought to, at 
least.) These can be expressed and measured 
as KPI—Key Performance Indicators. The 
types of search-related metrics that you saw 
in Chapter 1 can serve as components to these 
KPIs—in fact, many organizations that are 
otherwise sophisticated in their measurement 
of performance often fall down when it comes 
to measuring findability. In Chapter 3, we’ll 
help you do what John Ferrara did: use goal-
based analysis to measure, monitor, and 

40
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
optimize performance, again and again. 
Finally, there are some other important ways to 
analyze search data: 
•	Pattern analysis: What patterns emerge 
when you “play” with the data? Can you 
use those patterns to determine what types 
of metadata and content are the most 
important to your searchers? Can you 
detect changes in seachers’ behavior and 
needs that are seasonal? Do you also find 
instructive surprises and outliers? (We cover 
this in Chapter 3, “Pattern Analysis.”) 
•	Failure analysis: When searches return 
no results—or poor results—what can we 
learn? And what can we do to fix those 
problems and improve performance? (We 
cover this in Chapter 4, “Failure Analysis.”)
•	Session analysis: What happens during a 
specific search session? How do searchers’ 
needs and understanding of the content 
change as they search? (We cover this in 
Chapter 5, “Session Analysis.”) 

41
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Audience analysis: How might we 
uncover the differences between audience 
segments and their information needs? 
And how might we better address those 
differing needs? (We cover this in Chapter 
6, “Audience Analysis.”) 
What Gets in the Way of SSA? 
So you’re wondering: if SSA is so valuable, 
why don’t you hear more about it? And why 
haven’t you been taking advantage of it? 
There are a few predictable and mostly 
mundane reasons, such as the following: 
•	Lack of awareness: The idea has been 
around for years, but so was the Web before 
it took off. There’s simply a lack of critical 
mass behind SSA getting more attention; 
hence this book. 
•	Technical hurdles: Your IT people might 
be too busy to write the scripts to parse your 
log files or even provide you with access 
to large and unwieldy data files. This is 
becoming less of an issue as organizations 

42
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
move toward using analytics applications 
to access the data; still, you might need a 
developer’s help in writing ad hoc queries. 
•	Political hurdles: Your IT people might 
be too busy (or instructed not) to answer 
your phone calls. Or they might feel that 
anything related to search is their and only 
their responsibility (because many equate 
search with a search engine). There’s no 
simple solution here. Often, your best 
and only approach will be patience and 
persistence—just keep trying. 
•	Legal hurdles: Lawyers often freak out 
any time someone wants access to user 
data—even if it’s for internal use—and 
issue blanket denials to requests for access. 
If you can get the attention of your legal 
department’s representative for even 30 
seconds, explain to that person that you’re 
interested in analyzing the collective 
behavior of your site’s users, rather than 
digging into the habits of individuals. 

43
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Lack of data: Many sites—your personal 
blog, for example—likely don’t generate 
enough search activity to merit studying. In 
fact, they probably aren’t creating any sort 
of behavioral stream worth analyzing at all. 
That said, it’s still won’t hurt to poke into 
even a small data set, given that… 
•	Lack of tools: …the price of analytics tools 
is coming down. Way down. Like, free, 
thanks to Google Analytics (though you 
won’t be able to use a hosted service for 
your intranet). It’s not perfect, but it’s pretty 
useful, especially given the price. And if 
you’re working with simple data, Excel will 
do in a pinch. 
But these barriers to taking advantage of SSA 
don’t explain why it’s still something of an 
unknown in most circles. So why has SSA 
fallen through the cracks? 
Who Is Responsible for SSA? 
Frankly, in smaller, less advanced 
organizations, SSA receives little or no 

44
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
attention. It’s just one of a few dozen 
non-urgent aspects of maintaining a Web 
presence—like meeting accessibility standards 
or keeping content fresh—that often gets 
pushed aside as assorted fires get put out. And 
when it does get done in these settings, it’s by a 
webmaster who already wears nine other hats. 
In more advanced settings, where there are 
entire business units devoted to web analytics 
and user research, SSA still falls through the 
cracks. That’s because when SSA comes up, 
it seems just different enough from each unit’s 
existing daily responsibilities to assume that 
it’s someone else’s job. Why is that? It comes 
down to what people are comfortable with, and 
usually we’re comfortable with the familiar. 
For example, web analytics people tend to 
prefer analyzing “cleaner” types of data—
like conversion data—that have a more clear 
impact on the bottom line. (Monitor the Web 
Analytics Forum Yahoo Group for a week 
or two, and you’ll see what we mean.)4 The 
4	  http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/webanalytics/

45
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
successful conversion of a search is far more 
difficult to determine, much less measure, 
as language (and therefore searching) is so 
ambiguous. So, in a sense, the semantic 
richness of search query data is a double-
edged sword—while the data might be quite 
interesting, it can be relatively difficult to 
analyze. 
User experience people, on the other hand, 
tend to be less comfortable with numbers 
in general and data analysis in particular. 
They more typically rely upon qualitative 
analyses, where there are fewer expectations of 
conclusive, measureable outcomes and more is 
open to interpretation. And they may assume 
that analyzing data requires sophisticated 
expertise in statistical analysis. So, for UX 
people, SSA is usually on someone else’s table. 
Let’s face it, in most situations today, SSA 
is no one’s job, but it should belong to 
someone (hence this book). Whatever your 
perspective—whether you’re a web analytics 
expert, a UX researcher, or a wearer of nine 
hats—you’ll want to have a clear picture of 

46
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
those top most common queries and how well 
your site is performing. And you’ll want to 
have that clear picture this month, next month, 
next season, and next year. Seeing SSA as 
part of your ongoing work (for example, 5% 
of your normal week) rather than as a one-off 
project (for example, a 12-hour assignment) 
will enable you to continually improve your 
site and make sure that it keeps up with the 
changes in its environment. The world around 
it changes, and like a living organism, your site 
must change as well in order to survive and 
thrive. And don’t lose sleep over when during 
the process—research, design, development, 
or maintenance—you tackle SSA. You’ll glean 
something small—good things at each point, 
none of which will likely take you off on a 
radical tangent. 
Finally, if you’re one of those wearers of 
many hats, don’t fret: as mentioned earlier, 
SSA scales wonderfully. Even if you spend 15 
minutes per month looking over the simplest 
reports—the most frequent queries list and the 
null results query list—you’ll get something 

47
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
useful out of your analysis. This month’s 
15 minutes of tuning can gently grow to 30 
minutes next month, and so on. The work is 
the same—it will fill whatever time you can 
make or justify for it. 
Your Secret Weapon 
Thank your lucky stars: SSA remains safely 
under the radar. No one owns it, and the 
people in most organizations who are closest 
to it—the IT folks who manage the search 
engine—aren’t likely to worry much about 
things like user intent. So if you can crack open 
the data, you (and your organization) will own 
the keys to a very powerful secret weapon. 
Read ahead. 

48
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry
Avi Rappoport, Search Tools Consulting— 
http://searchtools.com/ 
Though most of us are now using analytics applications 
that provide some SSA reporting functionality, you may 
be in a situation where you’ll have to create your own 
reports—either because the analytics application doesn’t 
support your specific needs—or because you don’t have 
access to an analytics application. In both cases, you’ll 
need to process the data yourself. 
Working with search engine transaction logs, you’ll 
find the search query, any search parameters (such 
as language or date), and the number of matches 
retrieved by the search engine. Most also contain the 
date and time, and some kind of searcher identifier. 
Understanding the format makes it easier to understand 
search analytics reports, recognize what they can and 
can’t tell you, and perform special processing for unusual 
questions. 
Many search engines conform to the NCSA extended 
Web server log format, 5 so that’s what we’ll cover here. 
These text files have a standard field order, with spaces 
between them. To indicate a field with internal spaces, it 
needs double quotes or square brackets at the start and 
end. 
5	  The NCSA combined/extended log format is documented at http://publib.boulder.
ibm.com/tividd/td/ITWSA/ITWSA_info45/en_US/HTML/guide/c-logs.
html#combined and http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/mod/mod_log_config.
html#examples

49
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
However, there’s no place in the NCSA extended format 
for the hit count (the number of items matched in the 
search), so search engines tend to slide it in the middle 
or hang it off the end. If your search log format is not 
documented, you may need to do some sleuthing: you 
can figure this out by entering several unique searches 
that you know will generate no matches, and then look in 
the search log for those terms. 
BASIC FIELDS 
A simple query entry in this log format looks like this: 
XX.XX.XX.14 - - [10/Jul/2010:10:24:13 -0800]  
“GET /search?q=noise HTTP/1.1” 200 9429 111 
We can break that down into fields for better analysis, as 
shown in Table 2.2. 
TABLE 2.2  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101122/
Table 2.3 provides even more detail on each field. 
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry (continued)

50
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
TABLE 2.3  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101190/
*	 The GMT offset is important because you must have accurate timestamps to look 
for patterns of usage, such as spikes of traffic at lunchtime. Tracking the time relative 
to GMT lets analytics systems merge search logs from multiple time zones, which is 
especially important when adjusting for Daylight Savings Time.
**	Some search engines return the approximate number of hits, rather than provide a 
definitive number. This is usually because they are reserving the option to check whether 
the user has security access to additional documents. If you don’t have confidential 
documents, you may be able to disable the access check and get a real number.
WHAT EXTENDED LOG ENTRIES LOOK LIKE
Optional fields can be quite helpful as well. These 
include the “referer” field (it should be “referrer,” but 
the spec spelled it wrong, so now we’re stuck with this 
misspelling), which can offer insights into site navigation 
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry (continued)

51
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
problems; the user-agent for recognizing various 
platforms using the search; and an optional cookie, 
which is better than IP address for tracking searchers. 
To conform to other Web log formats, these fields might 
come before the hit count and time taken fields.
An extended log entry could look like this (detailed 
below in Table 2.4): 
XX.XX.XX.14 - - [10/Jul/2010:10:24:13 -0800]  
“GET /search?q=noise HTTP/1.1” 200
9429 111 0028 “http://search.example.com/
search?q=sound HTTP/1.1” “Mozilla/5.0
(iPhone; U; CPU iPhone OS 2_2 like Mac OS X;  
en-us) AppleWebKit/525.18.1
(KHTML, like Gecko) Version/3.1.1 Mobile/5G77  
Safari/525.20”
“USERID=CustomerACooke;IMPID=01234” 
TABLE 2.4  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101254/
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry (continued)

52
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
SEARCH PARAMETERS 
Most search engines stick to the common format for 
additional options and settings (such as language or in 
the search part of the request). They start after the results 
page URL with a question mark and then put in a code 
followed by an equal sign followed by a value, delimited 
by an ampersand (or comma or semicolon), like this: 
search.html?qq=noise&zone=all
There’s no standard, so the query parameter might be q, 
qq, qt, qry, query, w, words, s, st, search, or something 
else entirely. This, and all the other codes, should be 
documented by the search vendor or open-source group. 
(We’ve provided an example below, as well as details in 
Table 2.5.) You’ll find this information useful if you need 
to “teach” your analytics application what to look for to 
identify—and parse out—actual queries from your logs. 
Here is an example of a query parameter:
search?q=noise&l=f1&s=21&p=20v=housewares&i=1 
TABLE 2.5  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101316/
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry (continued)

53
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The contents of the log file enable site search analytics: 
the entries provide the evidence needed to deduce how 
your users are searching and how well the site search 
is helping them. Cherish the logs or at least keep an 
archive: you may need to go back someday.
Anatomy of a Search Log Entry (continued)

54
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary 
•	SSA offers a unique treasure trove of data 
worth tapping because it’s the one place 
where users tell you in their own words 
what they want from your site.
•	SSA provides different information about 
users than insights you normally get from 
SEM (Search Engine Marketing) and 
SEO (Search Engine Optimization). 
Think of people searching the Web as 
people you want to attract to your site, 
while people searching your site are 
customers you want to retain. SSA is 
concerned with the latter.
•	Query data can be captured in search 
engine logs or by analytics applications 
that harvest information on users’ actions 
on your site.
•	When users search your site, they 
typically will have more specific needs 
(and queries) than when they search for 
information on the Web. 

55
Chapter 2
Site Search Analytics in a Nutshell
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	As the Zipf distribution shows, a little 
SSA goes a long way. Start by improving 
the performance of your site’s most 
common queries; they will account for a 
huge portion of your search activity. 
•	Use pattern analysis, session analysis, 
failure analysis, and audience analysis 
to analyze your query data, diagnose 
problems, and determine ways to 
improve your site’s content, navigation, 
and search system. 
•	Use goal-based analysis to determine 
new ways to measure your site’s 
performance and connect search to your 
organization’s KPI (Key Performance 
Indicators).

56
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 3
Pattern Analysis
Analysis as a Form of Play	
57
Getting Started with Pattern Analysis	
61
Patterns to Consider 	
66
Finding Patterns in the Long Tail 	
86
Anti-Pattern Analysis: Surprises  
and Outliers	
90
Summary	
98

57
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
T
he next five chapters (including this 
one) cover various ways to analyze 
and derive new insights from your 
query data that can directly improve your site’s 
user experience. We’ll start by looking at the 
patterns and oddities that emerge from your 
data if you play with it (and stare at it long 
enough).
Analysis as a Form of Play
In pattern analysis, we look for what our queries 
have in common: tone, length, topic, type, and 
more. We also explore what’s odd—are there 
queries that don’t fit with the rest? We then 
study those groups and misfits to see if we can 
learn something new about our searchers and 
the content they want and need. Does their 
language match the tone of our content? Are 
they requesting certain types of content more 
than others? Do searchers demonstrate certain 
kinds of information needs at particular times of 
the year? Or day?
How does pattern analysis work? We simply 
play with our data and see what emerges. Yes, 

58
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
it’s essentially that simple: we play. And it’s as 
fun as it sounds.
The Simple Part
The simple part about pattern analysis is 
that as humans we’re naturally built to detect 
patterns, especially semantic ones. Don’t 
believe me? Well, take a quick look at this list 
of words in Table 3.1.
TABLE 3.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5825543999/
A set of common queries logged by Google Trends, December 30, 2010. 
What did you notice? Any patterns emerge? 
Any outliers?
You may have noticed many queries that were 
people’s names (for example, laura govan and 

59
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
billy taylor), while others were related to the 
end of the year (new year quotes funny and 
2011 predictions), and the rest were an odd mix 
of stuff pertaining to mostly earthquakes.
Or you might have divided the people into 
different categories (for example, politicians, 
musicians, comedians) or by gender. You 
might have sussed out some geographic 
issues, such as queries that have some regional 
or local significance (for example, former 
Israeli president moshe katsav and indiana 
earthquake). Or something else completely 
different.
Whatever patterns emerged for you, you 
probably performed some or all of these four 
pattern analysis tasks without even realizing it: 
•	You sampled the content to get a sense of 
what was there. 
•	You grouped things that seemed to go 
together. 
•	You may have sorted them to get a different 
collective look at them. 

60
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	And you likely iterated your way through a 
few passes at them before you were satisfied 
with what you came up with. 
If you’re not sure how to begin pattern 
analysis, try these four tasks and let your mind 
wander through the data. And remember, no 
single pattern is the “right” one!
The Fun Part
When I teach workshops on site search 
analytics, I have my students do a hands-
on pattern analysis exercise. Even though I 
intentionally provide minimal instructions, it’s 
amazing how quickly they become absorbed 
in the process of detecting patterns and 
categorizing queries. (And no, my students 
aren’t exclusively data modelers, librarians, or 
other data nerds.) They arrive at conclusions 
that aren’t the same—their groups overlap, 
their interpretations differ—and they greatly 
enjoy comparing their results. Some revel in 
their differences; others are, frankly, a little 
uncomfortable with the lack of a “correct” 
set of patterns. That’s the precise moment 

61
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
at which I recommend that they consider 
following up their pattern analysis with a more 
qualitative technique, like card sorting, to 
determine the most common, if not “correct,” 
groupings.
Some of my students are skeptical of the idea of 
“playing” with the data. They feel they should 
be engaging in more serious statistical analysis. 
Yet many statisticians will tell you that you 
should perform what they call “Exploratory 
Data Analysis”before you tackle formal 
statistical testing.1 Until you first have a sense 
of the data—and its patterns—you might not 
have a good idea of which statistical tests you 
should be applying.
So let’s have some fun.
Getting Started with 
Pattern Analysis
Good news: you already have the tools—
your brain included—necessary for pattern 
analysis. I’ll wager that you already own a 
1	  See Wikipedia for more on Exploratory Data Analysis: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Exploratory_data_analysis

62
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
copy of Microsoft Excel; if not, you could 
certainly create a spreadsheet in a free tool 
like Google Documents or OpenOffice. To 
get started, you’ll need some minimal data: 
queries (at least from the short head) and how 
frequently they were searched on your site. You 
might grab these by exporting them from your 
analytics application or by using this PERL 
script  www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/
downloads/searchanalytics/loganalyzer.txt to 
parse them from your server log.
Next, create two columns in your spreadsheet—
one for your unique queries, the other for their 
frequency counts—and import or paste in your 
data. If you know the date range for your data 
sample, mention it in the spreadsheet so you 
won’t forget it later. Here’s an example of such 
a spreadsheet that contains common queries 
from Michigan State University’s Web site in 
Figure 3.1. We’ll return to the MSU example 
throughout this chapter. 

63
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 3.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/
photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405511/
A week’s worth of Michigan State 
University queries, sorted by 
frequency. 
I’ve created a souped-up version of this 
spreadsheet (shown in Figure 3.2), which 
I encourage you to download and use as 
a template. (You can get it here:  http://
rosenfeldmedia.com/books/searchanalytics/
blog/free_ms_excel_template_for_ana/.) 
Here’s what the spreadsheet contains: 

64
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Rank: Each query’s rank in terms of 
frequency. 
•	Percent: The percentage of overall 
search activity that each unique query is 
responsible for (out of all your site’s search 
activity). 
•	Cumulative Percent: The percentages of 
all the queries added up. If you’re looking 
at query #3 (registrar), the Cumulative 
Percent shows the sum of the first three 
queries’ percentages (4.6391 = 3.0436 + 
0.8509 + 0.7446). 
•	Count: How often each unique query was 
searched. 
•	Unique Query: The query itself. 
•	Link: I’ve done a little fancy programming 
to provide a live link to execute each unique 
query on the Michigan State Web site. This 
just makes it easier to test each query. 
•	I’ve also provided some other information 
at the top—such as the average number of 
terms per query— as a pair of fancy Zipf 
distributions to help you visualize the data. 

65
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 3.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405491/
The same data as in Figure 3.1—now all gussied-up.

66
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Patterns to Consider 
Now go ahead and take a deeper look at and 
start playing with the MSU queries. Stare at 
them for a bit, scan up and down a bit, and 
then stare again. Do you detect anything 
interesting, or surprising, about the language 
searchers are using in their queries? Were you 
surprised that stuinfo is used more frequently 
than stu info? Or that map was as high (or 
low) as it was? Did you happen to notice lots 
of queries that seemed to deal with places on 
campus and others that seemed to be about 
courses? 
With each new pass at the data, you’ll come up 
with more questions. Following are some of the 
types of patterns you might encounter when 
analyzing your own query data.
To use this spreadsheet for your own analysis, 
paste your queries and query count data 
into the Unique Query and Count columns, 
respectively. You may need to select both 
columns and sort Count from largest to 
smallest in order to have your queries sorted 

67
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
by frequency (if they’re not already). The other 
columns should automatically be calculated 
and filled, and you should be ready to move 
forward with finding and analyzing patterns. 
Tonal Patterns 
Notice the tone or flavor of these terms. Do 
you see jargon (for example, spartantrak and 
cemscores)? Abbreviations (such as im west 
and hr)? Most importantly, does this language 
match what you expected? 
This is one of those so-obvious-that-it’s-not 
questions to ask. 
For example, I consulted for a large U.S. 
government agency that’s dedicated to serving 
health professionals. It found that there were 
many more instances of queries that were 
apparently coming from laymen (who would 
search for swine flu) than there were from its 
core audience of doctors, nurses, and health-
care researchers (who would search for h1n1). 
This resulted in a major rethinking of the site’s 
mission. (“Hmmm, maybe we ought to also 
serve everyday Joes who are worried that their 

68
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
kids might be coming down with something 
serious.”) Accordingly, the agency drastically 
changed its content’s tone and its tagging to 
meet those unanticipated needs. 
As you start to get a sense of the language of 
your site’s searchers, consider the language 
of your site’s content. Are there obvious 
differences? If you’re the Michigan State 
University webmaster, you may be surprised 
to find that searchers tend to abbreviate more 
frequently than you’d expect. For example, 
they may use the term im west rather than 
West Intramural Sports Building. So you might 
want to give your content authors a list of 
commonplace name abbreviations to use when 
tagging relevant pages. 
Synonym Patterns 
Synonyms are also instructive when it comes 
to understanding the tone of voice that your 
searchers are likely to take, as well as the 
tone your content ought to take. So let’s do 
a little bit of analysis of our common queries 
to determine potential synonyms, continuing 

69
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
with our Michigan State University example. 
In the following spreadsheet, I took MSU’s 50 
most frequent unique queries (if I had more 
time, I’d have used more) and their percentages 
(to remind you, these are percentages of 
overall search activity that each unique 
query accounted for). I did this simply by 
copying and pasting them from the previous 
spreadsheet in Figure 3.2.
I then looked for queries among them that 
seemed synonymous (such as jobs and 
employment) and grouped them. Finally, 
for each cluster, I tallied up the individual 
queries’ percentages to determine a cumulative 
percentage for that cluster (see Figure 3.3).

70
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 3.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981050/
Clusters of synonymous queries and their respective percentages of 
search traffic over a given time period.
The whole exercise took less than an hour. 
The first cluster of synonymous terms is related 
to student information (stuinfo, student info, 
and stu info) and comprises about 3.8% of all 
the searches that week. Of those three variants, 
we can tell that stuinfo is by far more common 

71
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
than its synonymous siblings, accounting for 
about 3% of that week’s searches alone. (This 
isn’t surprising, because at Michigan State 
University, stuinfo happens to be the official 
name of a branded application.) 
Knowing that one term is far more common 
than others is useful if you’re responsible 
for your site’s information architecture. For 
example, if you’re creating a set of metadata 
(for example, a thesaurus), you may need to 
determine “preferred terms,” variants that are 
selected as the most appropriate to use. So you 
might guess that stuinfo is, at least according 
to searchers, the best variant to choose to tag 
documents related to student information. 
It’s also handy to know a preferred term when 
you’re coming up with a document’s title. And 
if you are developing a site-wide taxonomy, 
you can typically include only a single, 
preferred term—and now you know that 
stuinfo is probably the best one. 
Even if you don’t need to determine a single 
preferred term, you now have a sense of the 

72
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
terms that are most likely to resonate with 
users. This can be pretty useful to share with 
your site’s content authors and can influence 
their editorial policy. After all, now they have 
data to help them make—or validate—their 
decisions on usage. 
And perhaps most importantly, you now 
will have a sense of the richness of searchers’ 
language. 

73
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Tuning Search for Phrase Queries
Walter Underwood, Lead Engineer, MarkLogic 
Corporation
Phrase queries may be more common than you would 
expect from looking at the top queries. In fact, it’s 
common for more than half of all query traffic to be 
phrases. 
To get good relevance for phrase queries (queries with 
more than one word), you will probably need to do 
additional search engine tuning. This tuning pays off 
when your CEO searches for his own name and sees his 
bio as the first hit.
Most phrase queries are either proper nouns or common 
noun phrases. A proper noun phrase is a specific person, 
place, or thing: Maurice Duruflé, United Way, Rice 
University Bookstore, or Wings of Desire. Other noun 
phrases act like common nouns: French composer, 
charitable contribution, campus store, or foreign film.
Noun phrases may show a lot of vocabulary variation, 
because individuals choose different words with similar 
meanings. A searcher might choose charitable or charity 
and combine that with contribution or donation. Now 
we have four phrase queries used to search for the same 
thing. These four are different ways of expressing the 
same information need as a query:
•	 charitable contribution
•	 charitable donation

74
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	 charity contribution
•	 charity donation
With query counts spread between these variants, the 
most common one might be far down your list of most 
frequent queries. If you add the counts together, you 
will get a more accurate picture of the importance of this 
information need. For example, if charitable contribution 
showed up 100 times and the others 50, 25, and 25, then 
the true frequency for this question would be 200 (or 
more), not 100. The variation in vocabulary spreads the 
concept over many different query phrases.
Your search engine might convert charitable to the root 
word charity with an English stemmer, but it is unlikely 
to treat donation and contribution as the same word. You 
can add donation and contribution to the synonyms used 
by your search engine and then re-index to treat them the 
same.
A “stemmer” converts words to their base forms, plural 
to singular, past tense to present, and so on. You can 
check the behavior of your stemmer by creating two test 
documents, each containing one word, either charity or 
charitable. Submit those to your search engine and then 
use those two words individually as queries to see if both 
documents match equally. If they don’t match, then you 
can make those two words synonyms.
Proper noun queries will usually be entered the same by 
all searchers, with little or no variation in vocabulary. It is 
Tuning Search for Phrase Queries (continued)

75
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
extremely unlikely that someone searching for Steve Jobs 
would type steve careers. Proper noun queries behave 
more like single words, so they will benefit from spelling 
correction or “fuzzy search,” but rarely need synonyms.
You may see spacing variants in phrase queries. Is 
it Ghost Busters or Ghostbusters? Is it web site or 
website? There might not even be an official correct 
spelling. Sony Pictures prefers Ghostbusters, but the 
movie’s title sequence splits it into two words. The AP 
Stylebook started allowing “website” in April 2010, so 
articles published before then correctly use “Web site.” 
Hyphenation may be involved, too—is it Spiderman, 
Spider Man, or Spider-Man? Even when there is a clearly 
correct choice, your searchers may split or join the words 
creatively, searching for bat man or spaceghost. Most 
search applications will encounter a limited set of these 
sorts of terms, so synonyms are an effective way to handle 
them.
Tuning Search for Phrase Queries (continued)
Time-Based Patterns
Pattern hunting can get especially interesting 
when you introduce the element of time 
into your analysis. After all, your searchers’ 
information needs are constantly changing, 
as is your content. SSA can tell you what’s 
important and when, and you can tune 

76
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
your site—and your content strategy—
accordingly.2 
You might consider analyzing query patterns 
by such finely grained time segments as hours. 
For example, you might find that your intranet 
experiences a high level of queries for calendar, 
meetings, and events as the workday begins; 
menu as stomachs rumble during the lunch 
hour’s approach; and weather and traffic as the 
day ends and thoughts turn to the commute 
home. Why not cycle these various kinds of 
content on your home page based on the time 
of day?
Of course, you might not have the 
opportunity—or the need—to cycle your 
content on a daily basis. But it is highly likely 
that there is at least a seasonality to your site’s 
information usage, and longitudinal pattern 
analysis will help you expose and address it. 
Our colleague Rich Wiggins did just that at 
Michigan State University; building on the kind 
of categorization exercise described earlier, Rich 
2	  Every organization has decided of late that it needs a “content strategy,” and this is a good thing. 
Consult Kristina Halvorson’s book Content Strategy for the Web as a good starting place.

77
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
analyzed an entire year’s worth of data (well, not 
quite, he reviewed one week per month). He 
color-coded his categories, and the result is the 
visually instructive table in Figure 3.4.
FIGURE 3.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981020/
Notice the monthly change in Michigan State University searchers’ 
needs.
Queries regarding finding one’s way around 
campus (coded black) spike in September 
and January, as each semester begins, as do 
the beige-colored queries for the bookstore 
and athletics. Conversely, searchers for the 
library (orange) spike as term papers come due. 
Michigan State can use this data to determine 
what should go where and when. For example, 
it might make the football team’s schedule 

78
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
(and a way to purchase football tickets) quite 
prominent on the site’s main page as the season 
approaches. Toward each semester’s end, 
MSU could feature the times its libraries open 
and close.
When you do your own analysis, don’t just 
look for seasonal patterns; different rhythms 
apply in different contexts. Retailers, for 
example, may find that customers search for 
varying products depending on the time of day. 
Searches of a customer support knowledge 
base may reveal that weekday searches relate to 
a company’s business-class products, while the 
weekend’s searches are for its consumer-facing 
products.
Time and time again (excuse the pun), I’ve 
found organizations to be surprised at the 
role time plays in shaping their searchers’ 
information needs. And they are overjoyed at 
the opportunities that are opened up to them; 
now they have the data they need to inform 
their editorial agenda in a narrow sense and, 
more broadly, their overall content strategy.

79
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Question Patterns 
If you want to dig even deeper into 
understanding the nature of the information 
needs behind your searchers’ queries (and 
who doesn’t?), try hunting for patterns that 
seem to describe common question types that 
searchers seem to be asking. In other words, by 
analyzing queries you can categorize the gaps 
in your searchers’ knowledge. 
Let’s return to our Michigan State University 
example. In the spreadsheet in Figure 3.5, 
I’ve taken the queries and query clusters 
from Figure 3.3, as well as their respective 
percentages of all search traffic. (Remember, 
these are only the top 50 short head queries.) 
Then I did something very subjective: for each 
query or query cluster, I tried to categorize the 
kind of question or need the query represented. 
So when students searched for transcripts or 
transcript, I inferred that they were wondering 
how to get a copy of their academic transcript 
(complete a desired task). Or, perhaps, they 
were wondering which of the university’s 
services would help them accomplish this task. 

80
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
(In this case, it’s the Office of the Registrar.) 
I’ve noted four potential information needs 
in the columns I’ve added to the right: place, 
department/program, service, and task. 
FIGURE 3.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690980980/
I’ve come with four ways to categorize queries and query clusters: 
place, department/program, service, and task. Some queries and query 
clusters fit in multiple categories. For example, the query cluster of 
transcripts/transcript is an instance of both a task and a service. 
How did I arrive at these categories? After I 
started to review and contextualize the first 
few queries and query clusters, service and 

81
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
task seemed to make sense right away. As I 
continued my analysis, place, department, and 
program emerged. Once these new categories 
surfaced, I had to add new columns and return 
to the first few query clusters and terms to see 
if these new categories would describe them 
as well. Later, I found that department and 
program were quite similar, and decided to 
merge them into a single attribute. 
After I completed the process of categorizing 
and classifying each query and query cluster, 
I totaled the percentages of queries associated 
with each attribute. For example, to arrive at 
“place’s” 4.01% score, I added the percentages 
associated with bookstore, stores, bookstores, 
computer store, im west, library, and other 
queries in that category. Or, put another way, 
I simply added up all the “x’s” in that column. 
Now I have a sense of which categories are 
most represented among the site’s search 
traffic. Queries dealing with services (%12.99) 
and tasks (%11.40) are more common than 
those associated with places (4.01%) and 
departments/programs (5.14%). 

82
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
So what does this analysis tell us? 
We now have at least a partial understanding 
of the kinds of information needs this 
particular group of searchers has. And thanks 
to tallying up their respective percentages, we 
can prioritize those categories. As with card-
sorting exercises, we can use these categories 
to inform a site-wide hierarchy. Or we can use 
the categories to help us make decisions about 
which metadata types to invest in—we have a 
sense that there are four decent candidates, and 
if we can’t afford to create and apply them all at 
once, we know which ones should “go first.” 
The analysis would certainly be better if I had 
used more queries—again, these are based on 
just the top 50. And it would be even better if 
I’d had multiple people do this exercise, not 
just your humble author. But even a single 
pass at the data—in the directed way I’ve just 
described—will force you to delve more deeply 
into understanding your searchers’ information 
needs. 

83
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Answer Patterns
In the last section, we tried to deduce the 
questions—or information needs—that 
searchers have. How about doing the same 
thing for the answers they hope to receive? 
We can repeat the same type of exercise, using 
the exact same data, but this time, let’s look for 
patterns that describe the kinds of answers—
in terms of content types—that searchers may 
hope to find. 
To determine possible content types, review 
your common queries and query clusters, 
but this time ask a different question: “What 
kind of content would searchers want when 
they searched this term?” In the spreadsheet 
in Figure 3.6 (on the following page), I’m 
using the same Michigan State University 
queries and query clusters, and their respective 
percentages of search traffic. But the columns 
to the right show the kinds of content types I 
thought each query was intended to retrieve.

84
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 3.6 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405311/
Determining content types from the bottom up and matching them to 
queries and query clusters.
Here I’ve identified six reasonable content 
types: 
•	Applications (Such as a piece of software 
which has a unique function and its own 
interface, such as a system for accessing one’s 
grades )
•	News and Announcements (For example, 
press releases) 
•	Navigation pages (For subsites—often, 
searchers just want to go straight to a site for 
a department or other program)

85
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Reference pages (Such as the Dean’s List 
or a list of campus cafeterias) 
•	Contact info pages (Records from a 
directory or subsites’ “about us” pages)
•	Instructions (For example, how to make 
an appointment for a physical exam or how 
to use the email system)
As in the last section, queries and query 
clusters can be included within more than one 
category. And, as before, the percentages of 
queries per content type will help you prioritize 
these six content types. Application and 
reference pages are clearly the types of content 
that most searchers are looking for here. 
So how will this help you? 
If you’re responsible for your organization’s 
document management or content 
management system, you might find it useful 
to have a strong sense of what types of content 
formats are connected to common queries. 
That will help you make better decisions 
about which content types to address first in a 
content migration plan. And if you are tasked 

86
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
with developing schema for specific kinds of 
content, or a unique set of templates to fit your 
site’s content, you now have a decent idea 
of which ones to create and where to start. 
Finally, if you have your query data segmented 
appropriately, you can do this same analysis 
for specific audiences to learn which types of 
content are especially important to them. 
Finding Patterns in 
the Long Tail 
So far I’ve advised you to focus on the short 
head in your pattern analysis. I know you’ll 
learn more as you iterate over the data, and 
I recommend that you scale up the number 
of unique queries you analyze as time and 
resources permit. 
A few organizations are so SSA-gung ho that 
they have maximized most of the analytical 
opportunities afforded by the short head and 
have moved on to the long tail. If you get 
to that point—and many congratulations if 
you do—you’ll be happy to know that you’ll 
analyze the data in much the same way I’ve 

87
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
shown you so far. The exception is that you’ll 
want to start with a random sample of 100 
or perhaps 503—there are simply too many 
unique queries to tackle much more. 
Here are 20 queries in Table 3.2 grabbed from 
our Michigan State University long tail. In this 
case, I defined the long tail as queries executed 
only once; more would have been unwieldy to 
display in print. 
TABLE 3.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101422/
3	 Spreadsheet applications typically have a random number generator that will be indispensable 
here. In Excel, the function is “RAND.”

88
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The analysis of even such a small sample is 
informative. 
•	About 30% of the queries appear to 
be names of people. This could have 
huge implications for the MSU search 
experience, as the university currently 
uses a separate interface to query the 
people directory. Perhaps this data makes 
an argument to combine the two search 
interfaces into one? Or perhaps teach the 
search engine to recognize which queries 
are names and automatically search the 
directory for entries? 
•	Fifteen percent of these queries involve 
locations on campus (or, in the case of 
Farmington Hills, off campus). Perhaps 
MSU should consider how easy it is to get 
directions and maps to its various locations? 
•	Twenty-five percent of the queries appear 
to be typos; thank goodness MSU has 
spellchecking in place! 
•	Some queries seem really to be 
combinations of a query and an attribute, 

89
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
like date (for example, 2007 basketball 
schedule). Considering there are many 
combinations of queries and attributes 
(other examples are location, name, and 
unique identifiers like ISBNs), MSU might 
consider adding sorting to its search results 
or exploring moving to a faceted search 
engine. 
•	Finally, there are queries that, other than 
piquing our general curiousity (such as 
powerlifting?), likely don’t merit much more 
thinking. 
Again, if you have the time and resources, 
and have maximized the possibilities of short 
head analysis, then analyzing long tail queries 
is worth the effort. The types of queries are 
simply different than short head—as evidenced 
by the query/attribute combinations we’ve 
noticed, as well as their overall length. (Our 20 
long tail terms average 2.45 terms, versus 1.42 
for the 50 short head terms we analyzed earlier 
in this chapter.) You’ll be able to use the same 
pattern analysis techniques, but you’ll come 
away with some different insights. 

90
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Anti-Pattern Analysis: 
Surprises and Outliers
While most of the patterns you find will be 
at least somewhat predictable, others will be 
downright head-scratchingly bizarre. For 
example, years ago some colleagues and I 
were surprised by a pattern we encountered 
when analyzing a software company’s queries. 
Many people were searching for URLs. Even 
more strange, the URLs were for completely 
different sites. Why on earth would so many 
people search for a URL, rather than just enter 
it in their browser’s address field? 
There were many possible theories, the 
primary of which was that browsers were still 
rather new, and users easily confused the two 
main text entry fields they encountered—the 
browser’s address field and the site’s search 
box. But really, the reason didn’t matter that 
much, because the fix was straightforward: 
rather than punishing searchers with a “0 
search results” page, we simply configured 
the search engine to redirect them to the site 
they wanted to visit. So, we took a surprising 

91
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
pattern and—rather than toil at making the 
inscrutable, well, scrutable—we just fixed the 
problem and improved the users’ experience.
You may also encounter queries that just seem to 
be complete outliers that don’t seem to fit within 
any sort of pattern whatsoever. For example, a 
quick glance at the short head of many academic 
sites, like Michigan State University’s, will often 
reveal an odd course ID number (such as CS101) 
among the queries for football tickets, summer 
jobs, library hours, and so on. 
When you do find a short head query that 
seems to be an outlier, study it intensely. It 
may not be an outlier, but simply the harbinger 
of yet another pattern. Or it may be truly 
something odd and worthy of investigation. 
You can find out by digging deeper into the 
middle torso or do a random sample from the 
long tail to see if there are many more similar 
queries showing up. 

92
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk
Avi Rappoport, Search Tools Consulting— 
http://searchtools.com/
Search logs contain a lot of weird query lines, and some 
of them can have a significant effect on how you analyze 
queries. For example, there’s not much sense in knowing 
that an empty search is your most frequent query, or that 
computers in China are sending a great many queries, 
when those are hack attacks on the site. Having looked at 
hundreds of thousands of lines of search log entries, here 
are the most frequent and useless, which I call “Search 
Log Junk” (inspired by Edward Tufte’s “chart junk”). 
Removing these means that site search analytics work on 
the signal instead of wasting time on the noise. 
Empty queries: Searches without words show up all 
the time in search logs. It’s not clear where this comes 
from: do people click the Search button without typing 
anything? Does the cursor get into the search field and 
people click on the Return button? It’s still a mystery, but 
it is very frequent. In any case, including empty queries 
in search metrics can skew response time (because there’s 
no actual search done) and the numbers for no-matches 
queries (because an empty search usually retrieves no 
results). 
In this example, there’s an IP address, a date and time, 
and an HTTP GET search request. Usually after the 
query parameter (q in this case), there should be the 
words to be searched. Here, there’s nothing: an empty 
search. 

93
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
xxx.xsx.98.144 - - [18/Oct/2010:00:03:25 -0400]  
“GET /search?q=&la=fi HTTP/1.1” 200 720 - - 0 
Repeat queries: Multiple identical queries to the 
search engine from the same IP or user ID are amazingly 
frequent. They may be words (sex), random characters 
(..), or seemingly random queries from mysterious places 
(author:akr+date:2000/01/01). If the query parameters 
are slightly different, it usually means that the user is 
navigating to the next page to check results. But if the 
query and parameters are identical, and it repeats more 
than 10 times in 10 minutes, it’s likely to be garbage. 
xxx.xxx.193.166 - - [18/Oct/2010:00:09:44 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=woman HTTP/1.1” 200 16205 - 
“Mozilla/5.0 Galeon/1.2.0 (X11; Linux i686; U;) 
Gecko/20020326” 426
xxx.xxx.193.166 - - [18/Oct/2010:00:09:58 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=woman HTTP/1.1” 200 16205 - 
“Mozilla/5.0 Galeon/1.2.0 (X11; Linux i686; U;) 
Gecko/20020326” 426
xxx.xxx.193.166 - - [18/Oct/2010:00:10:26 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=woman HTTP/1.1” 200 16205 - 
“Mozilla/5.0 Galeon/1.2.0 (X11; Linux i686; U;) 
Gecko/20020326” 426 
Robot crawlers: For public sites, having search and 
intelligent agents spider the search results is generally 
good. The search results on your site for emerald green 
widgets may rank well in Google and Bing results and 
drive good traffic. Even inside the enterprise, this kind 
of link can be useful. But if the search robots send 
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk (continued)

94
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
constant requests to the search engine, it can skew the 
statistics, such as the top queries. Robot crawlers identify 
themselves by using a “User Agent” string, most often 
with the word “bot” in it. This example shows a request 
by the Googlebot user agent. So a site search analytics 
program can include these entries for raw traffic metrics, 
but exclude them from query and trend reports. 
xxx.xxx.71.168 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:14:24 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=emerald-green-widgets HTTP/1.1” 200 
180 “-” “Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; Googlebot/2.1; 
+http://www.google.com/bot.html)” 199 
URLs often appear as query terms, mostly to popular 
sites such as google.com, yahoo.com, or facebook.com, or 
as in the example below, myspace.com. If the site is about 
these topics, that’s fine, but for most sites and especially 
online stores, they’re just noise. 
xxx.xxx.64.171 - - [11/Oct/2010:11:29:14 -0700]  
“GET /search?q=myspace.com HTTP/1.0” 200 1024 
“http://example.com/index.html” “Mozilla/4.0  
(compatible; MSIE 6.0;MSIE 7.0; MSIE 8.0;  
Windows 5.1)” 44 
Server hacks: Search engines can be attacked by 
common hacking approaches, such as searches for 
phpmyadmin and inurl, or calls to the search engine with 
PUT instead of the customary search request, GET. Very 
long queries may be attempting buffer overflow and other 
attacks. And they may succeed, so it’s important to work 
with your security team or webhosting provider to test 
your search interface against these kinds of attacks. 
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk (continued)

95
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
xxx.xxx.0.195 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:22:54 -0400]  
“GET /search?q=inurl%3Astart.cgi&la=en HTTP/1.1”  
200 1024 - “Mozilla/2.0” 0 
Search field spam: There are automated advertising 
services that insert fake comments with URLs into form 
fields, guestbooks, blogs, and wikis to get link-backs for 
better results ranking. This explains why logs contain 
random queries with sentences, HTML formatting, 
and URLs in them. They are complete noise and 
inappropriately raise the number of no-matches searches. 
It’s fairly easy to identify these queries with simple regular 
expressions looking for href and http, then remove them 
from the log before processing. 
xxx.xxx.66.180 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:22:54 -0400]  
“GET /search?q=Beautiful+<a+href=http://hotel= 
ital-oc-example.com>+hotel+italy+ocean+rome</
a>&la=it HTTP/1.1” 200 2048 - “http://www.example.
fr” “Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 6.0;MSIE 7.0; 
MSIE 8.0; Windows 5.1)” 0 
Internal testing queries: Automated testing or 
even heavy manual testing can change the search log 
significantly, especially given how quickly the long tail 
shows up. You can remove query entries from certain 
user IDs or IP addresses if these are stable. My trick for 
informal testing is to query my own name first and use a 
specific string such as “Avi’s searchtest,” which creates an 
immediate label for my session. 
xxx.xxx.165.119 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:29:42 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=searchtest 200 9216 0
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk (continued)

96
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
xxx.xxx.165.125 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:29:42 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=testing+123&la=en 200 16241 224
xxx.xxx.165.125 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:29:49 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=size+chart&la=en 200 16002 643330
xxx.xxx.165.119 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:32:47 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=22 200 9216 0  
xxx.xxx.165.127 - - [18/Oct/2010:11:44:00 -0400] 
“GET /search?q=shipping&la=en 200 16002 643330 
Note that in the above example, all the words in “size 
chart” and “shipping” were in all 643,330 pages on the 
site. 
METRICS 
As with everything server-related, it’s good to count 
all the user interactions. The rest of the book is about 
analyzing search log entries, but tracking the junk entries 
is important, too. If the search is suddenly painfully slow, 
it may be an automated system hammering the search 
engine with repeated queries. If the search engine has 
problems or crashes, it’s good to have the raw numbers 
of searches, how many had zero matches, recent IP 
addresses, and trends on the numbers of hits per search. 
This is particularly important for low-bandwidth 
situations and hosted site-search services, where each 
bad interaction may drive up the cost of search. 
NICE CLEAN LOGS 
Investing in the step of removing the search log junk makes 
all the analysis in the rest of the book more meaningful. 
Even for sites with thousands of queries per hour, junk 
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk (continued)

97
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
entries can distort statistics such as the percent of searches 
getting zero matches. Removing the “garbage in” by 
cleaning this log file data, you can be confident that you’re 
not getting “garbage out.”
A Taxonomy of Search Log Junk (continued)

98
Chapter 3
Pattern Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	In pattern analysis, you “play” with your 
data so that common usage patterns, 
trends, and outliers can emerge. 
•	To get started, you’ll need queries and 
their corresponding frequency counts. 
A spreadsheet is often your best tool for 
analyzing the data.
•	You can learn about many different 
aspects of your searchers’ behaviors 
by analyzing your queries for patterns: 
nuances in tone, use of synonymous 
queries, the differences between single 
and multi-term queries, the impact 
of time and seasonality, the nature of 
searchers’ information needs, and the 
kinds of content that they seek.
•	You can also perform pattern analysis on 
a sample of queries that come from the 
long tail.
•	Eliminate search log “junk”—
meaningless queries—as best you can to 
improve your analysis.

99
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 4
Failure Analysis
Study Failure with Care	
100
Queries That Return Zero Results	
102
Queries That Fail to Retrieve  
Useful Results	
111
Queries That Lead to Immediate Exits  
from the Site	
119
Beyond Generic—Evaluating Failures  
That Mean the Most	
122
Summary	
127

100
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
W
hen you’re conducting site 
search analytics, it’s incredibly 
instructive to see where your site’s 
searches are going wrong. While you might 
be frightened to see how much and how often 
things go poorly for your site’s searchers, SSA 
can help you quickly figure out where things 
go wrong so you’ll know what to fix first. 
Compared to many other types of analysis, 
you’ll find that failure analysis is quite simple. 
You won’t have to roll up your sleeves and 
muck about the guts of your query data quite 
so much. Instead, you’ll generally be able to 
rely on your web analytics application’s “out-
of-the-box” reports, many of which already 
cover some aspect of failure—like that old 
standby, the “zero search results” report.
Study Failure with Care
But there are two caveats. 
First, as we’ve mentioned before, site search 
analytics, like other forms of web analytics, 
can only tell you about behaviors—they can’t 

101
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
tell you too much about a user’s intent, his 
reactions, or his feelings. We can’t know for 
certain that, for example, when a searcher 
retrieves zero results that he definitely 
failed. It’s probably a reasonable bet in most 
cases, and so we can probably safely define 
such an outcome as a failure. But there are 
important exceptions: for example, let’s say 
you’re searching a patent information site. In 
your case, when a query yields zero results, 
you’d breathe a big sigh of relief. This wasn’t 
a failure, just a happy confirmation that 
something hadn’t already been invented, but 
a generic zero search results failure report 
wouldn’t explain that. So it’s important 
to define “failure” carefully because your 
site’s context matters. We’re making lots of 
assumptions here simply to demonstrate what 
is possible with site search analytics.
Second, generic reports describe generic 
failures. These reports are certainly useful, but 
treat them as starting points to help you define 
and analyze failures on your own terms, with 
careful thought about what it means for your 

102
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
searchers to fail when trying to do the things 
that your site exists to do. We’ll cover a great 
example of a customized type of failure analysis 
that Netflix uses at the end of this chapter. But 
first, let’s cover some generic types of failure 
with a critical eye, many of which you’ll find 
included with common analytics applications.
Queries That Return 
Zero Results
The most common type of search-related 
failure is when queries retrieve zero results. 
Zero search results reports (also called 
null results reports) show the short head of 
queries—the most common ones—that 
retrieve nothing. In the following example 
from Google Analytics,1 five queries led to null 
results in the last report period, as shown in 
Figure 4.1.
1	 Google Analytics doesn’t provide null results reports by default; you’ll first need to teach it 
to recognize your particular site’s null result pages. Justin Cutroni explains exactly how to 
do so here (and this is where we borrowed Figures 6.1 and 6.2 from): http://cutroni.com/
blog/2009/09/08/tracking-ero-result-searches-in-google-analytics/

103
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 4.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405937/
There were five no_results queries, according to this Google Analytics 
report.
Clicking through reveals the five keyword 
queries that failed to retrieve results in 
Figure 4.2.
FIGURE 4.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405911/
Sorry, no pasta tofu, apples, beans, or oranges available here!

104
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Reducing Thrashing in Zero Search Results Pages
Greg Nudelman, Principal, DesignCaffeine, Inc.— 
www.DesignCaffeine.com
Author, Design Patterns for Ecommerce Search: Design 
Secrets and Successful Strategies for Happy Customers 
(John Wiley, 2011).
Thrashing is a behavioral anti-pattern that occurs when 
people keep changing their query without removing the 
problem condition that caused the zero search results to 
be returned in the first place. Thrashing really frustrates 
people, and often it results in your potential customers 
leaving the site without finding what they wanted, 
creating a very strong negative experience. Analysis of 
sessions that included zero search results will help you 
understand and quantify thrashing and design effective 
strategies to reduce its effects on your site.
To identify cases of thrashing, examine your search data 
to see what your customers do after they receive zero 
search results. Pay special attention to sessions where 
zero search results pages occurred multiple times in a row 
and then resulted in a customer exiting the site. Some 
page designs, such as that of Morningstar.com shown in 
Figure 4.3, unintentionally invite thrashing:
•	 There is no explicit message that states “No results 
found.” Instead, the tiny font in the black bar 
states 1-0 of 0, which does not make much sense. 
Customers that do not know that they have received 
zero results will likely try the same query several 
times, which will show up in your analysis.

105
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 4.3  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405869/
Morningstar.com zero results page design invites thrashing.
•	 Instead of focusing on providing a way out, the page 
presents several completely useless and confusing 
links: Analyst Reports & Data, Morningstar Articles, 
and Tools. At first glance, it seems like clicking these 
Reducing Thrashing in Zero Search Results Pages (continued)

106
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
links would let customers browse content relevant 
to their query. Unfortunately, the links are actually 
filtering controls that serve only to further constrain 
a search that already has no results. This leads to 
thrashing, now requiring the customers to click the 
Back button. Look for this unnecessary filtering in 
your analysis.
•	 There is very little content on the page that helps 
customers reach their goal. Most of the links are 
third-party ads, which have little to do with financial 
information about Small and Mid Cap Value Funds. 
Because there is nothing on the page to help them, 
customers are forced to re-word their query instead. 
Look for manual query edits in the analysis. This is a 
prime opportunity to create a better design.
What can you do once your analysis revealed issues or 
opportunities for improvement?
•	 Use spelling correction and substitute a searcher’s 
original keywords with different keywords from a 
controlled vocabulary.
•	 Remove some of a customer’s original keywords from 
the query or make partial matches.
•	 Match only categories or facets, without the 
keywords.
•	 Display top searches, featured results, or most 
popular results.
Reducing Thrashing in Zero Search Results Pages (continued)

107
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I usually counsel minimizing third-party resources and 
ads on zero search results pages. However, if your site 
does not carry the product your customers are looking 
for, third-party ads may be an effective strategy of 
last resort and provide a positive experience to your 
customers.
Successful strategies for handling cases when there are 
no search results are not limited to the four I’ve just 
mentioned. For example, Google’s brilliant auto-suggest 
feature is an excellent example of a successful marriage 
of two strategies: making partial keyword matches and 
using a controlled vocabulary for keyword substitution. By 
matching the beginning of a string, the customer begins 
to type with popular search keywords. Google fosters 
a successful search, forestalling the no-search-results 
condition before it ever occurs.
On the zero search results pages, don’t stick with just one 
specific type of search assistance. Instead, get creative—
combine design features and content in a way that best 
meets the goals of your partner in conversation on the 
other side of the human-computer interface.
Reducing Thrashing in Zero Search Results Pages (continued)

108
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
You’re Not Offering What People Want 
Does this data suggest that you offer more 
products or services? If searchers are already 
coming to your site with the perception, 
however unfounded, that you may already 
offer the item they’re searching for, maybe 
you should. Of course, just because someone 
searches for a Uranium P32 Space Modulator 
doesn’t necessarily mean you should offer 
it, especially if your business and site offers 
hypnotherapy services. 
The key is to focus on queries that are 
potentially relevant to your business and 
monitor them for both volume and a rate of 
growth that might make them worthwhile to 
bring to the attention of your colleagues in 
marketing and R&D. Your data-driven trend 
spotting might be doing them a huge favor 
(and saving them a lot of money in comparison 
to conventional product and market analysis).

109
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The Content’s There but 
Isn’t Being Found 
This happens more often than you’d think 
or like. Fortunately, the problem is that your 
“missing content” is most likely just not being 
indexed properly by your search engine. This 
is an easy fix: point the search engine in the 
right direction to find the content and that 
should take care of the issue. 
The “missing content” problem happens most 
often in two cases: (1) stores of non-HTML 
documents (PDFs, MS Word documents, 
and so on) that your search engine simply 
might not know to index; and, surprisingly 
(2) ecommerce sites, where search engines are 
geared toward indexing product data rather 
than HTML content. In both cases, there are 
fairly straightforward technical fixes that can 
be accomplished through reconfiguring your 
search engine.

110
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
There’s a Disconnect Between Your 
Site’s Content and the People Using It 
The language your searchers use doesn’t match 
the language in your content, and sadly, your 
search engine can’t play matchmaker. This is a 
warning sign to slow down, regroup, and align 
your content. Spend some time reconsidering 
your titling guidelines you ask your content 
authors and editors to follow. Rethink the 
metadata you ask them to use to describe 
the content. Show them the kinds of terms 
searchers use, how those terms differ from 
the language used in the prose, and how that 
disconnect leads to their content not getting 
found.
Now that you know which queries aren’t 
retrieving results, you’re ready for the analysis 
that will lead, hopefully, to some useful 
hypotheses. Here are a few likely explanations 
to follow up.

111
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Queries That Fail to 
Retrieve Useful Results
When can you tell that a search has failed? 
(Aside, of course, from the case we’ve just 
described, where no results were retrieved.) 
The answer, of course, depends on a variety of 
factors that are difficult to predict. The search 
algorithm may not do a good job of parsing the 
searcher’s query. The query may have retrieved 
good results, but the results aren’t presented in 
a usable way. The results might be usable, but 
your site’s searchers are an impatient gang who 
are unwilling to scroll or click through long 
lists of search results. 
The first two examples are, respectively, 
examples of challenges that are technical and 
design-related. They’re areas that are within 
your control, and as such, you can address and 
correct them. 
But the searchers? Not so much. And in most 
cases, your site’s searchers are as impatient, 
unforgiving, and lazy as they come. They’ll 
expect instant gratification at the top of the first 

112
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
page of search results. That’s why we suggest 
making it your goal to ensure that the first page 
of results contains as many relevant results as 
your content will bear. Anything less should be 
considered a failure.
Are the Top Results Relevant? 
You can try the same precision-based approach 
as The Vanguard Group used in Chapter 1, 
“How Site Search Analysis Can Save Your 
Butt.” To refresh your memory, John Ferrara 
and his colleagues analyzed just the top five 
results for their common queries. They assumed 
that most searchers’ level of attention would 
degrade after the first five results. 
Then they rated each result’s relevance using 
one of these four ratings:
•	Relevant (r): Based on the information the 
searcher provided, the result’s ranking is 
completely relevant.
•	Near (n): The result is not a perfect match, 
but it’s clearly reasonable for it to be ranked 
highly.

113
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Misplaced (m): It’s reasonable for the 
search engine to have retrieved the result, 
but it shouldn’t be ranked highly.
•	Irrelevant (i): The result has no apparent 
relationship to the query.
John and his colleagues tallied their evaluations 
in the spreadsheet shown in Figure 4.4. Each 
row is a common query, and the columns 
correspond to the top five results for each 
query.
FIGURE 4.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405825/
Each common query’s top five results were rated as “r” (for relevant), 
“n” (for nearly relevant), “m” (for misplaced), and “i” (for irrelevant).

114
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
John then used the relevance ratings as the 
basis of scoring the search results. He did 
this in three separate ways: strict, loose, and 
permissive: 
•	Strict: Only results ranked as relevant were 
acceptable (r).
•	Loose: Both relevant and near results were 
counted (r+n).
•	Permissive: Relevant, near, and misplaced 
results were counted (r+n+m).
So, the query “reserve room,” by strict 
definition, scored a 40%—two of the five 
results were rated an “r.” By loose definition, it 
scored an 80%. (Four of the five results were 
rated “r” or “n.”) And by permissive definition, 
it scored a 100%. (None of the results were 
rated an “i”) You can see how all the results 
fared in Figure 4.5.

115
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 4.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405795/
The precision of each query’s results was then scored in three different 
ways (strict, loose, and permissive).
In the Vanguard example, three different 
metrics were used to evaluate the top five 
search results for common queries. We can 
quickly see that certain individual queries 
are failing—no matter which of the three 
metrics we use—like large transaction. That’s 
why using multiple metrics as part of a single 
analysis is helpful; you know a query has failed 
when it fails not one, not two, but all three of 
these tests.
You can now consider applying this same 
approach to failure analysis collectively to your 
queries. For example, you might decide to 

116
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
make sure that the top 15 most frequent queries 
collectively receive a passing grade. You then 
set thresholds for failure, deciding that those 
15 queries should collectively average 55% on 
strict terms, 75% on loose terms, and 95% on 
permissive terms. Now that your thresholds 
are in place, you can track performance over 
time, as Vanguard did, and eventually bring 
performance above “failure” levels.
Is the “Best Match” Near the 
Top of the Search Results? 
Here’s another way to make sure your top 
results aren’t failing. You’ll remember, from 
Chapter 1, that Vanguard also measured for top 
queries’ relevancy by making sure the “best” 
match for a query was retrieved at or close to 
the top of the first search results page. These 
relevancy metrics work only with queries that 
actually have a “best match” result—and by no 
means does every query have one. But when 
they do, you can determine how often a best 
match shows up in, say, the top five search 
results for a particular query. And if it doesn’t? 
Consider it a failure.

117
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
When Vanguard tested those among its 
common queries known to have “best 
matches,” it found a lot of successes and some 
notable failures. For example, the best match 
for the query job descriptions was in the lowly 
position of #79; ideally, it should have been at 
#1 (see Figure 4.6).
FIGURE 4.6 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981362/
“Best matches” for Vanguard’s frequent queries—many don’t occur in 
the top five search results positions.
As with the precision metrics, none is ideal 
on its own, but collectively they paint a more 
complete picture of performance. And as with 
precision, you can use these metrics to evaluate 

118
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
the collective performance of your short head 
queries.
Are Results Being Clicked 
at a Healthy Rate? 
If you have clickstream data, you can use it 
in combination with your site search data 
to measure a very similar metric: selection 
rate. Selection rate is simply defined as the 
percentage of clicks that a piece of content gets 
for a specific query. 
For example, let’s say that result #23 of a 
query’s 675 results happens to be the most 
clicked result with a whopping selection rate 
of 19%. That means searchers are digging 
pretty deep into this query’s search results to 
find something that (we think) they must really 
like—after all, they click through to it quite 
frequently. In effect, they’re telling you that the 
query’s best match is #23. You can now assume 
it is indeed the “best match”—and look into 
ways to move it up toward result #1—in just 
the same way that Vanguard did.

119
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Queries That Lead to 
Immediate Exits from the Site
Poor search results can drive searchers crazy 
and, in the process, drive them away from 
your site. Search exits happen when searchers 
leave after retrieving results for a query without 
clicking on any results. Let’s have a look 
at AIGA’s search exits percentages within 
its short head queries in Google Analytics: 
note that 19.82% of the queries, on average, 
were immediately exited. In Figure 4.7, the 
table’s far right column shows the exit rate 
for each unique query’s individual search exit 
percentage
FIGURE 4.7 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405743/
Most frequent AIGA.org queries and their percentages of search exits.

120
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
You’ll notice that the biggest offender was also 
the most common query during this period: 
case study had a much higher search exit 
percentage (57.64%) than average. The second 
most common query, salary, had a low search 
exit percentage of 5%. Let’s compare the 
results for each; here are the top search results 
for case study, as shown in Figure 4.8.
FIGURE 4.8 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405719/
Search results for case study at AIGA.org.
Notice that these results cover a wide range 
of case studies. Some, like Making the Case 
Competition, aren’t so much about case studies 

121
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
as about making the case for design in general. 
Perhaps the wide variety of results throws 
off searchers, who may have been expecting 
a broader treatment of case study-related 
content. (Along those lines, AIGA might be 
able to fix the problem simply by creating some 
sort of overview page for its case studies and 
making sure it came up in position #1 for the 
queries case study and case studies.)
By contrast, here are the results for the search 
salary in Figure 4.9.
FIGURE 4.9 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981256/
Search results for salary at AIGA.org.

122
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
These results deal almost entirely with annual 
AIGA salary surveys, and perhaps search exits 
are lower here because searchers are generally 
more interested in finding a single year’s survey 
and can safely and easily ignore the rest.
As you can see from these examples, it’s most 
useful to analyze percentages of search exits for 
common queries that range far from the overall 
averages. Glance through them on a regular 
basis, and you’ll find it hard not to notice 
the queries with high percentages of search 
exits—the queries that really failed your site’s 
searchers.
Beyond Generic—Evaluating 
Failures That Mean the Most
The types of failures we’ve examined in this 
chapter are fairly generic and, as noted, are 
often handled by existing reports in common 
analytics applications. “Generic failures” are 
useful, but you might see them as springboards 
toward more specialized failure analyses that 
make sense, given your organization’s unique 

123
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
business goals. In other words, investigate 
“meaningful failure” as much as you can. 
The following example of how to measure 
and evaluate meaningful failure comes from 
Netflix, the movie and TV show subscription 
service (see Figure 4.10). We should note that 
it includes both query data and clickstream 
data, integrating them quite gracefully. Here’s 
what the chart below includes:
•	Query Count: The number of times a 
query was entered within a specific period 
of time. Almost always, a query is the title of 
a movie or TV show. 
•	MDP Views: The number of times a search 
result was clicked through.
•	MDP Views per Query: The rate at 
which each query’s results were clicked 
through.
•	Queue Adds: The number of times a 
clicked-through result was added to the 
subscribers’ queues of shows to rent.

124
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Queue Adds per Query: The percentage 
at which a clicked-through show was added 
to the queue.
•	Query: The term that was actually 
searched.
FIGURE 4.10 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405557/
Netflix data showing frequent queries, their click-through rates, and 
their rates of being added to subscribers’ queues.
To dig deeper into the analysis, consider Query 
Count as a popularity measure. For example, 
Thank You for Smoking is the third most 
popular movie, having been searched for 8,756 
times during this time period. 
Ditto MDP Views per Query: subscribers click 
through at high rates to learn more. In the 
case of Thank You for Smoking, they clicked 
through at a relatively high rate: 24.14%. 

125
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
And the same is true of Queue Adds per Query: 
the movie was added to subscribers’ queues at 
the relatively high rate of 10.38%.
To boil this down, Thank You for Smoking is a 
great success from Netflix’s perspective: it was 
searched for at a high rate, clicked through at a 
high rate, and added to queues at a high rate. 
But Netflix is much more concerned about 
failures. For example, Lost was the 10th most 
frequently searched query (a robust 3,002 
times). It was frequently clicked through (at 
an impressive 55.66% rate), but only added 
to queues 4.03% of the time. It’s pretty safe 
to say that this query is a failure, and it would 
be important for Netflix to follow up on it and 
learn what was going wrong. (Hypotheses? 
TV shows have multiple results, as opposed 
to movies, that might require a lot of scrolling 
and simply be confusing to searchers who are 
looking for a specific episode. Or the word 
“lost” comes up in a lot of other titles of shows 
and movies. Whatever the case, Netflix would 
now have some good ideas about what needed 
to be fixed.)

126
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
This is a great method for looking for 
important failures if you’re in the movie 
subscription business, like Netflix. It’s 
highly unlikely that it would work for your 
organization. But given the business you’re in: 
what kinds of failures are important for you to 
investigate? If you can work that through, your 
query data—when combined with other types 
of data—will help you do just that.

127
Chapter 4
Failure Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Failure analysis helps you diagnose 
problems and determine what to fix or 
improve for your site’s searchers.
•	Queries that lead to zero results usually 
suggest that
•	You aren’t offering the content that 
your searchers want.
•	You offer it, but the search engine isn’t 
finding it.
•	A difference exists between how you 
and your searchers describe the same 
content. 
•	Queries that fail to retrieve useful results 
or lead to immediate exits from your site 
are other decent indicators of failure.
•	Go beyond out-of-the-box reports and 
their generic definitions of failure, and 
try to determine custom definitions that 
correspond to the needs of your own 
site’s users—and for your organization.

128
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 5
Session Analysis
Learning from Who Searched What  
and When	
130
Why Analyze Sessions?	
134
What’s a Session, Anyway?	
136
Analyzing a Short Session from TFANet	
138
Analyzing a Long Session from  
WW Norton	
142
Which Sessions Should You Analyze?	
147
How Granular Are Your Terms?	
149
Going Beyond Sessions: Looking at  
Individual Searchers 	
152
Summary	
156

129
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I
n site search analytics, we generally 
analyze individual search queries. But 
how about exploring what happens during 
search sessions—where a searcher executes 
multiple queries as he tries to address a single 
information need?
Most search engines and analytics applications 
don’t tell you much about who—which specific 
individual, rather than which audience—is 
the source of a query. There may be technical 
reasons for this, or a laudable desire to protect 
users’ privacy. But, occasionally, you will, in 
fact, know who searches what—most typically, 
on your intranet or in some other similarly 
closed environment. When you have this 
opportunity, make the most of it by studying 
searchers’ sessions: what goes on starting from 
an initial query and finishing with a completed 
search experience. Besides being one more 
analytical tool in your toolkit, it will tell you 
more about searchers’ information needs; 
specifically, how those needs evolve as the 
searcher interacts with search results and actual 
content.

130
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Learning from Who 
Searched What and When
The following snippet of session data comes 
from TFANet, an extranet managed by Teach 
For America, an education non-profit that 
recruits college graduates to serve two-year 
assignments teaching in the country’s poorest 
urban and rural schools. TFANet provides 
resources to improve teaching performance and 
provide career guidance to its members during 
and after their life in the TFA Corps. 
In Figure 5.1, “Person ID” shows who 
searched, “SEARCH FOR” column shows 
what they searched for, and “DATE,” which is 
how the data is sorted, shows when.
“TFAPERSONTYPE”—the kind of 
TFA person doing the searching1—and 
“TFACURRENTCMREGIONNAME”—
where they are located—will be of greatest 
interest to the analysts who actually work at 
TFA—and to those doing audience analysis 
(which I’ll cover in Chapter 7, “Goal-Based 
Analysis”). 
1	 “CM” means Corps Members—TFA teachers. “ALUM” means alumni of the TFA Corps. All 
other types are TFA staff.

131
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 5.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406325/
This query data sample, from a Teach For America intranet, includes 
searchers’ ID numbers and time/date stamping; together, these enable 
session parsing. 
Here we’re focused on using the who and when 
information to identify sessions. We can then 
look at sessions that match individual searchers. 
(Please also note that the original data set 
included searchers’ names, but I’ve hidden that 
to protect their privacy. If you’re in a similar 
position, you should always do the same.)
The Excel pixies pay us a visit, helping us get 
the data into shape for sussing out sessions. 
Their work is pretty straightforward: sort 
first by Person ID and then by TIME. Then 
it’s our turn. After a quick visual scan, we 

132
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
find sessions beginning to emerge. Here’s an 
example in Figure 5.2 of a specific session: 
one searcher from the Mississippi Delta 
regions entering queries over a two-minute 
period on May 21, 2010.
FIGURE 5.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406295/
A session. On May 21, 2010, over the course of a few minutes, searcher 
#1075914 (a TFA alum from the Mississippi Delta region) searched for 
law, detroit, and sail. Hmmm...
What exactly was the searcher, a TFA alum, 
thinking here? In the space of no more than 
two minutes, that person searched twice for 
law, then once each for detroit (even though 
she is based in the Mississippi Delta region), 
and, um, sail. Strange? Yes, and this is where 
subject matter expertise is required. I asked 
Laura Zingg, a business analyst at Teach For 
America, if she could interpret what was going 
on during this session—if it was, indeed, 
a single search session—or two or three 
squeezed rapid-fire into a tight time window.

133
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Laura also found it perplexing but was 
fascinated by this close-up view of what was 
going on inside the TFANet alum’s head. Her 
educated guess: the searcher was probably 
looking for other alumni who were practicing 
“law” in “Detroit,” maybe in anticipation of a 
move to the Detroit area. 
Laura wondered why the searcher didn’t 
simply put detroit and law together in a single 
query. Is this a pattern? That’s something 
that further data analysis could answer. Is 
it unclear that the interface is able to handle 
multiple-term queries? Or maybe the entry 
box isn’t wide enough? If so, perhaps it could 
be addressed through educating searchers or 
incorporating query-building guidance directly 
into the search interface or making the box 
wider. Or perhaps searchers don’t understand 
how the search system processes queries at 
all. Good questions—and possible answers—
begin to emerge.
As far as sail goes, Laura confessed that she 
had to really stretch to even come up with any 
sort of hypothesis at all. Perhaps the searcher 

134
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
might have hoped to find another alum in 
Detroit who shared a love for sailing. Or any 
TFA alum who liked to sail. 
Here are some other possibilities: the searcher 
misspelled a word, like fail, which the engine 
assumed was sail. (In which case, we’ll give 
it an “F” for “fail.”) Or perhaps that person 
just was curious to see if anything at all came 
up when she typed in her favorite activity. 
Whatever it was, her search for the Holy Sail 
may not have concluded well, but when we 
analyze the data, it certainly gets us thinking 
in a constructive way. (As it did for Laura. 
Thanks, Laura!)
Why Analyze Sessions?
As you can see, session analysis provides 
yet one more way to learn from your query 
data, and naturally, it’s always useful to have 
one more option in your toolkit. It can show 
you how searchers refine their queries, and 
by extension, how their information needs 
change over a short period of time (a session), 
rather than what’s happening with individual, 

135
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
disconnected queries. As with the other types 
of analysis I’ll cover here, it’s easy to jump in—
you play with the data and look for interesting 
patterns and surprises. 
Indeed, that’s the special sauce of session 
analysis: you focus on the searcher’s need 
rather than the query. You can learn how the 
searcher understands his own need, and how 
that understanding changes as he interacts 
with your site’s search results and content. 
By contextualizing individual queries, 
session analysis affords you a much closer 
connection to what the searcher experiences 
when interacting with your search system. For 
example, you can gain new perspective on why 
certain queries fail, or why it is that those weird 
query types keep showing up in your logs. You 
can get a sense of how important queries—say 
common ones, or specific ones, like product 
searches—perform in a broader context. And 
you can learn how narrow queries get before 
they succeed in retrieving content—or before 
the searcher gives up altogether.

136
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Studying information needs is really a better 
way to understand how people really search 
when compared with analyzing individual 
queries, if you can pull it off. There are some 
limitations, of course; chief among them is 
being able to define what a session actually is.
What’s a Session, Anyway?
A session is a searcher’s time-constrained effort 
to satisfy an information need. Put differently, 
it’s a search for a single type of information 
within a specific period of time. Put yet one 
more way, a session is a weasel. A session is 
hard to pin down because its definition hinges 
on two tricky, weaselly variables: a need and a 
time period. 
An information need can and often will change 
during a session. Let’s say you started out 
searching your employer’s intranet for help 
with understanding your pension plan. You 
ended up with the name of someone who 
might be an expert in your company’s human 
resource policies. What happened between 
those queries might be obvious to you, but 

137
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
how you got from Point A (pension plan) to 
Point B (Susan Landsman) won’t likely be at all 
obvious to someone analyzing the query data. 
In fact, it’s very likely the session isn’t done. 
For a variety of reasons—perhaps Susan 
Landsman isn’t the expert you’d hoped for, or 
she gives you some better terms to search—
your journey may have only just begun. So you 
may continue searching tomorrow. Or next 
week, after you’re back from vacation. Is this 
morning’s search for pension plan and the same 
query repeated next week the same session?
As is the case in all things weasel, compromises 
must be made. For purposes of your analysis, 
you might define a session’s time constraints 
by requiring consecutive queries to be made no 
more than one hour apart. Or 10 minutes apart. 
It will really depend on your understanding 
of the context in which users are interacting 
with your site. Queries made from a desktop 
computer might be made in more rapid 
succession than ones made from a tablet on the 
factory floor.

138
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
And you might also say that a session’s queries 
have to appear related. This is much harder to 
determine. You may not, for example, have any 
idea that Susan Landsman knows anything 
about pension policies.
Analyzing a Short 
Session from TFANet
I scanned the Teach For America data for 
instances of common queries that occurred in 
sessions, such as Delta ICEG (an “Investment, 
Community, and Execution Group,” which 
helps with professional development in 
particular regions, in this case in the Delta 
region). It didn’t take long to spot a two-query 
session that repeated itself multiple times. 
Here, searchers #2123288 and #1963366, both 
Corps members (CM), followed up their initial 
queries with a search for delta learning team, 
as shown in Figures 5.3–5.4.
FIGURE 5.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406273/
Searcher #2123288 first searched Delta ICEG, then delta 
learning team...

139
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 5.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981860/
...as did searcher #1963366.
While scanning the data, I noticed a similar 
case: searcher #2123492—yet another Corps 
member—initially searched for ICEG rather 
than Delta ICEG (see Figure 5.5).
FIGURE 5.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981832/
Searcher #2123492 exhibited almost exactly the same query 
progression as did searchers #2123288 and #1963366.
So what is going on with all these searches for 
Teach For America’s Delta ICEG? And why 
do searchers keep following it up with Delta 
learning team?
When I showed her these sessions, Laura 
Zingg immediately could tell that searches for 
Delta ICEG were retrieving unusually awful 
results (see Figure 5.6).

140
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 5.6 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981810/
The best result for the search Delta ICEG is nowhere to be seen...
In fact, the best result doesn’t show up until 
position #9 (of the 10 results shown) in Figure 
5.7. 
FIGURE 5.7 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406167/
...until position #9 of the 10 search results.

141
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Why is that? After Laura investigated 
further, she found a problem with how 
weighting had been configured in the search 
engine’s relevance ranking algorithm. TFA 
communities (like ICEG) rise to the top 
of the results based on how recently their 
content has been refreshed. It’s apparently 
been awhile since the Delta ICEG content 
was updated, so searchers, who were 
expecting it to be higher, were likely to have 
been unpleasantly surprised.
So why did they search for Delta learning team 
next? Laura guesses that searchers considered 
it an alternative to Delta ICEG. Only problem 
is that, though they’re similar, they’re not the 
same thing. And so searchers still wouldn’t find 
what they were looking for. 
The lesson here? Simple: a little data—just 
a two-query session—can go a long way. 
Analyzing just a small snippet of session data 
led to reevaluating how the search engine’s 
weighting was configured. TFANet staff can 
now start making a case to invest resources into 

142
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
a relatively small task, one that could make a 
great impact on the site’s search experience. 
Analyzing a Long Session 
from WW Norton
Book publisher WW Norton’s site supported 
an interesting implementation of search—users 
were required to classify their queries as either 
titles, authors, or ISBNs from the initial query 
entry interface, as shown in Figure 5.8.
FIGURE 5.8 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981744/
WW Norton’s old book search UI classified queries as title searches by 
default. You could change it to author or ISBN. Complicated, and that’s 
not even getting into the keyword search UI.

143
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I would never bless an interface that would 
make it so difficult to enter an initial query. 
(It should be noted that WW Norton has 
dramatically improved its search system since 
I looked over its data.) However, knowing 
query types in advance did make the analysis 
especially interesting. Not only could I see 
what people searched, but also the important 
attributes of what they were searching for and 
how they changed within a session.
After poring through the data for a couple 
hours, I showed some of the more interesting 
sessions I’d discovered to the Web team at 
WW Norton (see Figure 5.9). This one really 
caught their attention; not surprisingly, it was 
the hardest for us non-subject matter experts to 
figure out.
FIGURE 5.9 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981708/
One user’s search session at the WW Norton site. Queries (in red) are 
classified in the second column; I listed my questions in the right column.

144
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Together, we pieced what had happened 
this way:
The searcher started out by searching for 
norton anthology of amer lit, a shortened 
version of a popular Norton book’s title. He 
quickly followed that up with an ISBN search 
and retrieved a specific volume from a specific 
edition. A little while later, the user searched 
with the full title. Is it the same session? We 
can’t be certain. Why did the user search again, 
and why the full title this time? 
The user then searched for a specific edition’s 
ISBN—only this time, as a title. This was 
almost certainly an error, and the Norton 
search engine was quite unforgiving in such 
situations, returning poor results and leading 
the searcher to flail about for the next few 
minutes. The user next searched the title as an 
ISBN and then tried some ISBN fragments. 
Then the user tried an author search—twice—
for baymina, which is likely a misremembered 
juxtaposition of the editor’s name (Nina 
Baym). Finally, the poor searcher tried a very 

145
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
simple query for norton anthology, which 
was almost too general to be of value when 
searching the Norton catalog.
Ooof. Lots happening here, almost too much, 
and not all of it is by any means good. What 
did we learn?
•	This search system is likely broken. 
Given that searchers tried to find the same 
book—on a publisher’s site, nonetheless—
and used multiple attributes (title, ISBN, 
and author), it’s a fair hypothesis that the 
basic search ain’t working. Other sessions 
and testing the queries’ performance seemed 
to bear this out. 
•	It’s dangerous to require users to classify 
their own queries. The default you choose 
(for example, title) may not be suitable, and 
either way, people will miss it again and 
again. In at least two cases in this single 
session, it seems pretty clear that query 
classification introduced a major error.2 
2	 In fact, I later looked at all title searches and found that roughly one-third were ISBNs or 
author names.

146
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Users repeat exactly the same queries. 
Do they really expect something different 
to come up? Are they insane? Probably not. 
Many engines treat the loading of each new 
page of search results as the execution of a 
query. It’s almost certain that your session 
data will show duplicated results, so you 
should know why: your search engine is the 
likely culprit. 
•	Search results design can almost always 
be improved. Here, the searcher knew what 
he was looking for. Even then, the engine’s 
search results design didn’t make it easy to 
understand that there were different volumes 
and editions to contend with. It didn’t make 
it clear who the editor was. The searcher 
had a fuzzy memory of Nina Baym’s name 
but should have found it spelled out exactly 
within the search results.
If you’re thinking that this is quite a bit to 
infer from a single session, you’d be right. But 
that’s the point: if one session can tell you so 
much, think of what happens when you start 

147
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
reviewing multiple sessions and detecting 
broader patterns? In the next section, I’ll 
suggest some ways to select larger numbers of 
sessions to analyze.
Which Sessions Should 
You Analyze?
It’s almost certain that your data contains 
more sessions than you’d ever want to analyze 
or have the time for. You could dive in and 
grab a random sample of 10 or 20 sessions for 
an initial exploration. You’ll definitely get up 
close and personal with your query data and, 
indirectly, your searchers. You’ll not only learn 
a bit about session analysis first-hand, but 
you’ll pick up something of value about your 
site’s sessions specifically.
But it’s quite likely that you’d be overwhelmed 
by the sheer volume of data before any 
meaningful patterns truly emerged. So instead, 
I suggest culling a few critical session types 
from your data and focusing on them. Here are 
a few session types that you might consider to 
drive your sampling: 

148
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Sessions that include most frequent 
queries. You could be even more 
specific, looking at sessions that start with 
common queries separately from those 
that end with them. 
•	Sessions that include an interesting 
query type. These “interesting” queries 
might be specialized queries like names, 
product IDs, dates, or other types of 
searchers that are very important within 
the context of your site—in other words, 
the queries that are really important to 
understand. How do sessions that include 
those interesting query types go?
•	Sessions that end in failure. For example, 
do you see a pattern among sessions that 
end with no results? Are there signs at 
the start of sessions that are tip-offs for 
eventual failure?

149
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
How Granular Are Your Terms?
As you analyze sessions, look for changes 
in granularity; that is, how broad or specific 
the query’s meaning is. Do you see a pattern 
that shows searchers progressively narrowing 
queries, say from bicycle to tandem bike? Or 
vice versa? Is there a natural “resting place” 
where searchers don’t get more specific—a 
point at which they’ve moved from molecules 
to atoms? 
Knowing the “right” level of granularity can 
be useful for developing sufficiently narrow 
metadata and for encouraging those who apply 
metadata to your organization’s content to go 
equally narrow. One of the biggest barriers to 
successfully applying metadata is that many 
content owners use terms that are simply too 
broad—like tagging their document as being 
about “higher education” when it’s being 
included in a site dedicated to education. 
Here’s an opportunity to show them that if 
searchers think in far more specific terms, then 
so should they.

150
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
There’s another possible benefit to derive 
from having a good sense of term granularity, 
one that might help you save a lot of money 
in Search Engine Optimization (SEO) 
efforts. Given that most Web advertising 
opportunities—like Google AdWords—
require you to bid on keywords for position, 
you’ll be bidding with many competitors 
if you only know how to bid on broader 
keywords. If you determine narrower 
keywords, you’ll have less competition. 
Where might you find such narrower 
keywords? Your site’s searchers, of course!
For example, you can see from the following 
sample of Michigan State University’s data 
in Figure 5.10 that “referral queries”—ones 
that come from Web search engines like 
Google—are coarser than those from the 
local search engine.

151
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 5.10 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406057/
Queries to the MSU.edu environment: Web-wide versus from the local 
search engine.
If you move farther down toward the long 
tail, you’ll see even narrower queries. Today’s 
narrow local search terms may be good 
predictors of tomorrow’s valuable keywords, so 
use your more granular local queries to guide 
you on what keywords to bid on.

152
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Going Beyond Sessions: 
Looking at Individual Searchers 
If you can identify users, you will be able not 
only to identify their sessions, but also to learn 
more about them by looking at their information 
needs and search behaviors collectively. To 
demonstrate, I grabbed sets of queries from a 
few different TFANet searchers, dropped them 
into the wonderful word cloud tool wordle.net, 
and generated these clouds in Figures 5.11–5.13.
FIGURE 5.11 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981580/
One TFANet’s searcher’s queries, rendered as a tag cloud...

153
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 5.12 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981556/
...and another’s...
FIGURE 5.13 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690405961/
...and another’s.

154
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
While interesting curiosities by themselves, these 
single-user views can be incredibly powerful 
if they’re representative of major audiences. 
That would enable you to incorporate search 
data into audience-related tools like personas. 
And personas based on actual data are more 
compelling than those that aren’t.
But be careful: knowing who searched for 
what, while entirely fascinating, is nonetheless 
ethically fraught. That’s what a set of AOL 
researchers learned—the hard way—when 
they innocently made AOL search data 
publicly available for research purposes.3 
Within hours, opportunistic busybodies 
grabbed the data set and threw it into query-
able databases. Although the data did not 
include searchers’ names, it did include user 
IDs. Which made it relatively simple to 
determine who—by name—was behind each 
user ID, as some enterprising New York Times 
reporters proved.4 You obviously want to be 
3	 The hard way, as in losing their jobs; read: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AOL_search_data_
scandal
4	 Read the story “A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749” from August 9, 2006: 
http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F10612FC345B0C7A8CDDA10894
DE404482 (login may be required).

155
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
careful with any kind of data that includes user 
IDs. In this book, I’ve focused on data and 
analysis that are typically more anonymous 
precisely for that reason.
Session analysis isn’t for everyone, primarily 
because not every search engine or analytics 
application gathers this data. But if you do find 
a way to access it, I hope I’ve shown you the 
value of taking a closer look. Like all the other 
forms of analysis, session analysis—if nothing 
else—is yet another fantastic opportunity to 
dig deep into the search experience, and it will 
get you as close as you can to being inside the 
searcher’s mind as she thinks her way through 
a single information need.

156
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	If you have access to information about 
who searched what and when on your 
site, conducting session analysis will 
help you gain deeper insight into what 
searchers do and how their needs change 
over a short period of time.
•	Session analysis can provide more 
insight into what a searcher is actually 
trying to find; therefore, it’s even better at 
revealing user intent than other forms of 
analysis.
•	Session analysis helps you gain new 
perspective on why certain queries fail or 
why a weird query type keeps showing 
up in your logs.
•	The best sessions to focus on include 
•	Sessions that start and end with your 
most popular queries.
•	Sessions that end in failure (to fix them).

157
Chapter 5
Session Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Sessions with specialized queries 
that are especially important to your 
business (such as product names). 
•	It’s hard to define what exactly 
constitutes a search session. You’ll have 
to be comfortable identifying a user need 
(query terms that qualitatively appear to 
belong together) and a set time range (for 
example, up to an hour).
•	Be careful with user names and ID 
numbers; even the latter, when grouped, 
can reveal an individual’s identity and 
risk violating that person’s privacy.

158
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 6 
Audience 
Analysis
Why Segment Your Audience?	
160
How to Segment Your Audience	
165
Comparing and Contrasting Segments	
175
What’s Next?	
178
Summary	
180

159
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
M
any people who are new to 
analytics—or who have managed to 
avoid it so far—are concerned that 
they’ll be overwhelmed by the volume of data 
they’ll be dealing with. That’s a fair concern, 
especially if one is used to dealing with the far 
more manageable volume of data generated 
from, say, a 10-person user study. That’s why 
I’ve encouraged you to begin your foray in SSA 
with a laser focus on the short head. It’s a very 
manageable amount of data, and thanks to the 
Zipf Distribution, it goes a long way.
But there’s another way to make the 
overwhelming, well…whelming: break your 
data into smaller segments based on audiences. 
You can then choose the most important 
audience to analyze, or prioritize, and work 
your way through each of them as time and 
resources allow. Either way, you’ll get a more 
precise and nuanced view of user behavior, 
and you’ll likely reduce the volume of data that 
you’re analyzing.

160
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Why Segment Your Audience?
Are all dog owners alike? It might seem that 
way to those uninitiated in canine ways. After 
all, what is there to owning a dog aside from 
walking it, feeding it, cleaning up after it, and 
giving it the occasional belly rub?
Well, Timmy and Wallace might disagree, as 
shown in Figure 6.1.
FIGURE 6.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406497/ 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982062/
Not all dog owners are alike. Clearly. Just ask Lassie and Gromit.1,2
While the Timmies and Wallaces of the world 
both love their dogs, they have very different 
reasons for owning them. Timmy looks to 
Lassie for guidance, love, and protection. 
1	 http://doggieaficionado.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/lassie-and-timmy.jpg
2	 www.winnipegfilmgroup.com/cinematheque/cabin_fever_the_incredible_adventures_
of_wallace_and_gromit.aspx

161
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Wallace sees Gromit as a partner in a daily 
routine built on a foundation of hijinks, 
inventions, and cheese. If you were designing 
for the segment of Wallace-like dog owners, 
your work would be drastically different than 
what you’d deliver for the Timmy segment. 
Does your site’s audience break out into 
segments as dramatically different as little boys 
and absent-minded inventors/bachelors? If 
it does, SSA will help you better understand 
how their information needs and searching 
experiences differ. If you’re not sure, SSA will 
help you uncover what segments merit further 
consideration.
Aside from breaking down something big and 
untenable into more digestible parts, audience 
segmentation can help you in a variety of ways:
•	Assess which segments make sense—
when you don’t already know. It’s not 
always clear how to segment your users. 
For example, if your business is new, it may 
not have gotten to know its customers well 
enough to know which segments matter 

162
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
the most. Use pattern analysis (see Chapter 
5, “Session Analysis”) to get a better sense 
of the segments that might emerge simply 
from playing with your data. And use raw 
numbers—based upon the search traffic 
that each segment generates—to get a better 
sense of each segment’s relative importance.
•	Beef up your personas. If your 
organization already uses personas, perhaps 
it could do so more effectively if those 
personas were more grounded in data. 
Imagine injecting common information 
needs and tasks—derived from your site’s 
queries—directly into your personas!
•	Tap into an existing culture of 
segmentation. And if your organization is 
a true believer in audience segmentation, 
chances are it’s still not incorporating site 
search query data into how it describes 
its segments. Another data point—
especially one that so effectively describes 
each segment’s information needs—will 
only improve your organization’s ability 

163
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
to understand its audience segments. 
Conversely, you can sneakily establish SSA 
within your organization by piggybacking 
onto the existing segmentation analysis. 
•	Challenge the assumption that all 
your users are alike. If you work at 
an organization that hasn’t yet gotten 
UX religion, many of your colleagues—
especially the ones who don’t have direct 
contact with customers—may have a very 
imprecise picture of who your customers 
are. Or they may have a completely wrong 
one. Here’s your chance to play with the 
data, see if some specific audiences emerge, 
and beat the naysayers about the head with 
real live data. Your ability to do so will, by 
the way, earn you many friends in both your 
marketing and product management groups.

164
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Not All Searchers Are Alike
Dog owners are not as alike as you might think. They 
want and need dogs for different reasons, and this is 
borne out through their queries.
Dogs as companions/best friends:
•	 Key needs/motivations: I want a dog to take on walks 
and to take me on walks. I live alone and have a 
dog to keep me company on activities like running, 
camping, hiking, exercising, and so on. The dog will 
help me get out more and meet people.
•	 Related search queries/tasks: dog runs, teaching 
dogs to catch frisbees, glasgow dog parks, meet-ups 
for dog owners, dog sitters. 
Dogs as workers:
•	 Key needs/motivations: I need a dog to help me 
hunt/herd/rescue/sniff out drugs.
•	 Related search queries/tasks: field spaniel, fox hunt 
dogs, guard dog, search and rescue canine training, 
SAR dog training, police dog breeds.
Dogs as guides:
•	 Key needs/motivations: I need a dog to serve as 
my eyes.
•	 Related search queries/tasks: guide dogs london, 
training seeing-eye dogs, sponsor a guide dog, guide 
dogs in workplace.

165
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Dogs as surrogate children:
•	 Key needs/motivations: I want a dog to shower with 
love and attention. 
•	 Related search queries/tasks: LL Bean dog bed, liver 
doggie cookies, organic dog food, dog obedience 
school los angeles, dog airplane kennel, natural flea 
products.
Dogs as fashion accessories:
•	 Key needs/motivations: I want a dog to go with the 
rest of my outfit.
•	 Related search queries/tasks: toy chihuahua, dog 
sweater, doggie spa, rhinestone dog collar, puppy 
clothes.
Not All Searchers Are Alike (continued)
How to Segment Your Audience
There are an almost infinite number of ways 
you can segment your users. Let’s start with 
the easy ones first.
Segmenting the Easy Way
Some segmentation approaches are easy to 
work with because there’s a good chance that 
your analytics application already supports 

166
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
some or all of them—like Google Analytics, for 
instance, as shown in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406433/
Google Analytics allows you to segment your queries in at least 
25 ways.

167
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Here are just some of those “easy” ways that 
you can likely segment your users by today:
•	Traffic sources: In which domains did 
users’ visits originate?
•	New versus repeat: Are users first-time 
visitors, or have they been to your site 
before?
•	Loyalty: How often do they visit?
•	Conversions: Did or didn’t they purchase 
the product? Or register for the workshop? 
Or complete the survey?
•	Average order or revenue per order: 
How much money did they spend? As 
amounts live on a continuous scale, you’ll 
want to set thresholds so you can create 
segments out of ranges (for example, $0.01–
$9.99, $10.00–$24.99).
•	Geography: Where are they located? 
How do such regions map to your sales 
territories?

168
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Timing: When do they make their 
purchases? As with order size, you’ll have 
to set thresholds (for example, time of day, 
month, year).
Which segments should you check out? 
Consider what your organization is in business 
to do or what specific challenges it’s facing at 
the moment. For example, if your business is 
struggling to succeed in the UK, it would be 
worth seeing if you can learn something about 
how the British searchers’ information needs 
differ from those in other English-speaking 
markets. Or perhaps you want to understand 
the information needs of visitors who don’t 
make a purchase on your site (versus those 
who do). 
If your analytics application is kind enough to 
provide these segments, it’s worth spending an 
hour or two experimenting with them. While 
the value of some will be obvious, others 
might surprise you. For example, what might 
you learn from analyzing common queries 
associated with different language segments?

169
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
In the example that follows, I’ve segmented 
one year’s worth of queries from AIGA, 
the professional association for design, by 
language. It used Google Analytics’ pivot 
feature, selecting language, and was shown the 
top 10 most common queries, sorted by Total—
all queries, regardless of language (see Figure 
6.3). The Total column is followed by columns 
that break down the queries by specific 
languages: 
•	en-us means English speakers from the 
U.S.
•	en means English speakers from other 
geographic areas.
•	es-es means Spanish speakers from Spain.
•	en-gb are English speakers from Great 
Britain.
•	pt-br are Portuguese speakers from Brazil.

170
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 6.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982006/
AIGA’s common queries segmented by language type. The default is 
set to Total—all languages combined—and subsequent columns show 
queries associated with 69 (!) language segments, starting with “en-us” 
(English speakers in the U.S.).
To start learning about common queries 
by language segment, I simply clicked that 
language’s column. Here I’ve selected “en-us;” 
the top query is salary, followed by portfolio, 
and so on (see Figure 6.4).

171
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 6.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690981968/
Common queries sorted by en-us—English speakers from the U.S. Eight 
of 10 seem to have something to do with employment.
Let’s compare those Yankee queries with 
those from Germany. Interesting! Pictogram 
or variants thereof comprise 7 of the top 10 
queries, as shown in Figure 6.5.
FIGURE 6.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406353/
Common queries sorted by “de.” The Germans seem very interested in 
things that have something to do with pictograms.

172
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Who knew that English-speaking Americans 
and Germans would have such different 
queries (and information needs)? I wouldn’t 
have discovered this without a few minutes 
of “play” with the Google Analytics 
segmentation feature.
Now that I know what is interesting about 
these two segments, I need to decide whether 
it’s important to know why. Should AIGA—a 
U.S.-based association—place great 
importance on reaching German speakers? 
Would it be useful to know why pictograms 
were so significant to German speakers? 
AIGA staff could follow up with a formal 
user study to learn why—or, at a minimum, 
they might simply float the question by their 
German colleagues. (They also might want 
to determine what percentage of their queries 
came from German speakers. If the portion 
were minimal, it might not be worth the effort 
to investigate further.)

173
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Segmenting the Hard Way
It’s nice to have ready-made segments like 
“language” available out of the box. But often 
the most interesting and useful segments are 
the ones that your analytics application knows 
nothing about: segments that are unique to 
your organization and its business model. 
For example, your organization might want 
to classify users by where they are within the 
customer life cycle or by such demographics 
as age and income. If you’re working with 
an intranet, your organization might find 
that segments based on employee role—
administrator versus researcher versus customer 
support—would be the most useful. If you’re 
running an annual conference, perhaps you’d 
like to know how first-time attendees’ needs 
differ from those who have attended in past 
years. And as we’ve explored elsewhere in this 
book, you might find other time-based segments 
significant, like seasonality.
These segments are all clearly useful but 
require much more effort to obtain. It’s likely 

174
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
you have the data you need somewhere—for 
example, you may be able to match employee 
roles with queries because employees have 
to log in to your intranet to search it, and 
you already know each employee’s role. But 
having this sort of identifying data is one thing; 
integrating it with your query data is another, 
labor-intensive thing altogether. You may have 
to partner with the business units within your 
organization that own the data you need. Let’s 
hope that your horse-trading skills are up to 
snuff, because that’s what it might take to get 
the cooperation you need.
In fact, it’s likely that the value of your 
segmentation approach is strongly correlated 
with the difficulty of obtaining the appropriate 
data. Can you justify the investment? As with 
so many things, it comes down to business 
value. But at least you now have a better idea 
of what kinds of questions are good candidates 
to invest in answering. And you have a model 
for how to proceed from our previous language 
segmentation example.

175
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Comparing and 
Contrasting Segments
Let’s jump into the nuts and bolts of using 
segmentation to analyze audiences. 
The good news is that you can use all the 
analysis techniques that I’ve already covered in 
the book—pattern analysis, session analysis, 
and failure analysis—on your individual 
segments. You’ll find that both seasonality 
and the Zipf Distribution also apply to your 
segments, and you’ll likely start with each 
segment’s short head before proceeding to its 
long tail.
And the bad news? There’s none, really. The 
only major difference in audience analysis to 
note is that you can (and should) contrast and 
compare segments. Let’s have a look at how 
the Open University, a distance learning-based 
academic institution in the United Kingdom, 
did just that.3
3	 This data and some of the analysis came from an unpublished paper on search behavior at 
the Open University (www3.open.ac.uk), written in 2007 by Caroline Jarrett, Whitney 
Quesenbery, Viki Stirling, and Sarah Allen.

176
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
How Segments Differ
The Open University has three primary types 
of audiences: enquirers (users who’ve never 
logged into the site), students (users who 
can be identified as students by their login 
information), and staff (users who can be 
identified as staff by their login information). 
Examining the top 10 queries of each audience, 
the researchers found some significant 
differences between them, which are shown in 
Table 6.1.
TABLE 6.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101466/
The top 10 queries for each of the Open University’s three primary audiences.
From this minimal analysis, it’s already 
apparent that enquirers are primarily focused 

177
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
on areas of study, such as psychology, 
photography, and law. That’s not especially 
surprising. What is stunning is that 
photography and law aren’t taught at the Open 
University. Such a finding might have great 
implications for the university’s deans as they 
plan the institution’s future. And it wouldn’t 
have become apparent if the data hadn’t been 
teased out into separate segments. 
With such frequent queries as exam results, 
credit transfer, and graduation, students 
seem more focused on finishing their studies 
rather than the subjects themselves. Granted, 
this data had a very seasonal component; it 
was gathered during exam season, so it’s not 
surprising that students should be fixating on a 
simpler, less stressful future without exams.
Course codes, like aa309 and dd304, already 
begin to appear within the top 25 of students’ 
queries. Course codes also appear for staff, who 
often need to answer questions about specific 
courses; in such cases, they memorize course 
codes as mnemonics for quick lookup. Staff 
also frequently search for moodle, a content 

178
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
management system used by many academic 
institutions; since it’s something they would 
likely navigate to, why are they searching for it? 
And, interestingly, the staff’s top query is jobs; 
perhaps many staff are hoping to find positions 
for friends, checking their own job descriptions, 
or looking for an upgrade from their current 
positions.
Clearly, larger data samples and additional 
analysis will tell you more, especially long 
tail analysis, which will help you understand 
variations between segments in tone and 
types of content that are sought. But even 
each segment’s top 10 queries exhibit very 
instructive differences and commonalities.
What’s Next?
Once you have a better sense of which 
segments to study, how they differ, and what 
they share in common, you’ll be positioned 
to apply other forms of site search analytics 
covered in this section of the book to those 
segments. Pattern analysis, for example, may 
help you understand how you might label 

179
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
content differently for different audiences. You 
might learn about where navigation fails by 
performing failure analysis on your segments. 
And segment analysis might show how their 
typical search experiences compare.
Like everything else, analyzing your data 
to learn about audience segments is an 
investment: the more you put into it, the more 
you’ll get out of it. And the custom segments—
the ones not necessarily supported by your 
analytics application—are likely to be the 
most valuable. But even if you stick to the easy 
segmentation approaches that may already be 
available to you, you’ll learn something new.

180
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Audience analysis will help you better 
understand how information needs and 
searching experiences differ between 
audience segments.
•	Challenge the assumption that your users 
are all alike. Even dog owners can be 
grouped into segments with very diverse 
needs and wants.
•	Audience analysis can beef up your 
personas or boost your organization’s 
existing segmentation analysis.
•	A good way to start is to use the 
segments that your analytics application 
(for example, Google Analytics) may 
already offer. Then consider your 
organization’s business model and build 
a few more of your own.

181
Chapter 6 
Audience Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Consider performing pattern analysis, 
session analysis, failure analysis, and 
goal-based analysis on each segment. 
See what they share in common and how 
they differ.
•	Insights can help define what labels to 
use for various audiences, or types of 
content, to show or prioritize by role.

182
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 7 
Goal-Based 
Analysis
Goal Tracking Is Good, but Search  
Metrics Make It Better	
184
Determining Goals and KPIs	
189
Summary	
198

183
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
E
very organization has goals. 
Your organization is likely using 
conventional web analytics to measure 
how well its Web site or intranet is performing 
in helping it meet its business goals. But is it 
using metrics that come out of search? 
If the answer’s no, you’re not alone. Lack of 
goal setting around (and involving) search is a 
chronic problem facing most organizations and 
a missed opportunity that can lead to loss of 
revenue. 
The past four chapters showed you how to 
analyze your query data from the bottom up—
so that useful insights would emerge. In this 
chapter, we’ll take a top-down approach. We’ll 
show you how SSA metrics can be a secret 
weapon in your organization’s efforts to monitor, 
measure, and optimize site performance—to 
help you determine if your organization is on 
target to meet its business goals. 

184
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Goal Tracking Is Good, but 
Search Metrics Make It Better
Goals are nice, but if you’re not tracking how 
well you’re doing at meeting them, they’re 
worthless. That’s why KPIs (Key Performance 
Indicators) exist.1 They force organizations to 
express and track their business goals in ways 
that are quantifiable and measurable.
From Goals to KPIs
For example, Central Michigan University 
developed a goal to improve its campus 
climate. While that sounds great, such a goal 
could end up as meaningless hand waving 
unless CMU makes this goal measurable 
and actually monitors how well it’s doing at 
achieving that goal. How does one actually 
know that the campus climate is improving?
So CMU set out to create a KPI to measure 
campus climate.2 Its KPI is based on 
1	 It’s worth noting the difference between KPIs and metrics: metrics are simply measurements, 
while KPIs are metrics that map to organizational goals. Read Dennis Mortensen’s brief article 
on the difference: http://visualrevenue.com/blog/2008/02/difference-between-kpi-and-
metric.html
2	 CMU was kind enough to share its KPI—and these charts—on its Web site: www.planning.
cmich.edu/kpis.shtml

185
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
measuring freshmen and seniors’ perceptions 
of their campus climate, as determined by 
their responses to a short questionnaire. The 
questions specifically surveyed how much
1.	 Students asked questions, participated in 
class discussions, or both.
2.	 Students contributed to conversations with 
individuals different from themselves, in 
terms of religious beliefs, political opinions, 
or personal values.
3.	 Students spoke to faculty and staff regarding 
career plans.
CMU then set targets: it hoped to improve its 
scores over five years by 2.3% for freshmen and 
2.1% for seniors. Now CMU had a measurable 
KPI that could help it determine how well it 
was doing at improving the campus climate 
over the course of several years. And, as the 
two charts in Figure 7.1 and 7.2 demonstrate, 
it’s doing quite well.

186
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 7.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406545/
According to the target line, CMU seems on its way to meeting its goal 
of improving its campus climate for first-year students.
FIGURE 7.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982148/
There was a drop in 2009 (and perhaps some missing data for 2007), 
but CMU’s seniors are also enjoying an improved campus climate since 
the university began monitoring this KPI.

187
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
These KPIs are based on metrics that come 
from surveying students. It’s a great start, 
but it’s just one way to track how well things 
are going. And since no single type of user 
research is ideal, it’s preferable to rely on 
multiple views of the same area (as we’ll 
discuss in detail in Chapter 11, “Bridging Web 
Analytics and User Experience”).
Souping Up a KPI with Search Metrics
What if CMU added another metric to the 
mix, one based on the volume of search activity 
related to the campus climate? Possible 
queries might include tracking the number 
of times students searched for, say, mental 
health-related content, which might be a 
good barometer for campus climate, and a 
target could be set for reducing those queries 
from one year to the next. CMU could track 
changes in the annual volume of searches 
for such terms as mental health, counseling, 
therapy, psychologist, emotional health, and 
depression, hoping to see these keyword 
searches decline year after year. The data might 
look like Figure 7.3 when charted.

188
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 7.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982126/
Year-to-year changes in the volume of mental health-related queries; 
fortunately, the volume of queries is decreasing.
This hypothetical chart shows the percentage 
change from year to year for each query and for 
all the queries (tallied up as “Total”). From the 
search data, you could conclude that the drop 
in searches related to mental health matters 
could support survey data that the campus 
climate was improving. CMU could use the 
Total as an additional metric—along with 
survey responses—to help measure the KPI of 
campus climate.
Analyzing query data is less expensive than 
designing, running, gathering, and analyzing 
the many results from a series of annual 

189
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
surveys—and less expensive to learn from. 
Using both forms of user research leads 
to a KPI that’s more robust than one that 
relies on a single, imperfect source of data to 
measure. And therein lies the opportunity: 
organizations can really benefit if they would 
augment their goal-tracking efforts with the 
data gleaned from site search analytics. I’ll 
show you how to do it.
Determining Goals and KPIs
Let’s face it, I can’t tell you what the goals of 
your organization and its site are or should be. 
If you don’t know, you should start talking 
with as senior a manager as you can find 
immediately. 
But I can tell you that your organization’s 
site is likely to match at least one of four main 
types: commerce, content, lead generation, or 
self-service support sites. I’ll briefly describe 
each type in the sections that follow, so 
familiarizing yourself with them will help you 
get a better grasp of your site’s goals and their 

190
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
corresponding KPIs. Once you have a better 
sense of your KPIs, you’ll find it easier to 
determine how to fold search metrics into them.
Four Main Types of Organizational Sites
•	Commerce sites, like Amazon and 
eBay. Their primary goal is to get 
customers to buy their products or services. 
For such sites, search is probably more 
critical than in any other type of site, 
as many customers arrive at their sites 
knowing what they want to purchase. A 
typical commerce site KPI might be “To 
increase sales among customers in emerging 
markets.” To enrich that KPI, you might 
incorporate a search metric like “Percentage 
of conversion rates of top 20 most common 
queries for product names” into it.
•	Content-rich sites, like ESPN, the 
New York Times, and YouTube. The 
goal of these sites is to entertain or enrich 
users with content—to read, watch, play, 

191
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
learn from, and enjoy. Such sites typically 
generate income in two ways:
•	Ad Service: These sites sell ad space 
on their pages and make money every 
time an ad is served or clicked through. 
An ad service-related KPI may be 
“Increase the amount of time spent on 
the site.” A supporting search metric 
could be “Average time spent on site after 
searching.”
•	Subscription: A subscription is 
essentially a type of purchase, so these 
types of sites share much in common 
with commerce sites. A subscription 
KPI could simply be “Increase the rate 
at which subscribers renew.” A relevant 
search metric could be “# search traffic 
originating from within the subscription 
process.”
•	Lead generation sites, like 
LendingTree.com and SelectQuote.
com. The goal of these sites is to capture 
personally identifiable information about 

192
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
your site’s visitors so you can follow up 
with them later. This can include traditional 
offline transactions or customer relationship 
management (CRM) efforts. A lead 
generation KPI could be “Convert more 
leads into prospects,” and a supporting 
search metric could be “Conversion ratio of 
visitors who use site search.”
•	Self-service/support sites, like 
Microsoft Support, GetSatisfaction.com. 
Their goal is to save you money: visitors use 
your Web site to solve any issues, instead 
of utilizing costly alternatives, such as call 
centers. A possible KPI: “Reduce call center 
support tickets”; a supporting search metric: 
“Volume of traffic for such support-related 
queries as ‘support,’ ‘technical support,’ 
‘help,’” and so on.
The first three types of sites bring in money; 
the last one saves money (by reducing an 
organization’s expenses). Either way, it’s about 
the money. And just about every organization’s 

193
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
site in the world can be said to follow at least 
two of these models.
Once you have a sense of your organization’s 
goals and the KPIs that correspond with them, 
you can begin determining metrics that help 
you measure those KPIs. So, just as Central 
Michigan University can monitor its KPI of 
campus climate by measuring student survey 
responses (and, as I suggested, searches 
for mental health-related content), you can 
develop your own metrics to power your KPIs. 
To get a deeper understanding of KPIs, as well 
as a zillion great examples, I recommend Eric 
T. Peterson’s wonderful The Big Book of Key 
Performance Indicators and Avinash Kaushik’s 
Web Analytics: An Hour a Day. 
Search Metrics Based on Query Data
For now, let’s turn to covering some search 
metrics that you can use to beef up your KPIs 
or use as KPIs. The following set of search 
metrics in Table 7.1 was graciously provided 
by analytics whiz Marko Hurst. The list is by 

194
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
no means comprehensive, but if you think of 
it like a menu, these metrics should be very 
useful for you to consider as you integrate 
search into measuring your site’s performance. 
Please note that while most are based on query 
data, some will require server log data as well. 
More and more organizations invest heavily 
in KPIs for measuring site performance. 
But so many continue to completely forgo 
incorporating search metrics into their 
performance analysis. Perhaps it’s simply 
too new or too strange for them to consider. 
We hope this list of search metrics helps you 
change all that for your organization.
From Top-Down to Bottom-Up Analysis
Goal-based analysis (or top-down analysis) is a 
critical component of site search analytics (and, 
really, any type of analytics). You start with 
clear goals—expressed as KPI—that come 
from the upper levels of your organization’s 
management. Therefore, you know that, by 

195
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
benchmarking, measuring, and monitoring 
performance, you’re getting a better read of 
what’s important to your organization. In 
effect, goal-based analysis gives you a better 
sense of how well your organization’s site 
is performing in the world that you know. 
When it is combined with the emergent, less-
quantitative analysis methods we covered in 
the prior four chapters—which, in effect, teach 
you about the patterns, trends, and surprises 
that make up the world that you don’t know—
you’ll have a powerful, balanced toolkit to gain 
incredible insights from your query data.
TABLE 7.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101524/

196
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
TABLE 7.1 continued 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101578/

197
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
TABLE 7.1 continued 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101648/
Marko Hurst’s list of search metrics. Not exhaustive, but quite useful!

198
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Search metrics—many of which come 
straight from query analysis—can be 
a secret weapon in your organization’s 
efforts to monitor, measure, and optimize 
site performance—to help you determine 
if your organization is on target to meet its 
business goals.
•	Many Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) are missing search-related 
metrics; here’s your chance to fix that.
•	Start by understanding your 
organization’s business model, which 
typically falls into at least one of these 
four main types:
•	Commerce sites
•	Content-rich sites
•	Lead generation sites
•	Self-serve or support sites

199
Chapter 7 
Goal-Based Analysis
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Start with clear goals and corresponding 
KPIs around your site that come 
from the upper management of your 
organization. This gives you key 
benchmarking targets to use to measure 
and monitor site performance.
•	Use your site goals and KPIs as critical 
context for selecting relevant search 
metrics from the menu found in this 
chapter. Plug in, play, measure, analyze, 
and improve. Repeat.

200
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 8
Practical Tips 
for Improving 
Search
Plugging Gaps in Your Search Engine’s  
Index	
201
Making Query Entry Easier by Fixing  
“the Box”	
202
Accommodating Strange Query Syntax	
205
Determining What Your Best Bets  
Should Be	
208
Helping Searchers Auto-Complete  
Their Queries	
211
Improving a “No Results Found” Page	
214
Helping Searchers Revise Their Queries  
to Get Better Results	
216
Designing Search Results Around  
Specialized Query Types	
224
Designing Search Results Around  
Specialized Content Types	
228
Summary	
235

201
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
T
he previous five chapters gave you 
some techniques to use to analyze and 
act upon your query data. In the next 
three chapters, I’ll show you some specific 
benefits that come directly from site search 
analytics, starting with improving your site’s 
search system.
Plugging Gaps in Your 
Search Engine’s Index
It’s a dirty little secret that search engines don’t 
always index all the content they’re supposed 
to. The problem isn’t with the software itself. 
Rather, it’s due to the engine simply not 
knowing about content areas that exist on 
a given site. And the engine may not know 
because it’s likely that you don’t. If your site is 
actually a large set of subsites—typical of many 
enterprise-scale Web environments—then it’s 
simply hard to know what content is out there.
One solution is to analyze your top queries 
with zero results. Of those, identify which 
aren’t retrieving results because there simply is 
no content to match searchers’ needs. 

202
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Then look at those queries as a group. First, 
are you surprised by what you find? Do you 
see any patterns, anything in common at all? 
Would you have expected there to be content 
to match those queries? If so, who would 
have created it, and in what unit would they 
likely work? 
You’re mostly there, Holmes; now go talk to 
someone in that part of your organization. Find 
out if there is, indeed, content that needs to be 
crawled in order to match these null queries 
(and if not, to make a gentle recommendation 
that it should be created).
Making Query Entry Easier 
by Fixing “the Box”
Most sites these days happily sport “the box,” 
a simple text-entry box (and an accompanying 
“search” button) that persists on every page 
in a fixed position (see Figure 8.1). It’s a life 
preserver of sorts—searchers know exactly 
where to look for it when they need to execute 
a search, and it works the same way wherever 
they find it.

203
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406935/
Even a Web environment as large as IBM.com has a persistent simple 
search entry box.
If you have “the box” in place throughout your 
site, congratulations! But have you considered 
how wide it should be? It had better be wide 
enough to accommodate the majority of your 
queries. SSA will help you figure out how long 
your queries typically run, so you can plan 
your design of the text-entry box accordingly.
In this example, I analyzed AIGA’s top 500 
unique queries for a specific month—these 
accounted for exactly 37% of all search activity 
(see Figure 8.2). I used Microsoft’s “LEN” 
function to count the number of characters in 
each query and then calculated the queries’ 
mean and median lengths (10.648 and 10, 
respectively). 

204
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982624/
The most frequent AIGA.org queries—and their lengths. 
After I sorted by query length, you can see that 
the maximum length among these 500 queries 
was 62 characters, but that is something of 
an outlier; the next longest was 36, then 28, 
and then it flattened out (apparently, Zipf is 
everywhere), as shown in Figure 8.3.
FIGURE 8.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/
rosenfeldmedia/5690982594/
The short head of AIGA’s queries by length; 
notice the quick drop-off.

205
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Based on this data, I might be safe using a 
search entry box with a width in the 15–20 
character range. If horizontal real estate isn’t at 
a premium, a width of 30 characters would be 
even better.
I could take my analysis further and compare a 
sample from the long tail and see if query length 
differs greatly. Still, with this small sample, I’m 
safely addressing our most frequent queries and 
almost 40% of all search activity.
Accommodating Strange 
Query Syntax
Once upon a time, prior to the advent of 
the Web, most online searching was done 
in either library catalogs or commercial 
databases that were hugely expensive to 
use (think hundreds of dollars by the hour) 
and usually horribly designed. Accordingly, 
searchers in those days were more than casual 
and definitely not lazy. They were quite 
motivated to learn all sorts of search tricks, 

206
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
like using Boolean operators (for example, 
OR, AND, and NOT), wildcards, ways to 
truncate terms, and lots of other weirdness.
These days, Google is good enough that most 
searchers can be lazy, entering a term or two, 
and expecting something reasonably good 
in return. Still, there are a few holdouts, and 
if your site is older or tends to be used by 
researchers or librarians, there’s a good chance 
that you may need to consider supporting old-
style query syntax. 
A simple way to check is to search your queries 
for such instances. In the example below, I 
used Google Analytics to filter a year’s worth 
of AIGA.org queries for the operator OR (see 
Figure 8.4). Of the over 75,000 unique queries 
for the entire year, only 121 unique queries 
(and 142 searches overall) included OR. And 
most of those queries were not using OR as a 
Boolean operator.

207
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406897/
AIGA’s searchers aren’t using the Boolean OR operator very often.
The use of AND, however, was a bit more 
common; it was included in 1,596 unique 
queries and 2,205 searches overall. (NOT 
showed up in 84 unique queries and 112 
searches overall.) But out of over 75,000 

208
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
unique queries and 188,000 searches overall, 
the volume of searching using Boolean queries 
is still quite small—in the 1%–2% range—and 
the majority of those queries don’t use AND, 
OR, and NOT as Boolean operators. So AIGA 
is probably safe in not supporting Boolean 
operators in its query syntax.
Determining What Your 
Best Bets Should Be
Best bets (aka “recommended links”) are 
simple. They’re search results that have been 
manually connected to a particular query. 
Why do this? Because search engines are 
robots, and robots aren’t always that effective 
at retrieving good search results. 
In the example in Figure 8.5, the National 
Cancer Institute wanted to make sure 
that searchers always retrieved something 
useful when searching for melanoma. The 
organization manually attached three sets 
of best bet search results to the query, and 
these are displayed before the search engine’s 
automated results show up.

209
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982562/
When searching cancer.gov for melanoma, you’ll find best bet search 
results front and center.
So, while best bets are simple, they’re also 
powerful. “Powerful” in the sense that they 
can really improve the search experience. 
And “powerful” in that they can be a weapon 
wielded in your organization’s political battles. 
For example, who gets to determine which are 
the most appropriate best bets for a query? If, 
for example, your organization sells hardware 

210
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
products, and someone searches for a product’s 
name, should there be a best bet result from 
marketing? Or from sales? Or from the tech 
support department? Whose should be the 
highest priority? This sort of situation can spin 
out into a political firefight very quickly.
And who gets to determine which queries 
merit best bets in the first place? (And how 
many should there be at most? We’ve not 
seen this addressed by researchers, but three 
or four seems plenty, since you don’t want to 
completely obstruct the raw search results.)
Rather than let best bets become a political 
headache, use data—query data—to quell or 
at least blunt these battles. Look to the short 
head for common queries, and look at them 
longitudinally to determine which are the 
most persistent over time. The combination of 
popularity and persistence is a great driver for 
choosing queries that merit best bets. 
If you do have multiple best bet candidates, 
consider prioritizing them by determining 
the relative importance of a particular query 

211
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
to different audience segments. Consider our 
hardware vendor once more: if the people 
searching a specific product name are three 
times more likely to be existing customers 
seeking to download drivers, rather than 
prospects who might be looking to learn 
about a product, then the data would suggest 
that tech support’s best bet should come first. 
Argument settled.
Helping Searchers Auto-
Complete Their Queries
Unless you’ve been under a rock for the past 
few years, you’ve likely encountered sites that 
automatically complete your queries (also 
known as “type-ahead”). In effect, the search 
engine has been given enough information to 
predict what you want to search—or, at least, 
provide you with a few useful possibilities for 
you to select from. Auto-completion can help 
searchers save time entering a query. They can 
just click or tab over to their selection, rather 
than continue typing. And if they’re not exactly 
sure how to enter their query—perhaps they 

212
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
don’t know the proper spelling of a term—
auto-completion will expose some useful 
possibilities.
Where does SSA fit in auto-completion? Well, 
it might be tempting to simply use all of your 
queries—or even your most frequent queries—
as your auto-completion list, but beware: these 
queries are likely to be quite dirty in all senses. 
They’ll include typos, irrelevant terms, and 
terms that are dirty in the pornographic sense. 
Rather than using raw queries, rely on a 
cleaned-up version. For example, you may 
already have a list of keywords associated 
with best bet search results. Given that they’re 
probably based on your frequent queries and 
that they’ve been scrubbed, they’re a great 
starting point. You might also consider using 
a tool that can perform entity extraction on 
your queries to give you a set of proper nouns 
for your auto-completion list. But again, you’ll 
still need to manually review such a list; no 
software application will be able to do that as 
well as you can.

213
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
SSA can also help you identify metadata 
attributes and content types (see Chapter 3, 
“Pattern Analysis”). Consider them candidates 
for items to add to an auto-completion list. 
You may find that you can go out and acquire 
certain metadata—say, place names—from 
commercial sources and insert them directly 
into your auto-completion list. (Just make sure 
that your newly added terms have content 
associated with them, or they’ll be navigational 
dead-ends.) Or you may already have the terms 
you need somewhere inside your organization.
For example, ESPN.com enables searchers to 
type ahead and retrieve names of professional 
athletes, as shown in Figure 8.6.
FIGURE 8.6 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982530/
Auto-completion of players’ names at ESPN.com.

214
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Improving a “No Results 
Found” Page
Whoever issued the click that led to the 
following page in Figure 8.7 should be reported 
to the authorities immediately. Bad user!
FIGURE 8.7 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406841/
Shame on you! (from http://astro.phpwebhosting.com/404.html).
We’ve all seen error messages like these before. 
Some are unhelpful (see Figure 8.7), while 
others seem to go out of their way to make you 
feel like a lunkhead. Many sites are addressing 
their messaging of their “file not found” pages, 
moving from 404-impersonality to a more 
helpful approach that suggests alternatives.

215
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Similarly, there’s no reason not to go beyond 
default “results not found” pages and do even 
better. And SSA can help in a very simple way, 
as shown in Figure 8.8.
FIGURE 8.8 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406823/
No “peeps” at the JellyBelly.com site? No worries; help is on the way.
Certainly, JellyBelly.com’s copy could be even 
a tad bit more helpful. But more importantly, 
the company realizes that, in the context of a 
failed search, it’s a good idea to suggest other 
queries to try. These suggestions are frequent 
queries; even better would be suggesting 
queries with synonyms for the failed query 
term. (But let’s face it: there probably are 

216
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
no synonyms for “peeps.”) Either way, the 
searcher is now just one click away from more 
search results, rather than being made to feel 
like an idiot.
Helping Searchers Revise Their 
Queries to Get Better Results
As searchers get past the initial query entry 
interface and start to encounter search results 
pages, they become increasingly likely to 
invest more effort into finding what they need. 
There are many reasons for this—the scent of 
desired information may be getting stronger;1 
they don’t luck out into great results the first 
go-round as they’d hoped; or they learn more 
about what they’re looking for as they engage 
with search results. Whatever the case may be, 
this is a good time to expose them to a higher 
level of search functionality that is afforded by 
the common starting point of “the Box.”
It’s likely that your search engine already has 
many great features to help searchers revise 
their queries and massage their search results. 
1	 For more on the “scent of information,” read Peter Pirolli and Stuart Card’s “Information 
Foraging” in Psychology Review; 1999, Vol. 106, No. 4 (pp.643-675).

217
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Unfortunately, it’s also likely that these features 
have been buried in a search system’s sad 
ghetto, infamously known as Advanced Search. 
(Did you know that “Advanced Search” is 
actually search engine vendor terminology for 
a “Miscellaneous bucket of features that we 
don’t know what you’ll do with [but we wish 
you the best of luck]?”) 
Like any other kind of help feature, these types 
of search features work best when presented 
within the appropriate context of use. Your 
search engine vendor can’t or won’t help you 
figure out which of these features to provide 
to searchers and when, so it’s up to you to do 
the heavy lifting. Fortunately, SSA (and a little 
common sense) can help.
Two of the most common motivations for 
revising a search have to do with adjusting 
the volume of results—either the engine isn’t 
returning enough, or it’s returning too many. 
In the first case, you can guess that a null 
results page is too few—or you might set your 
threshold a little higher—say, five results. In 
the latter case, you might set a threshold of 

218
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
more than one or two screenfuls of results, 
because you’re fairly certain searchers won’t get 
past those initial sets of results.
In either case, look to integrate features from 
your Advanced Search interface that broaden 
or narrow, respectively. For example, the 
University of Alaska Fairbanks’ Advanced 
Search interface consists exclusively of a means 
for broadening your search results, as shown in 
Figure 8.9.
FIGURE 8.9 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406805/
At the University of Alaska Fairbanks, Advanced Search means 
“broaden your search.” Why not expose these features when the search 
results need expanding? (www.uaf.edu/uaf/search)
The IRS, on the other hand, provides all sorts 
of ways to narrow a search from its Advanced 
Search interface (see Figure 8.10).
Clearly, Advanced Search means different 
things to different people. Rather than relying 

219
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
on that term having any sort of consistent 
meaning, consider simply designing your 
search results pages to incorporate whatever 
form of refinement made sense given the 
situation: support expanded results if zero were 
retrieved, or ways to narrow results if too many 
were retrieved. This approach would likely be 
much more helpful than burying such features 
on an Advanced Search page.
FIGURE 8.10 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406773/
At the IRS, Advanced Search means “narrow your search.”  
(http://search.irs.gov/web/advanced-search.htm)

220
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Search Pre-Refinement: How Much Customization to Allow
Gary Angel, President, Semphonic— 
http://semphonic.com
For most sites, the simpler the search interface you 
offer, the better. Thanks to Google, searchers are deeply 
familiar with basic keyword searching methods and 
can use them effectively. Advanced Search tools don’t 
usually work any better, and, if poorly conceived, often 
work rather worse than basic keyword search. There 
are important exceptions, however, where encouraging 
searchers to provide additional criteria for their initial 
search makes good sense.
For sites where search is the almost universal method of 
finding things, especially where faceting is necessary, 
providing up-front search refinement makes good sense. 
If you manage a hotel site, an airline site, or a real estate 
site, then form-based (aka advanced) search is far more 
efficient than keyword search.
For example, in real estate sites nearly all searches begin 
with a city name. For the vast majority of searchers, 
however, a citywide search—regardless of how the 
results are sorted—will return too many results to be 
used effectively. The results should be faceted by price, 
neighborhood, or categories like size or number of 
bedrooms. Airlines face a similar search problem. Almost 
every search begins with both a date and, at minimum, 
a trip leg (a from: to pair), as shown in Figure 8.11. The 
same is true for almost any travel application, including 
hotel and car rental sites.

221
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.11  
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406745/
A single field search box wouldn’t make sense for travel sites like 
Expedia.com.
For most industries, there is a fairly obvious subjective 
ordering of at least a few primary fields. As with most 
subjective orderings, however, there are always questions. 
For example, we may know that far more people will 
search a real estate site based on price or neighborhood 
than, say, pools. You don’t need analytics to tell you that. 
But not every question is quite so obvious. For home 
search, is price or neighborhood more important? Is 
number of bedrooms or bathrooms more important? Or do 
you need both? What about square feet? 
Search Pre-Refinement (continued)

222
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The goal of analytics is to help answer, or give the 
necessary information to answer, questions like these. 
If you start with the assumption that the fewer choices 
you give searchers, the cleaner and better the interface, 
how do you decide how many choices and which 
choices are best?
In general, the goal of search refinement is to narrow the 
range of search results to some optimum level. You can 
test facet combinations on initial search relative to two 
different criteria: 
•	 Number of search results produced 
•	 Search outcomes (measured either by product detail 
views or conversion results)
In the real estate case shown in Figure 8.12, “Pct of 
Searches Used” captures how often visitors actually 
used a field when submitting a search. “Lift” measures 
whether visitors who searched using a field were more or 
less likely to submit a lead. Four fields (Neighborhood, 
Property Type, Square Feet, and Amenities) all showed 
negative lift—meaning visitors using these features were 
less likely to submit a lead than users who did not. In 
other words, on average they decreased the effectiveness 
of search when included in the initial search.
You’ll also note that Bedrooms and Bathrooms and 
Maximum Price worked very well as fields for an 
initial search. The bottom line is that analysis of 
the lift and number of results returned based on the 
Search Pre-Refinement (continued)

223
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
initial search make it much easier to make intelligent 
decisions about how many and which options are 
worth providing to searchers.
FIGURE 8.12 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982368/
The data suggests that the presence of fields like 
“Neighborhood” in a form decrease the search’s effectiveness.
In every case for this study, the least effective fielded 
searches produced, on average, very small result sets. 
That won’t always be the case. There is no single right 
answer to an optimal number of search results returned, 
particularly across different problem sets. People need 
to see more search results for houses than they would for 
kitchen blenders. The critical factor is the degree to which 
the search criteria can reliably identify what the visitor is 
looking for. Housing search is necessarily fairly fuzzy.
Search Pre-Refinement (continued)

224
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Designing Search Results 
Around Specialized 
Query Types
Certain query types are worth looking for 
as you dig into your query data, especially 
your long tail, because you can tune how 
your results are presented and how they can 
be sorted. Specialized types of queries may 
include such search terms as
•	Unique identification numbers, such as 
ISBNs, SKUs, and course codes
•	Proper nouns (names of people, places, or 
objects)
•	Acronyms
•	Dates
•	Navigational queries (URLs)
If unique IDs are usual suspects within your 
query data, you may be able to program your 
search engine to look for them—their syntax 
is usually consistent and predicable—and 
present custom search results for that specific 
type of query. So a commerce site might 

225
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
recognize a search for 0-38533-349-8 to be 
for a book’s ISBN, and would accordingly 
know to display a cover thumbnail and other 
information to help the searcher identify and 
purchase Kurt Vonnegut’s The Sirens of Titan. 
A person’s name might work the same way, 
although name recognition isn’t as surefire 
as unique IDs. For example, you might 
teach your search engine to flag a mixed case 
string of two words separated by a comma 
(for example, Vonnegut, Kurt) as a name. 
You could also define a person’s name more 
loosely, such as a string of any two words in 
mixed case (for example, Kurt Vonnegut, but 
also Chopped Liver). The latter case has its 
obvious drawbacks, but could still be workable 
if your search engine is searching a federated 
collection of data stores. In such a case, you 
could have it default to display results from the 
staff directory first. If there is no one with the 
name “Chopped Liver” in your staff directory, 
your search engine could move on and grab 
results from elsewhere (like your intranet’s 
extensive collection of lunchroom menus).

226
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Place names, organization names, and 
acronyms are often already known. For 
example, you can purchase or steal lists of 
place names (or in some cases, like U.S. 
states, cull them from your memory). Your 
organization may have lists of its internal 
division names and its partners’ names. And 
it may also maintain a glossary of acronyms 
(which, by the way, you can grow from 
analyzing queries if you need to). If so, you can 
feed these to your search engine in advance 
and provide well-crafted search results using 
the same approach as you would for best bets.
Dates (and, less frequently, place names) are 
helpful in a slightly different way—rather than 
helping identify the most appropriate result, 
they’re useful in helping identify how to present 
results. The persistence of dates within queries 
suggests that the searcher is trying to either 
narrow or sort her search results. The fix, as the 
Financial Times found, is to enable searchers to 
sort and filter by date, as you can see from the 
search results page shown in Figure 8.13.

227
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.13 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982338/
The Financial Times allows searchers to sort and filter search results by 
date.
Financial Times could take this approach just 
a little further by setting the sorting to default 
to “Date” when date information is included in 
the query. (The current default for all queries 
seems to be “Relevance.”)
Finding URLs in query logs isn’t so strange; 
searcher sees boxes on a page, searcher fills it 
in with a URL. Why should a search entry box 
be any different than an address entry box? 
In fact, because it happened so often, IBM 
Software found it worth addressing. Rather 
than punish searchers with an unpleasant 404-
like “no results found” experience, IBM simply 
taught its search engine to redirect searchers 
to the desired page, as specified by the URL 

228
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
entered. It was a simple and straightforward 
way to show its searchers respect.
Designing Search Results 
Around Specialized 
Content Types
You can also tune your search results when you 
know that you have specific types of content 
that searchers might find especially interesting. 
In Chapter 3, “Pattern Analysis,” we used our 
Michigan State University example to illustrate 
how you might uncover potential content types 
that occur again and again in your site. Once 
you have those types in place, they serve as 
wonderful “building blocks” for tuning your 
search results in a powerful way. 
In the example shown in Figure 8.14, the 
searcher is looking for a product that includes 
the number 1012. Hewlett Packard’s search 
engine has been taught to guess that such 
numeric strings are quite likely to be products. 
And HP has already identified a variety of 
content types—“Product overview,” “Supplies, 

229
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
options & accessories,” and so on—which are 
associated with products. (These are displayed 
in the center of the page under “Product quick 
links.”) In effect, HP has determined that 
queries for products ought to have certain 
content types shown automatically and expects 
that these are valuable to searchers. In fact, they 
seem far more valuable than the rough results 
found by the search engine (to the right, under 
“Search results”). 
FIGURE 8.14 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406657/
When Hewlett Packard’s search engine senses a product search, it 
automatically displays product-related content types (for example, 
“Software & driver downloads”) in the center of the page, while raw 
search results are displayed to the right.

230
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Hewlett Packard’s approach is very 
intelligent—in fact, it’s a souped-up version 
of best bets. HP has already done the hard 
work of determining what its content types 
are, and likely tags them as such in its content 
management system. It takes advantage of that 
effort by exposing appropriate content types 
when it encounters a specialized search, in this 
case, a product query.
Interestingly, HP shows content types that are 
geared toward existing customers rather than 
ones who might be considering purchasing this 
particular product. The company’s research may 
have shown that it has more existing customers 
search its site for product information than 
prospects. And we’ve all heard how it’s cheaper 
to keep a customer than to acquire one.

231
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Using SSA to Help Determine Search Scoping
Martin Belam, Information Architect, Guardian News & 
Media—www.currybet.net
One way to help searchers to get to the best result quicker 
is by “scoping” their search: limiting their results to 
content similar to the page they are currently viewing. 
For example, if they use the search box on a page in your 
“press office” section of the Web site, you would only 
return results from pages published by the press office, not 
the site as a whole.
While this can be very helpful to some searchers, 
particularly on sites with large silos of unrelated content, 
it can also second-guess their intentions. If you scope 
your content incorrectly, you might have made it nearly 
impossible for the searchers to locate the information 
they need.
Site search analytics can help you to understand 
whether “scoped” search is really helping your 
searchers, but you have to make sure you are measuring 
the right things. If you have three different scoped 
search boxes on your site (for example, the news 
section, help section, and documentation section of 
your site or intranet), it is important that you can slice 
your data to examine behavior in each of those scopes 
in isolation. You’ll want to be able to see the top search 
terms that have been used on a particular area of the 
site, and you’ll also be very interested in those searches 
that have generated no results.

232
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
On the guardian.co.uk Web site, we scope search based 
on the section of the site that the searcher is currently 
visiting. This can get quite granular, so that if you are on 
guardian.co.uk/culture, you only receive results from our 
culture coverage. If you drill down further within that 
to the music section, then search results are restricted to 
just returning content that has been tagged with music. 
Search log analysis allows us to check whether this is 
helpful or not. For example, in January 2010, one of 
the top 10 searches on the music section of the site was 
for wire (see Figure 8.15). Because of scoping, we can 
guarantee that the searcher is only going to get articles 
about the recently reformed ’70s post-punk band, rather 
than our extensive coverage of the critically acclaimed 
TV show The Wire.
FIGURE 8.15 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982240/
The top 10 searches within the Music scope of guardian.co.uk in 
the first weeks of January 2010.
Using SSA to Help Determine Search Scoping (continued)

233
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Looking further down the most popular searches, 
however, reveals that we have a problem. In the top 40 
searches on the Guardian’s music area at guardian.co.uk/
music, we also see frequent queries for top columnist 
Charlie Brooker and for the crossword. These are most 
certainly not music-specific queries. Our answer is to 
make sure that more general, site-wide editorial best bets 
are also retrieved within a scoped search’s results. This 
gives the searchers the best of both worlds. If their query is 
specific to the area of the site, they get the narrow focus of 
scoped search. If their query is a navigational one, aimed 
at jumping context to another area of the site, then best 
bets will take them there (see Figure 8.16).
This means you’ll have to regularly monitor the generic 
queries within a scope to make sure that you are picking 
up all of the popular searches that would benefit from 
being an editorial best bet.
Using SSA to Help Determine Search Scoping (continued)

234
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 8.16 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406581/
This search originated in the Music area of guardian.co.uk, 
as indicated by “You searched for ‘charlie brooker’ in Music.” 
Although the 26 results returned are specific to that area of the 
site, the “Editor’s picks,” our label for best bets, are generic and 
direct the searcher to useful links outside of the music scope.
Using SSA to Help Determine Search Scoping (continued)

235
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Identify gaps in your search engine’s 
index by finding top queries with zero 
results and then identifying which aren’t 
retrieving results because there is no 
content to match searchers’ needs.
•	Make your search entry box the right 
width by measuring the width of your 
queries.
•	Analyze queries to identify odd or 
unexpected queries and query syntax 
that your search engine should be 
configured to support.
•	SSA can identify good candidates for 
best bets and, when you have multiple 
best bets for a particular query, help you 
prioritize their order.
•	Use SSA to help create a cleaned-
up version of terms for query auto-
completion. 

236
Chapter 8
Practical Tips for Improving Search
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	SSA can improve your null results page 
by providing a list of your site’s most 
popular search terms to choose from or 
similar search terms based on synonyms.
•	Use SSA to better support query 
refinement (instead of relying on 
Advanced Search interfaces).
•	When multi-field search interfaces make 
more sense than a single box, use SSA to 
help determine which fields or facets to 
make searchable.
•	Look for specialized (and very 
important) query types and then develop 
specialized search results for those 
queries.
•	Conversely, identify important, 
consistently appearing content types, and 
use them to power results for important 
query types (like product names).
•	Use SSA to help determine and tune 
search “scopes” or zones within your 
site’s content.

237
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 9
Practical Tips 
for Improving 
Site Navigation 
and Metadata
Improving Contextual Navigation for  
Specific Content Types	
238
Creating a Better Site Index	
246
Testing and Tuning Metadata Values  
Important	
249
Summary	
257

238
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
J
ust as site search analytics can improve 
your site’s search system, it can also 
increase findability in other ways. In this  
	
chapter, we’ll show you a few approaches 
to improve your site’s navigation and metadata 
based on analyzing your query data.
Improving Contextual 
Navigation for Specific 
Content Types
You’ve got ‘em: important page types that occur 
again and again, deep within your site. Perhaps 
they are pages that describe the benefits that 
your products bring. Or they are bios of each 
of the high-priced consultants you hire out. Or 
they are your intranet’s critical policies—the 
ones that all employees had better follow. 
Whatever these pages are, they behave 
consistently—in fact, they may be built by 
your CMS using the same template. And they 
are often critical to your organization’s success, 
because if these pages don’t work well, you 
may be in deep trouble.

239
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
They also may generate quite a bit of search 
traffic. For example, User Interface Engineering 
found that over 50% of search traffic on a 
major commerce site was generated from the 
department, gallery, and product pages deep 
inside the site, noting that “most users clicked 
on more than three links before they decided to 
search,” as shown in Figure 9.1.1
FIGURE 9.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982874/
Search activity can and often will happen on pages other than your 
site’s main page, as this example from UIE shows (www.uie.com/
articles/time_search).
1	 From “Spending Quality Time with Your Search Log,” UIE Web site; Jared Spool; January 6, 
2010; http://www.uie.com/articles/time_search/

240
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
These deep page types clearly deserve your 
attention, and you can use SSA in a few ways 
to improve them:
•	Identify frequently occurring (and 
valuable) page types. In Chapter 3, 
“Pattern Analysis,” I showed you a method 
for using your queries to identify page 
types that searchers seem to be requesting. 
Once you know what page types are 
common to your site, you can move on to 
these next tasks.
•	Determine what’s missing from each 
page type. Assuming your analytics 
application will allow you to do so, analyze 
the frequent queries generated by each page 
type by starting with a few samples of each 
type. Look over each sample’s queries. Do 
you see any patterns? You might find that 
users are looking to move to another, related 
kind of content; these desire paths might 
suggest adding contextual navigation links 
to the page type (see Figure 9.2).2 I looked 
2	 Desire paths are desired forms of navigation that a system currently doesn’t support. You’ll 
often see them in a park or on a college quadrangle: paths worn into the dirt by constant use, 

241
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
at three samples of AIGA’s event pages in 
Figures 9.3, 9.5, and 9.7. You’ll see the results 
in Figure 9.4, 9.6, and 9.8. Or you might 
notice that users are requesting that more 
information be included in the page type 
(which means you’ve now identified a way to 
improve the content in that page type).
FIGURE 9.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982854/
A desire path worn by those navigating this lawn. Are there similar 
paths that have been created by people trying to navigate your site?
unanticipated by the space’s planners. More on desire paths in Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Desire_path

242
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 9.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982806/
An AIGA.org event on value pricing (www.aiga.org/content.cfm/event-
detail?eid=21627029)...
FIGURE 9.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982784/
...is the starting point for these queries—many of which are about 
pricing.

243
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 9.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982756/
Another AIGA.org event (www.aiga.org/content.cfm/event-
detail?eid=17487113) also addresses pricing...
FIGURE 9.6 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406999/
...and is also the starting point for many queries regarding the subject of 
pricing.

244
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 9.7 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406989/
This AIGA.org event (www.aiga.org/content.cfm/event-
detail?eid=12771382) is about student portfolios...
FIGURE 9.8 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982682/
...and, not surprisingly, it leads to many queries about portfolios.

245
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Identify problematic members of 
a particular page type. While you’re 
comparing your page type samples, 
you might find one that’s an outlier. 
For example, one of your 15 product 
description pages (or, in the case of AIGA, 
one of your event pages) may generate very 
different types of queries or a much higher 
volume of queries. Is that particular page 
broken in some particular way? Is it poorly 
labeled, titled, or written? Is it missing 
some critical contextual navigation? Or, 
conversely, is there something special 
about that particular product that suggests 
you reconsider how navigation works for 
your other product descriptions? Now you 
have an interesting question to consider, 
and you can explore it further using a 
qualitative user research technique.
Each of the event pages I sampled indicated 
that users were interested in getting more 
information on each of the page’s respective 
topics. There are many potential reasons for 
this; for example, the users weren’t able to 

246
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
make the event in person but were interested 
in the topic. Or they visited the page after the 
event had taken place and wanted to know 
about the topic. Or they got to the page from 
a Google search, and it wasn’t quite what they 
needed, so they used the AIGA site search to 
see if it had what they were looking for. 
Whatever the case may be, since these events 
seem to serve as good landing pages for their 
topics, AIGA may want to invest in linking to 
relevant (and more static) content on its site 
from within each event page.
Creating a Better Site Index
A–Z site indices are like the sad, neglected 
vacant lots you find in many cities—full of 
trash and weeds, yet so prominent throughout 
the site. They’re often just a single link from 
anywhere in the site and therefore so full of 
potential. This prime real estate is usually 
wasted because developing and maintaining an 
alphabetical index for a large Web site require 
much more work than most people anticipate. 
And when your site is really a collection of 

247
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
separate, distributed subsites, many of which are 
off the grid, the problem gets even worse. After 
all, you can’t index what you don’t know about.
You might decide that a site index simply isn’t 
worth the bother. After all, indices work best 
for users who know what they’re looking for, 
but in those cases, search systems are almost 
always a better option. 
If you do decide to maintain an index—
because your users already rely upon it, or 
because your search system is in “transition” 
at the moment—you can build an alphabetical 
index around your common search queries. 
In effect, your index will be designed around 
your searchers’ most pressing information 
needs. This works especially well if you are 
already building an extensive set of best bet 
search results around those common queries. 
Michigan State University has done just that.
MSU has an initiative in place for creating best 
bets for hundreds of its most frequent queries. 
As you might expect, it stores these results in a 
database. It didn’t take long for the smart folks 

248
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
there to realize that their database could output 
those results as a single alphabetized list just as 
easily as it could match individual results to a 
specific search query (see Figure 9.9). 
FIGURE 9.9 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690406959/
Each entry in MSU.edu’s A–Z index is a common query (“keyword”) and 
is linked to its best bet search result (under “Description”). 
The result is compelling. Not only has MSU 
reused its editorial effort in an innovative way, 
but, in effect, it has also cracked the nut of 
Web site alphabetical indices. It has addressed 
maintenance challenges by basing its index 
on an ongoing stream of popular queries, 

249
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
leveraging existing best bet maintenance 
efforts. Additionally, the index cuts across 
the many content “silos”—departments and 
divisions—found in huge organizations like 
a university. Rather than trying to represent 
each silo in the index evenly—a fool’s errand—
MSU defers to searchers’ queries as the arbiter 
of what will and won’t be included in the 
index. As a result, MSU provides its users with 
a living, breathing A–Z index that spans many 
silos and requires almost no additional expense 
beyond its existing best bet initiative.
Testing and Tuning Metadata 
Values Important
Every domain is changing. And every domain’s 
vocabulary of descriptive metadata should, 
naturally, change as well, but all too typically it 
lags behind. This is especially true in dynamic, 
rapidly changing domains, especially those 
related to technology or the hard sciences. 
It’s simply difficult and expensive to keep up. 
Fortunately, SSA offers a variety of approaches 

250
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
to help you evaluate and maintain metadata 
values, which fall into three categories:
•	Testing terms using the “query test.”
•	Deriving terms through “reverse lookup.”
•	Tracking appearances, disappearances, and 
trends among terms.
Putting Metadata Through 
the “Query Test”
You can test your metadata by treating them 
as queries and, well, trying them out. Do they 
retrieve relevant documents? And how do they 
compare with equivalent queries? After all, 
metadata should be close to the language of 
searchers; queries already are.
That’s not entirely fair. Metadata are not 
queries, and the people responsible for metadata 
have to balance the nature of the content and its 
language with users’ natural language. But you 
still may find this test instructive:
1.	 Choose a manageable number of your most 
frequent queries. Say, 25.

251
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
2.	 See if those queries have synonymous 
metadata values. For example, campus 
map may be a common query; its closest 
metadata equivalent might be “map.”
3.	 Are there any queries that don’t have 
similar metadata terms? Great, you’ve just 
identified potential gaps in your metadata 
vocabulary that need to be filled.
4.	 Measure your frequent queries’ relevance 
and precision. (This is what Vanguard did 
in Chapter 1, “How Site Search Analytics 
Can Save Your Butt.”)
5.	 Do the same for the corresponding 
metadata. In other words, try them as 
queries using the same metrics.
6.	 Now see how well they compare. If 
your metadata don’t perform as well as 
their synonymous frequent queries, they 
might merit another look and possibly 
replacement. For example, if your metadata 
term is “water closet,” but the query toilet 
is much more effective, you might want to 
replace the former with the latter.

252
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Using “Reverse Lookup” to Identify 
New and Problematic Terms
Just as you can test metadata values as queries 
and see what documents they retrieve, you 
might consider doing the opposite: start with 
the documents and try to determine which 
metadata values ought to be matched with 
them. To do this, you’ll need an analytics 
tool that can track the queries that found a 
particular document:
•	Start with a small set (say 20) of 
important documents. “Important” can 
mean different things, such as popular (in 
terms of showing up in search results or 
being clicked through from those results), 
authoritative, or subjectively important, 
according to the needs of your business and 
its customers.
•	List the queries that retrieve those 
important documents. You’ll either need 
an analytics application that can handle 
both clickstream analysis and SSA, or 
the willingness to do a lot of parsing and 
crunching by hand. 

253
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Determine if there are metadata that 
correspond with those queries. (This 
is similar to our “query test”—we’re 
matching metadata terms and queries.) 
So, for example, you may find that the 
query no-iron shirts comes up a lot on your 
clothing site, but there are no corresponding 
metadata terms. If that’s the case, then 
you’ve identified a gap in your metadata. 
Consider creating a new term, or if you 
can, recasting an existing term in more 
contemporary, user-friendly language. 
•	Use extra credit. If possible, try 
this same exercise only with new 
documents. This will be especially helpful 
as you try to maintain the currency of your 
metadata values in the face of your domain’s 
new content. 
Tracking Metadata Trends
Identifying new queries that are trending 
upward is a great way to keep the scope of your 
metadata updated. You may be able to identify 
terms in a particular batch of queries that were 

254
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
never searched for on your site before and use 
those terms to develop new metadata values.
Any brand new query—whether searched a 
thousand times or just once—will register as 
having infinite growth, as its starting point was 
0. Because brand new queries grow at the same 
rate, regardless of their search volume, you’ll 
want to focus on the more frequently searched 
new queries. So, if your clothing site has two 
new queries—hoodie, with 71 searches, and 
crocs, with 449—you’ll clearly want to focus 
your energy on crocs.
In the case of existing queries that are trending 
up, it can be a bit tricky to determine which 
ones truly merit your attention (see Table 9.1). 
Some queries might start small and spike up 
quickly, while others may already be frequent 
but are growing at substantial rates. Which are 
more important?
TABLE 9.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5825544535/
Spikes in query activity. Which is more noteworthy?

255
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The more common query certainly deserves 
attention. It may have a much slower growth 
rate, but its overall growth (in terms of actual 
queries) is more than twice as high. And 
it’s already an important query. If there’s no 
corresponding metadata value, you might 
scratch your head and ask yourself why not. If 
corresponding metadata are already in place, 
then you don’t have much to do, although 
something else—unrelated to metadata—
might be happening. Seasonal spike perhaps?
The less common query—2010 marketing 
strategy—is interesting in a different way. 
It’s spiked much more quickly, but is it real 
or an anomaly? Put it on your watchlist, and 
give it more time to “prove itself” worthy of 
joining your stodgy, oak-paneled metadata 
club. Adding a new term to a vocabulary has 
long-term implications, and it shouldn’t be 
done in any manner that hints at flightiness 
or impulsiveness. So keep your eye on spikes 
that emanate from the middle torso and 
determine whether you’ve got a flash in the pan 
or something of long-term importance. If it’s 
the former, you might be better off addressing 

256
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
the information need that it represents with 
a lighter scale touch, such as implementing a 
best bet search result to ensure that when it is 
searched, it retrieves something of value.
Just as a query might suddenly spike, the 
reverse is true as well: queries can begin to 
drop out of sight, albeit a bit more gradually 
than they rise. You’ll want to determine if a 
more up-to-date variant is available to replace a 
moribund term.
Keep in mind that eliminating metadata values 
is a very dicey proposition. You may already 
have a lot invested in a particular term, in the 
sense that it’s been used to tag a significant 
amount of your content. Retracting a term will 
have an impact on each of those documents. 
Now missing an old term, will their chance 
of being found greatly diminish? You’ll want 
to consider replacing stale metadata values 
with more viable synonyms. Hopefully, you’ll 
have a content management system or some 
other automated means in place to make such 
changes globally; otherwise, you’ll have a lot of 
tedious manual labor to struggle with.

257
Chapter 9
Practical Tips for Improving Site Navigation and Metadata
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Identify specific content types that 
generate a lot of search traffic and use 
this information to improve your site’s 
contextual navigation.
•	Build a better alphabetical index for 
your site by basing index entries on your 
frequent query terms.
•	Tune and test your metadata by 
comparing it with the tone, coverage, and 
trends of your searchers’ common queries.

258
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 10
Practical Tips 
for Improving 
Content
Determining Which Content You Should  
Get Rid of	
259
Plugging Content Gaps	
260
Making Relevant Content Even More  
Relevant	
263
Expanding Your Understanding of  
Users’ Content Interests	
265
Getting Marketing to Do the Right Thing	
269
Getting Content Owners to Do the  
Right Thing	
272
Summary	
274

259
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
S
ite search analytics doesn’t just help you 
improve your site’s findability. In this 
chapter, we’ll cover a few ways it can 
lead directly to better content.
Determining Which Content 
You Should Get Rid of
These days, many organizations are falling 
over themselves to hire content strategists to 
help them figure out what content to get rid 
of, and for good reason: ROT (Redundant, 
Outdated, and Trivial) content misinforms and 
confuses. It’s expensive to maintain and even 
more expensive not to maintain. It damages the 
search experience as well, because no matter 
how brilliantly you’ve designed your site’s 
search system, poor content will invariably 
clutter your search results. 
There are many ways that organizations 
identify ROT. It might be content that’s never 
or rarely been accessed, according to server 
logs. (Unverified rumor: 90% of Microsoft.
com’s content has never been accessed—not 
once!) It might be content that is too old or 

260
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
has no clear owner. SSA can provide another 
criterion to consider. For example, perhaps 
content that is not retrieved by short head 
queries (say, your 100 most common queries) 
should be considered as potential ROT. After 
all, if important queries don’t find it, there’s a 
chance it’s not especially relevant.
Sandia National Labs took a slightly different 
SSA-based approach. It compared content 
that’s been spidered—in other words, that the 
search engine knows about—but was rarely 
if ever accessed. If the search engine knows 
about it, but searchers don’t find it, perhaps it 
should be weeded?
Plugging Content Gaps
Conversely, does your site or intranet have 
the content it ought to? Using SSA to answer 
this question is both deceptively simple and 
highly effective.
Review your most frequent zero result queries 
on a regular basis: weekly for most sites, and 
daily for commerce sites whose customers and 

261
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
products are highly dynamic. Try variants of 
each query to validate that the documents are 
simply not there. If they’re not, the solution is 
relatively simple: create new content.
Of course, getting new content created can 
be tricky. It’s not always clear that you should 
support queries that are retrieving zero results. 
If your alternative medicine drugstore site 
keeps getting queries for Nyquil, you probably 
don’t want to start selling Vicks products.
But there is an opportunity there. Instead 
of simply showing a zero results page, why 
not provide an explanation of why you 
don’t sell Nyquil? Or why you strongly 
recommend alternative medical products 
over commercial pharmaceuticals in general? 
Instead of punishing the users, you have a 
great opportunity to provide them with some 
useful information.
And while we’re on the subject of punishment, 
you can beat up on the person in your 
organization who is shirking his responsibility 
for creating content. For example, at Michigan 

262
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
State University, freedom of information was 
a frequent query that wasn’t retrieving any 
content. Ironically, the university’s Freedom 
of Information Officer hadn’t made herself 
particularly easy to find. So MSU hit on an 
ingenious temporary solution: make her staff 
directory a best bet search result that would be 
retrieved by the query freedom of information 
(see Figure 10.1). That way the officer’s contact 
information was made to serve as a placeholder 
search result until she created a more helpful 
page about freedom of information at MSU 
(see Figure 10.2).
FIGURE 10.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690983044/
Now when you search MSU’s site for “freedom of information,” you get 
a best bet result...

263
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 10.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690983002/
...the FOIA officer’s directory entry!
Making Relevant Content 
Even More Relevant
Your analysis of null results reports may 
uncover a different problem: you have the 
relevant documents, but for some reason 
they’re not being retrieved (or, if they are, 
they’re hopelessly too far down the results list 
to be noticed). When relevant documents 
aren’t matching searchers’ queries, the culprits 
are usually one or more of these:
•	Deficient titling: This is a common 
problem in large organizations where many 
different authors handle titling documents. 
When it comes to their own documents, 
authors can be a bit narcissistic. They 
don’t always realize or remember that their 

264
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
document will be accessed as part of a much 
larger collection of documents. So their 
document on expense reporting guidelines 
gets lost in the search results pages because 
it’s been titled too broadly (“Travel”), 
narrowly (“Taxi Receipts”), too jargony 
(“Using the ReimburseX System V8.2”), or 
too obscurely (“Policy #29-b.37”).
•	Deficient or poorly applied metadata: 
If your search system takes advantage of the 
metadata associated with your document 
(say, to support fielded searching), searchers 
will experience problems akin to poor 
titling. (And unfortunately, poor titling and 
poor metadata often go together.) 
•	Poor writing: Is there something missing 
from relevant documents that simply ought 
to be there? Intuit’s Christine Connors 
found this to be the case. Users were 
frequently searching for the phrase get back 
overpaid wages and striking out. These 
terms ought to have been included in the 
appropriate Intuit page. They weren’t, and 
the fix was obvious and easy to implement. 

265
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Now it might not sound fair to call such a 
document “deficient”—the writing itself 
was fine—but it was missing something that 
should have been there all along.
These issues are all diagnosable and all 
fixable, but they may require some social 
reengineering. We’ll cover that in the last two 
hacks in this chapter.
Expanding Your Understanding 
of Users’ Content Interests
When searchers ask your site—through a 
query—for information about a particular 
topic, the way they ask it reveals much about 
their understanding of that topic (and, often, 
some surprises). One way to do this is by 
exploring the other terms that searchers use 
in combination with the particular term that 
you’re interested in analyzing to see what 
sort of adjacent interests (and corresponding 
content) can be deduced. This is especially 
useful with queries for newer terms where you 
don’t have much understanding of what else 

266
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
the searchers might be interested in beyond the 
term itself. 
For example, the BBC encountered a spike in 
queries for a company called Farepak, and used 
a couple different approaches to learn more 
about it. The report in Figure 10.3 shows one 
week’s worth of BBC.co.uk queries that include 
the term Farepak.
FIGURE 10.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982950/
Queries at BBC.co.uk that include the term Farepak.

267
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
You’ll immediately notice that many of the 
queries include the term hamper. That’s 
because Farepak was, essentially, a club 
that negotiated special deals for customers 
for the holiday season: Christmas hampers 
are baskets of food that customers had paid 
for in advance. Farepak was running into 
financial difficulties—ultimately reported by 
the BBC (see http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
business/6124406.stm )—and clearly many 
were interested in the story’s developments. 
Farepak’s troubles can also be sussed out from 
other queries shown here, like Farepak in 
administration (“in administration” means the 
same thing as “bankrupt” does in the U.S.), 
and Farepak bust. Now the Farepak story starts 
to become clearer, and the BBC could adjust 
its coverage—and its content—accordingly.
Analyzing other terms that were searched 
within the same session as Farepak also 
gleans some useful benefits, as the next 
report in Figure 10.4 demonstrates. This 
Amazon-like “people who searched for... also 
searched for...” approach provides a clearer 

268
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
understanding of common misspellings 
(helpful if you’re building a thesaurus or some 
other capacity for handling equivalent terms). 
More importantly, it provides useful semantic 
clues, like connecting Farepak to Watchdog, a 
BBC consumer affairs program that may have 
reported on the story.
FIGURE 10.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690982920/
BBC.co.uk queries that occurred within the same session as Farepak.

269
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Are there topics that show up in your search 
logs that merit further exploration? You might 
learn more about them and their context by 
seeing what else users searched them with. 
Then develop your content in response to what 
you’ve learned. 
Getting Marketing to 
Do the Right Thing
Jargon, specifically in branding products 
and services, has been a bone of contention 
between marketers and UX people, like, 
forever. (And you already know whose side I’ll 
be taking in this argument.)
Clearly, there are some cases when a brand 
name makes or breaks a product’s success. 
But just some: not every brand name can 
compare with, say, Coca-Cola, because not 
every product is backed by a similar budget or 
has the decades of exposure that are required 
to establish it within a market. In most cases, 
avoiding jargon in favor of plain language that 
actually means something to your customers 
will yield better results. SSA can help your 

270
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
organization decide on whether to use jargon 
or plain language terminology (and, of course, 
help you determine just what that plain 
language ought to be).
Washtenaw Community College (www.wccnet.
edu) faced exactly this challenge. Like many 
academic institutions, WCC offers a variety 
of Web-based educational programs. They 
sported some interesting brand names, like 
“College on Demand” (aka “COD”) and 
“FlexEd.” But students weren’t signing up at 
nearly the rates that were expected. 
WCC’s marketing staff were considering 
some traditional advertising remedies: mass 
mailings of brochures, creation of posters, and 
other measures that would introduce these 
terms to target audiences. Such an approach 
can’t guarantee success, but considering its 
reliance on broadcasting to a large audience, 
it’s guaranteed to be expensive. WCC’s Web 
team, armed with its secret SSA weapon, 
had another idea: compare the frequency 
of queries for brand names with their plain 
language equivalents.

271
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The numbers were eye opening. During the 
time period studied, COD ranked as the 101st 
most popular query, College on Demand 
clocked in at #259, and FlexEd at #389. 
Compare those rankings with the best plain 
language equivalent, online, at position #22. 
Additionally, online was included as part of 213 
other queries (see Figure 10.5).
FIGURE 10.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690407163/
WCC query ranks: online is far more popular than the other, more 
jargony terms.
The result? WCC relabeled much of its 
content with plain language terms, ensuring 
that its content already spoke the language of 
its customers, rather than investing heavily in 
training customers to use WCC’s language. 
The brand names didn’t necessarily go away, 
but they weren’t relied upon to match content 
with users’ needs.

272
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Getting Content Owners 
to Do the Right Thing
Chances are if your organization has more 
than one content author, it has a thick set of 
policies and procedures to guide their work. 
And chances are that your content authors will 
ignore them. Not because they’re bad people, 
but because the activity of creating content 
is necessarily a very focused one. You’re 
typically thinking deeply about what you’re 
writing or editing, not of the bigger picture 
of how your content will fit into the broader 
collection of documents that populates a Web 
site or intranet. When you combine myopic 
content creation with a disregard for following 
conventions for style, titling, and tagging 
documents, you’re left with documents that 
won’t get found. 
Sandia National Labs dealt with this problem 
in a very innovative way. For its 50 most 
frequent queries, Web staff regularly record 
which documents show up at position #1 on 
the search results page. If and when that top 
document falls out of position #1, the staff alert 

273
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
the document’s owner and begin a healthy 
dialogue about why this has happened. 
Given that the drop often has something to do 
with not following policies and procedures, 
the content owner is more likely to understand 
their value—and the natural urge to compete 
(and win) helps content owners see that their 
content is indeed part of something bigger. 
A secondary benefit is the creation of the 
dialogue itself—in large organizations, Web 
staff and content authors often have little 
opportunity or clear incentives to talk. 

274
Chapter 10
Practical Tips for Improving Content
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Summary
•	Identify the content that’s not being 
found by common queries—maybe it’s 
time to weed it out or at least make it 
less prominent.
•	Use SSA to identify content gaps; 
consider these gaps as opportunities to 
grow your offerings. 
•	Diagnose content problems with SSA, 
such as deficient titling, poorly applied 
metadata, or poor writing.
•	See what types of queries co-occur with 
specific queries you want to study; you’ll get 
a sense of what content should co-occur.
•	Squash ill-considered reliance on jargon 
and brand names by finding better 
plain-language alternatives among your 
query data.
•	Get content owners to finally follow 
content guidelines by using query data 
to show them how terribly their content 
fails when they ignore the guidelines.

275
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
CHAPTER 11
Bridging Web 
Analytics and 
User Experience 
Data and Design: Never the Twain  
Shall Meet 	
277
The Case for Integrated Problem Solving 	
280
Creating a Single User Research Brain  
Within Your Organization 	
297
Site Search Analytics: The Natural  
Boundary Object	
308

276
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
I 
hope that this book has, by now, 
convinced you that site search analytics is 
indeed a valuable user research technique. 
Still, there are many people out there in 
both the user experience and web analytics 
communities who don’t take advantage of 
SSA. Even stranger, practitioners from both 
communities should be analyzing queries 
together. After all, SSA has something to offer 
to both: analytics folks generally want to derive 
insights from whatever huge store of behavioral 
data they can get their hands on. Meanwhile, 
the data’s semantic richness helps establish 
users’ intent as do many of the core research 
methods that UX practitioners rely upon. So 
why aren’t they sitting down to analyze query 
data together?
Well, the truth is, they’re not doing much of 
anything together. To grossly overgeneralize, 
it’s very much a right brain/left brain 
situation—they are two very different types of 
people who intuitively try to solve problems 
in very different ways. And because they live 
in separate organizational silos, web analytics 

277
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
and user experience folks simply don’t mix that 
much to begin with. 
But as different as they may be, their respective 
problem-solving approaches are incredibly 
complementary. In fact, they’re really two halves 
of the same brain. So wouldn’t it be great to get 
them to think—and work—together? 
In this chapter, we’ll step back from site 
search analytics to look at these communities’ 
respective and complementary skills, and argue 
for their greater integration. Then we’ll return 
one last time to SSA to offer it as a boundary 
object—a common method around which both 
fields can coalesce and eventually collaborate. 
Data and Design: Never 
the Twain Shall Meet 
Here’s an interesting headline in Figure 11.1 
involving a really well-known designer and a 
really, really well-known Web search company. 
And here’s another headline in Figure 11.2 
involving the same two parties, not three 
years later.

278
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 11.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690407393/
“Google just got Doug Bowman. Smart move by Google. This is their 
best acquisition to date.” (37 Signals, May 2006)1
FIGURE 11.2 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690983136/
“Google’s Data Fetish Drives Away Its Top Designer.” (ValleyWag, 
March 2009)2 
1	  May 26, 2006; Signals vs. Noise (37 Signals’ blog) http://37signals.com/svn/archives2/
googles_best_acquisition_to_date_doug_bowman.php
2	  March 20, 2009; ValleyWag http://valleywag.gawker.com/5177144/googles-data-fetish-
drives-away-its-top-designer 

279
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Doug Bowman’s journey in and out of 
the GooglePlex is a very telling one. 
Smart designer gets snapped up by smart, 
engineering-driven company, to great 
applause. Company assigns him a newly 
minted senior role—Visual Design Lead—and 
charges him with helping “establish a common 
visual language across all [its] collaborative 
and communication products.”3 Designer 
finds that it’s not exactly easy to inject design 
thinking into a well-established engineering 
culture. And, after a couple years, finally flees 
after being asked to use data to justify his 
design decisions once too often. (“Ummm, 
Doug? We’ll need some data to determine 
whether that line should be three, four, or five 
pixels wide.”4) 
While it may sound silly to test the 
performance of a line’s width (we’re not 
making this up) or the relative merits of 41 
3	  May 27, 2006: StopDesign (Doug Bowman’s site) http://stopdesign.com/
archive/2006/05/27/going-to-google.html
4	  March 20, 2009: StopDesign http://stopdesign.com/archive/2009/03/20/goodbye-
google.html

280
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
shades of blue,5 you really can’t argue with 
Google’s success. Then again, if you’d been 
following his career, you really can’t argue with 
Doug Bowman’s success. Who’s right here: 
the UX guy or the data-driven engineers? 
More importantly, whose approach to solving 
problems is the better one? 
The Case for Integrated 
Problem Solving 
Before we select a winner, let’s take a closer 
look at both approaches. Table 11.1 attempts—
in, admittedly, highly generalized terms—to 
show the differences between the practices of 
web analytics and user experience.
The two practices really are quite different and, 
as Doug Bowman found, don’t necessarily jive 
very well—especially in organizations, like 
Google, that are so strongly skewed in one 
direction. Yet they each have something to 
offer and are often attempting to address the 
very same kinds of design problems. Given 
that they both succeed, to varying degrees, 
5	  March 3, 2009: New York Times www.nytimes.com/2009/03/01/business/01marissa.html

281
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
there must be merit in both. And if each has 
merit without the other, on its own, each must 
be incomplete. 
TABLE 11.1 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5826101714
For example, if you’re analyzing clickstream 
data, you’re trying to figure out what happens 
as users move through your site. But you won’t 
get too far solely relying upon that method 
to answer why they do what they do. Or, if 
you’re running a field study, you might get a 
great sense of why people behave as they do, 

282
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
but your picture of what is going on is hugely 
limited and limiting. 
But here’s the good news: as much as each 
practice is incomplete, they’re chock-full 
of incredibly complementary dichotomies. 
When these two incomplete problem-solving 
approaches are integrated, we can achieve a 
far more balanced understanding of both what 
is happening with our sites and why. After all, 
it’s not much use to know what is happening if 
you don’t know why. Conversely, it’s not much 
use to understand why things are happening 
when you don’t understand what they were in 
the first place. When you integrate the what 
and the why, you’ll be creating something 
of a powerful new decision-making engine 
for your organization—and all sorts of new 
opportunities for your organization to leap 
ahead of its competition.
Let’s look at just a few examples of how web 
analytics and user experience approaches 
can complement—rather than confound—
each other. 

283
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Another Perspective on the Complementary Nature of 
Engineering and Design
Tom Chi, Experience Lead, Google Special Projects—
www.tomchi.com
Doug Bowman’s departure from Google sparked much 
heated discussion in the design world. While most of 
the follow-up conversation was strongly partisan—some 
defending Doug’s position, others saying that Google had it 
right—my take is that both stories are incomplete.
The underlying problem is that design is a holistic 
discipline, while data-analysis, applied dogmatically, 
is a reductive discipline. When they’re combined 
improperly, serious friction ensues. But far from vowing 
to never interact, these two disciplines need each other 
tremendously. The designer brings perspective that 
helps to organize experiential systems at all scales, 
while metrics are key to validating and optimizing those 
perspectives. The problems arise when analysis is treated 
as the primary driver for invention—that’s like setting 
a measuring tape on a drafting table and expecting it to 
design spectacular architecture—rest assured, the genius 
is not in the tape. To best illustrate this point, I’ll put on 
two hats.
FELLOW ENGINEERS
From the engineer’s standpoint, quantitative metrics are 
an obvious must-have. Used well, they offer an impartial 
mechanism for tracking how code/design changes affect 
performance. Against that backdrop, design is really 

284
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
best understood as a kind of multivariate optimization 
of extreme complexity. Even a simple two-column 
layout with borders and background colors, the possible 
mix of colors, borders, column widths, layouts, and so 
on is exponential. Engineers familiar with large-scale 
optimization, even with approaches like max-descent, 
simulated annealing, and random restart, find that it’s 
difficult to ensure that their customers are not trapped in 
local optima.
Think of your designer as a guide in this multivariate 
optimization process. A good designer has been all over 
parts of the territory a dozen times on various projects 
and has studied the design patterns and techniques that 
help in different problems/situations. Because of this, 
he intuitively knows how to approach a problem, just 
as an experienced software architect intuitively knows 
what software design approaches will provide various 
benefits/drawbacks. Don’t think of this as some sort 
of “design mystique” with the designer projecting his 
“artist soul” or anything like that. A talented designer is 
similar to a senior technical architect because both can 
help you avoid configurations/combinations that are just 
not viable. Both the designer’s and architect’s designs 
are holistic, just as many good software architectures and 
system designs are holistic.
DEAR DESIGNERS
Okay, first off—design is not the same as art. In teaching 
seminars, I’ve often shared that “Art is about freedom; 
Another Perspective (continued)

285
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
design is about constraints.” Among the key constraints 
is the performance of your design, especially with respect 
to how it impacts your product and your business. While 
metrics may be scary to some, becoming familiar with 
different evaluation techniques and knowing which to 
employ are the hallmark of an experienced designer. The 
key is to extend your design process beyond the drawing 
of pixels, vectors, and boxes-and-arrows, to the design 
of the system within which your work is produced and 
evaluated. Once you are comfortable with a wide variety 
of evaluation techniques, you’ll know which one will help 
clarify your key design decisions, and which will just waste 
your time only to produce noise. Instead of resisting or 
fearing evaluation of your design, you’ll appropriately lift 
the conversation up to the level where you are discussing 
and proposing the right methods of evaluation.
This attitude won’t turn a company’s culture around 
overnight, but being the type of designer who knows how 
to validate and defend his designs will raise the value and 
respect of the discipline within your organization.
CONCLUSION
The interplay of all disciplines (engineering, design, 
research, marketing, sales, QA, product, legal, customer 
care, and so on) is where the magic happens. Metrics 
are an absolutely critical interface between disciplines, 
but when controlled and wielded by only one discipline, 
they can greatly limit the potential of the others. An 
organization that empowers only engineers will primarily 
Another Perspective (continued)

286
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
produce engineering innovation, while an organization 
whose designers fear metrics will never reach the full 
potential of design. It is the organizations where all 
disciplines are represented and where metrics build 
common understanding that are able to innovate in 
several spheres at once, and those places will be vastly 
strengthened by this diversity.
Another Perspective (continued)
Example 1: A Field Study Demystifies 
Site Search Analytics Data 
We love this example; it’s based on the 
experience of User Interface Engineering’s 
Jared Spool. Imagine you’re a WA person for 
a retailer, and while perusing your site’s query 
data, you’ve discovered something strange: 
customers are searching SKU numbers—each 
product’s unique identification number. This 
wouldn’t seem so bizarre except for the fact that 
there are no SKUs featured in the site’s catalog. 
So where are customers finding the SKUs? 
And why on earth would they use them? 

287
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
While you may have some hypotheses, there’s 
simply no way to find definitive answers from 
the analytics data. Fortunately, you have some 
UX colleagues to turn to. Their suggestion is to 
do a field study, where those customers can be 
observed interacting with the Web site in their 
natural habitat.
They return from the field with some 
interesting observations: customers don’t 
only use the Web site; they also rely upon 
something else your company provides: a 
good old-fashioned printed catalog. In fact, 
they prefer this handy, familiar, and extremely 
high resolution catalog to the Web site when it 
comes to browsing for products. But ordering 
is so much easier on the Web site, and it avoids 
the messy business of interacting with other 
humans. So customers go online and search for 
the SKUs to fill their shopping cart as quickly 
and painlessly as possible. 
Of course, if the site’s product pages don’t 
include SKUs, that experience won’t be so 
quick and painless. But at least the SKU 

288
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
phenomenon identified by the WA folks is 
now understood—and, thanks to the field 
study, a traditional UX method, it can be 
easily addressed. 
Example 2: Segmentation 
Leads to Better Personas 
Now imagine that you’re a UX person who is 
trying to get personas developed, accepted, and 
used by your Web team. But, not surprisingly, 
you’re finding some resistance; after all, aren’t 
these personas all just fiction? The developers 
shake their heads when you describe such a 
touchy-feely way of driving the design process!
Well, personas have a basis in truth—it’s just 
that this “truth” is grounded in a qualitative 
(and often anecdotal) understanding of 
your site’s audiences. In effect, personas are 
interpretations of interpretations. But if you 
could introduce “hard” data into persona 
development, you might reduce concerns with 
the “fictional” nature of personas. 

289
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Do that by asking your WA counterparts 
to show you their audience segmentation 
reports. These reports describe actual user 
behavior—the “what” of each segment. If 
you’re fortunate, the segments will match up 
well with your personas; if not, you’ll have to 
do some extrapolation. 
After you’ve identified relevant segments, 
integrate their data as best you can into your 
personas to make them more concrete (see 
Figure 11.3). For example, that segment’s 
common search queries can be used to 
illustrate a particular persona’s common 
information needs and interests. Does funnel 
analysis show where a segment is failing? 
Incorporate this data as an example of what 
frustrates that persona when it uses your site.

290
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 11.3 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5707187123/
A data-infused persona, with associated queries (“What Steven 
Searches”) added at the bottom. (Based on a persona from Adaptive 
Path.)

291
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
And there you have it: a traditional UX design 
tool (personas) was improved by a traditional 
WA tool (segmentation).
Example 3: Analytics as a Low-
Cost Form of User Research
So what happens when you don’t have the time 
or money for traditional user research? Analytics 
can help you diagnose the problem quickly. 
This example is based on some excellent work 
by Fred Beecher from Evantage Consulting. 
In this example, you’re a UX consultant whose 
client’s Web site appears to be failing. Your 
client knows this because it keeps hearing 
complaints from both customers and business 
partners. The client’s industry is highly 
competitive, and product orders are often won 
or lost on customer service alone. But the client 
doesn’t have the time or money for you to do 
the usability testing you know you need to do 
to identify the problems to focus on during user 
research. What do you do?
Look to your counterparts in web analytics. 
They may already have some data you can 

292
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
use to diagnose the problem. Collaboration 
with an analyst is key here. Analysts can help 
UX designers understand site traffic and 
query data. In this situation, Fred found very 
quickly that users were suffering from two 
big problems. Site traffic analysis revealed 
that users were looking for information all 
over the site. Search log analysis revealed that 
users were looking for very specific pieces 
of information. However, the search log also 
revealed that the terms users were searching 
on were close to, but did not exactly match, 
the syntax for those terms on the site. This led 
to many queries with no results, even though 
the information users were seeking was 
actually on the site.
Obtaining these insights required a little over 
three days. During that time, Fred and the 
rest of the team also conducted a series of 
extremely short guerilla interviews with friends 
in a related industry. Combining the insights 
gained from site traffic and search log analysis 
with those gained from the short interviews, 
the team was able to craft a streamlined user 

293
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
research plan. This plan allowed the team to 
focus on the problem areas during interviews 
and contextual inquiries, just like diagnostic 
usability testing would have. However, even a 
quick usability test takes at least two weeks to 
craft, schedule, and execute. The approach of 
combining analytics with guerrilla interviews 
yielded the same results in under a week.
Example 4: When Your Funnel’s Broken, 
Task Analysis Can Explain Why 
Now you’re a WA person who works for a 
professional association, which is trying hard to 
expand its membership (traditionally based in 
the U.S.) into other countries. The association 
has made a big marketing push, which has 
resulted in more overall traffic, but hasn’t led to 
the hoped-for bump up in registrations. When 
you perform funnel analysis on the registration 
process, you can see that visitors from non-
U.S. IP addresses are getting tripped up on 
the page where they’re supposed to enter their 
address information.

294
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Now, many WA folks would say that their 
work is complete at this point—they’ve 
identified that there is, indeed, a problem and 
can point to where it’s happening. 
But the problem hasn’t been solved because no 
one has determined why those users are failing. 
Does the problem have to do with translation? 
U.S.-address biased text entry boxes? A text 
entry sequence that assumes top-to-bottom 
and left-to-right? A page flow that makes sense 
for North Americans but not for East Asians? 
Or something else?
The answer won’t come out of analytics data. 
However, there are a variety of methods—
such as task analysis and field testing—that 
a UX person could apply to determine why 
the process is failing and how it might be 
fixed. For example, while subjects “think 
out loud” during a task analysis session, 
they may indicate that they’re getting 
foiled by something as easy to fix as an 
insufficient number of address entry boxes to 
accommodate most non-North American street 
addresses (which can be quite long). 

295
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
With help from your UX colleagues, you’ve 
closed the loop to make your analysis truly 
actionable, and together you’ve determined what 
is going on and why. And once the problem is 
diagnosed, the fix is cheap and easy to make.
To summarize: funnel analysis, a fixture of 
WA, was used to identify a major problem; a 
traditional UX method, task analysis, was then 
used to diagnose and address that problem.
Example 5: Finding Data to Back 
Up and De-Politicize Your Design 
You’re a UX person who is trying to figure out 
how wide your search box should be. It needs 
to squeeze into the header you’ll be including 
in new templates used to generate every page 
in the site. Naturally, the owners of other 
features are clamoring for their own favorites 
to fit into that limited space, and the senior 
vice presidents among them are wielding their 
political power to get their way. 
Rather than letting politics drive the design 
process (and, in the process, ending up with a 
tiny search box or, worse, a link to a separate 

296
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
search page), you enlist your WA counterpart 
to help. She has the data, and she can do the 
math. Together, you decide to actually measure 
the ideal length of your site’s queries, using the 
method described in Chapter 8, “Practical Tips 
for Improving Search.”
And—voilà!—now you have some real data 
to refer to when making your case. And you 
can even be a little Machiavellian in how you 
proceed. Perhaps you ask for a 12-character-
wide query entry box, knowing that if you 
ended up with, say, 10, you’d still accommodate 
60% of all your queries. (I’d actually suggest 
requesting a few more characters, given that 
these numbers are based on averages.) Either 
way, you’ve managed to work together with 
a web analytics person to come up with real 
behavioral data to justify an important design 
decision.
Each of these examples combines the what 
and why to form a sum that is greater than its 
parts. Sounds like a great idea, but doing so 
has typically been difficult: most of today’s 

297
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
WA and UX people work in separate silos, 
using different tools to generate different types 
of research. Fortunately, the walls are starting 
to come down, as more and more intelligent 
organizations are enjoying the benefits of 
synthesizing their research—not just WA and 
UX, but from CRM, tech support, customer 
support, and other areas as well.
Creating a Single User Research 
Brain Within Your Organization 
There are many more potential ways to 
integrate different research practices and, 
ultimately, make decisions with a whole brain. 
How can you get your own organization to 
start making its decisions with a full brain? 
The answer depends upon whom you are 
within your organization—a rank-and-file 
practitioner or a senior decision maker. So 
naturally, we’ll explore the issue from both the 
bottom up and the top down. 

298
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
From the Bottom Up: Grass 
Roots Organizing 
If you’re down in the trenches, your options are 
limited, but don’t underestimate the gains that 
can be made from small, simple steps. Here are 
a few things you can do today.
Who’s Out There?
You’re looking to combine your data, analysis, 
and insights with those of the rest of your 
organization. So start by taking an inventory: 
who knows what within your organization’s 
user research silos? You want to learn the 
following information:
•	What types of data they own? Is 
it statistical or semantic? Logs or lab-
generated? Behavioral or attitudinal? 
Aualitative or quantitative? 
•	What sorts of tools and approaches do 
they use to learn from their data? Do 
they rely upon Omniture to capture and 
analyze their data? Do they have a team of 
ethnographers analyzing transcripts from 
field studies? Do they have access to a 
statistician?

299
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	What types of insights do they use 
these data for? Are they generating new 
product features or monitoring existing 
products’ performance? 
•	Which decision makers use these data? 
Senior managers? Product managers? 
Advertising staff? 
•	Who’s doing the actual work? What 
kinds of practitioners actually do the 
heavy lifting? What sorts of academic 
backgrounds do they come from? Do they 
have incentives to collaborate with you?
You won’t likely be able to capture a complete 
picture of all the user- or customer-facing 
research activities in your organization—you 
wouldn’t likely have time for that anyway. But 
if you can get a start, you—and whomever you 
enlist to join you—can fill in the blanks over time. 
To get you started, you might begin with these 
potential sources within your organization:
•	User research groups
•	Web analytics groups

300
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
•	Market research groups
•	Product groups that maintain their own 
research teams
•	Customer support/call center groups and 
switchboard operators
•	Customer relationship management (CRM) 
groups
•	Corporate library/research centers
You should also inventory the consultants and 
agencies that are involved in one type of user 
research or another; often, they know more 
about your users’ behaviors than your own 
organization does. 
Once you have a sense of who is out there, you’re 
ready for the next step: lunch.
Let’s Do Lunch
Invite a colleague to lunch to discuss her user 
research and to share your own. Go into your 
meeting having at least taken an initial pass at 
trying to fit your work with hers, as you’ve seen 
in the examples in the last section. 

301
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
When you meet, try to get a little 
brainstorming going on how your insights 
might support each other’s. For example, if 
you’re a UX person, take the opportunity to 
learn from your WA counterpart more about 
your organization’s KPI and then brainstorm 
together what sorts of qualitative data might 
strengthen those KPIs. If you’re a WA person, 
learn about the design challenges that your 
UX colleagues face. Are there places where 
quantitative data could strengthen their 
decision-making process (for example, the 
personas example earlier) or the cases they 
need to make (as in the query entry box 
example)?
At the end of your lunch, offer to pick up the 
tab, ask to add your colleague to your LinkedIn 
network, and don’t expect much to happen, at 
least right away. One-on-one connections are 
often the start of great movements, and small 
steps can be meaningful. You’re just planting 
seeds right now.

302
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Brown Bagging It
After you’ve had say, five lunches with new 
colleagues, you may be ready to start a brown 
bag series on the organization’s user research. 
Be sure to invite others involved in any flavor 
of user research. Initially, your topics can 
center on simple reviews by representatives 
of your organization’s different user research 
silos, covering the methodologies used and the 
kinds of insights gathered. As things pick up 
steam, invite outside experts to speak at your 
brown bags; not only will your organization’s 
researchers benefit, but your brown bag will 
also gain a much higher profile.
If your brown bags gain some traction—with 
enough momentum that they can operate 
without your personal involvement—
congratulations. You’ve succeeded in creating 
a community of interest around user research. 
This alone would be quite an achievement—
it’s a great step toward your organization’s 
forming a complete user research brain.
But to make a real difference, grass roots 
movements can only go so far. There are 

303
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
typically few or no incentives to share 
information or collaborate with people in 
different silos within an organization. They 
can have lunch or go to a brown bag, but they 
won’t be given the green light to spend the 
kind of time that’s required to truly integrate 
and derive value from the various centers of 
user research. If you want to go further, senior 
leadership must buy into the plan.
From the Top Down: Involving 
Senior Leadership 
Senior leaders are decision makers. If that’s 
you, what kinds of data do you need to 
help you make the decisions that determine 
your organization’s strategy? Play along for 
a moment: forget the acronyms, products, 
platforms, and practices that are floating 
around out there to describe user research. In 
fact, consider banning such words from your 
discussion altogether; terms like “CRM,” “user 
research,” and “Omniture” are so laden with 
baggage that they can obscure the critical goal: 
making well-informed decisions. 

304
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Okay, now ask yourself: what do you need to 
make good decisions?
Blue Skying the Organizational Brain
There won’t likely be a single answer. Rather, 
you’ll probably want a balanced diet of 
data, starting with a mix of quantitative and 
qualitative. You’ll want data that describe users’ 
actual behaviors, as well as their expressed 
attitudes. You’ll want data that help you 
monitor performance so you stay true to your 
organization’s goals, but you’ll also want data 
that help suss out new trends and surprises—
the stuff that changes your understanding 
of how your organization interacts with its 
audiences. Of course, you’ll want to know what 
and you’ll want to know why. And you’ll want 
to synthesize all this good stuff so that the sum 
is greater than the parts.

305
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
In effect, you’re developing an organizational 
research agenda to support your decision 
making. Your research agenda is made up of 
these components: 
•	The critical questions that you need answers 
for in order to make decisions. 
•	A broad and balanced set of data inputs 
to synthesize in order to answer those 
questions. 
•	A collection of tools and methods to help 
you obtain the data you need. 
Figure 11.4 presents a variety of user research 
inputs as a landscape of inputs.6 This isn’t the 
only way to see the big picture—other axes 
could have been used, other research methods 
could and should have been included—but it’s 
a great start.
6	 This diagram is from Christian Rohrer’s guest article in Useit.com, “When to Use Which User 
Experience Method” (October 6, 2008). It’s also been attributed to Mulder and Yaar in The User Is 
Always Right: A Practical Guide to Creating and Using Personas for the Web (New Riders, 2006).

306
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 11.4 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690407345/
The Landscape of User Research Methods demonstrates both the 
diversity and complementary nature of the methods used by many 
different research fields.
As this research diagram comes from UX 
people, it’s skewed toward the methods they 
tend to use. If a business analyst were to draw 
his research methods landscape, it would 
certainly look different. But I’m showing 
it because I want those responsible for an 
organization’s decisions to consider: how 
would they draw this diagram for their whole 
organization?

307
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
The Decision-Making Dashboard
Developing a holistic view of your 
organization’s research needs will help you 
in many ways: you’ll find opportunities to 
eliminate redundancies, but you’ll also identify 
gaps and correct imbalances in the tools, 
methods, and data that are currently driving 
your decision-making process. You’ll also come 
up with ways to better sequence your user 
research. So imagine, if you will, a research 
“dashboard” that would include inputs from 
all of your research sources—in effect, an 
inventory of all of your organization’s user 
research sources.
Consider taking things one step further and 
showing the relationships between those 
inputs. So, for example, draw a line between 
the “dial” for frequent search queries and the 
“dial” for your regular task analysis studies, 
as task analyses can be greatly informed by 
common queries. Not only does that mean 
both inputs are better, but as you draw lines 
showing the relationships between all of your 
data inputs, you’ll also achieve true synthesis. 

308
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
Finally, by starting with a unified research 
agenda, you’ll find ways of better utilizing 
the smart, expensive people—in-house and 
consultants—who are already in your employ. 
If you can break down the silos that divide 
them, they’ll be able to understand your 
organization’s challenges together and execute 
on them together. Otherwise, all they’re doing 
is understanding and executing incomplete 
solutions to incomplete problems.
Site Search Analytics: The 
Natural Boundary Object
So what does all our cheerleading for 
integrating different types of research have to 
do with site search analytics?
Well, SSA might be the best hope of bringing 
them together because it’s a natural boundary 
object. According to Wikipedia, “Boundary 
objects are objects which are both plastic 
enough to adapt to local needs and constraints 
of the several parties employing them, yet 
robust enough to maintain a common identity 

309
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
across sites.”7 In our case, of course, the 
parties are web analytics and user experience.
I learned about boundary objects from visual 
thinker extraordinaire, Dave Gray, of XPLANE 
and author of Gamestorming. After mulling 
over the differences between “data people” and 
“design people,” Dave naturally drew a picture 
(and shared some brilliant thoughts about how 
different disciplines can intersect).8 Rather than 
portraying a simple boundary object, he took the 
concept further and drew a boundary matrix, as 
shown in Figure 11.5.
7	  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boundary_object
8	  Dave had some great observations on the topic; see www.gogamestorm.com/?p=58

310
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
FIGURE 11.5 
 http://www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/5690407327/
Dave Gray’s boundary matrix shows how to link two disciplines (in our 
case, web analytics and user experience).
For example, data people might think in terms 
of segments; design people might think in terms 
of personas. Data people might think in terms of 
KPIs, while designers might think about goals. 
SSA has relevance to both: it can help augment 
both personas and traditional segments. 

311
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
And its metrics can help connect goals and 
KPIs. Because of that mutual relevance, SSA 
itself is a boundary object that can offer a 
path that can connect data and design people. 
Consider this: almost all of the data that web 
analytics people work with is statistical. While 
clickstream data and site traffic data display 
users’ behaviors, they’re ultimately weak, as 
I’ve noted, at showing users’ intentions and 
motives—at explaining “why” they do the 
things they do. 
Site search query data is a very different kind 
of data: it’s semantically rich in a way that no 
other analytic data comes close to. Queries are 
an almost pure expression of users’ intentions 
and needs in their own words. The closest 
competitor—analyzing navigation paths from 
clickstream data—helps you infer where users 
hope to go, but requires quite a lot of guessing. 
SSA requires little or no guessing at all about 
intent. So SSA plugs a huge attitudinal hole in 
web analytics’ grasp of user intent.
Conversely, UX people have often been 
challenged to come up with the numbers to 

312
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
justify their design decisions. It’s not enough 
to simply intuit that a “campus map” would 
be valuable to feature on a university’s main 
page. It’s not necessarily enough to have 
this intuition validated by test subjects in a 
laboratory environment. Thanks to SSA, you 
can now argue this point with much more 
certainty, and more importantly, with a much 
greater volume of data based upon actual 
usage to back you up. And you can justify how 
you label that information, as well as many 
other heretofore mushy design decisions that 
wilted under scrutiny from your organization’s 
managers and other competing interests.
Really, SSA, with its connections to both 
user experience and web analytics, is the 
ideal boundary object for bringing them 
together. In other words, SSA should appeal 
to both WA and UX people. They may see 
its value differently, and use different terms 
to understand it, but nevertheless SSA offers 
value to both. So I’m hopeful that SSA can 
provide a beachhead for collaboration between 
smart analytics and UX people that might 

313
Chapter 11
Bridging Web Analytics and User Experience 
Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
eventually enable organizations to make 
decisions with a full brain.
You may not use SSA for such ambitious 
goals as bridging entirely separate worlds of 
research and insight like web analytics and 
user experience. But I do hope you’ll use 
it to improve your site’s user experience in 
practical and meaningful ways, from making 
your search box wide enough to convincing 
your site’s content owners to follow titling 
guidelines. SSA really does plug a gap in the 
conversations that organizations can have with 
their customers: where search queries express 
their information needs, analyzing query data 
makes sure you’re answering those needs 
effectively. Good luck!

314
Enter code SSADE for 15% off any Rosenfeld Media product directly
purchased from our site: rosenfeldmedia.com
Index

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
315
Index
Symbols
80/20 Rule,  33
A
acronyms,  224, 226
Ad Service, income from,  191
ads, on search results pages,   
107
Advanced Search,  217–223
AIGA,  169, 245
search exit percentages,   
119–122
airlines, searches,  220
Allen, Sarah,  175
Amazon,  190
AND Boolean operator,  207
Angel, Gary,  220–236, 221, 
222, 223
answer patterns,  83–86
anti-pattern analysis,  90
AOL researchers, and 
privacy,  154
Applications content type,   
84
archive of search logs,  53
audience analysis,  41,  
159–181
audience segmentation 
reports,  289
auto-completion of 
queries,  211–213
average order, for segmenting 
audience,  167
awareness of SSA, lack of,  41
A–Z site indices,  246
B
base forms, converting words 
to,  74
BBC,  266
Beecher, Fred,  291
Belam, Martin,  231–236, 
232, 233, 234
best bets,  208–211
best match, location in search 
results,  116–118
bidding on keywords,  150
Big Book of Key 
Performance Indicators 
(Peterson),  193
Boolean operators,  206
boundary matrix to link 
disciplines,  310
boundary objects,  308
Bowman, Doug,  278, 279, 
283
branding products,  269
broad terms, vs. metadata,   
149
brown bag series on user 
research,  302

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
316
Index
C
card sorting. See also  
analysis; content; 
methodologies; need 
for card sorting; user 
research techniques
Card, Stuart,  216
case study on SSA,  2–21
Central Michigan University
campus climate 
improvement as goal,   
184
Chi, Tom,  283–313
cleaned-up queries for auto-
complete,  212
clickstream data,  118, 281
commerce sites, goals,  190
commercial databases,  205
Connors, Christine,  264
Contact info pages content 
types,  85
content
available but not found,   
109
changing owners’ actions,   
272–273
decision to remove,   
259–260
disconnect with site users,  
110
increasing relevance,   
263–265
plugging gaps,  260–263
search results design 
around specialized 
types,  228–234
search site analytics and,   
38
types for answers to 
queries,  84
content-rich sites, goals,  190
content strategy,  76
contextual navigation,   
238–246
conversions, and audience 
segmentation,  167
converting words to base 
forms,  74
cookies, for user information,   
30
costs of analytic tools,  43
Count, of query frequency,   
64
Cumulative Percent,  64
Cutroni, Justin,  102
D
dashboard, decision-making,   
307–308
data,  311
and design,  277–280
legal hurdles to 
accessing,  42
raw, for site search 
analytics,  28–32

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
317
Index
databases, commercial,  205
dates, in searches,  226
date/time stamp for data,  30
Daylight Savings Time,  50
decision-making dashboard,   
307–308
design
data and,  277–280
engineering and,  283–313
politics and,  295–297
desire paths,  240
E
empty queries,  92
engineering, design and,   
279, 283–313
error messages,  214
ESPN,  190
Evantage Consulting,  291
Excel,  62
exit, queries resulting in 
immediate,  119–122
Exploratory Data Analysis,  61
extended log entry,  51
F
failure analysis,  40, 100–127
in audience analysis,  175
caveats,  100–102
meaningful failure,  122
queries not retrieving 
useful results,  111–118
queries resulting in 
immediate exits,   
119–122
queries with zero results,   
102–110
failure, sessions ending in,  148
Ferrara, John,  112
field study,  281
funnel analysis,  293
fuzzy search,  75
G
garbage, in search log,  97
generic reports, for failure 
analysis,  101
geography, for segmenting 
audience,  167
GetSatisfaction.com,  192
GMT offset,  50
goal-based analysis,  183–199
goals
determining,  189–197
tracking,  184–189
Google,  206, 278, 283
Google AdWords, bid on 
keywords,  150
Google Analytics,  29, 43, 
119, 206
and audience 
segmentation,  166
null results reports 
from,  102
pivot feature,  169

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
318
Index
Google Documents, 
spreadsheet,  62
Google Search Appliance,   
28, 30
granularity of terms, session 
analysis and,  149–151
grass roots organizing,   
298–303
Gray, Dave,  309, 310
guardian.co.uk Web site,   
232–236
H
hacking of search engine,  94
Hewlett Packard, search 
engine,  228
hierarchy for site,  82
Hurst, Marko,  193
hyphenation, impact on 
searching,  75
I
identification numbers,  224
income, generating by 
content site,  191
indexing by search 
engine,  109
plugging gaps in,   
201–202
information architect,  5
information need, change 
during session,  136
Instructions content type,  85
integrated problem-solving,   
280–297
intent of user,  101
Internal Revenue Service, 
Advanced Search 
interface,  218
internal testing queries, as log 
junk,  95
Irrelevant (I) rating,  113
J
jargon,  269
Jarrett, Caroline,  175
JavaScript code, for data 
capture,  28
K
Kaushik, Avinash, Web 
Analytics: An Hour a 
Day,  193
KPI (Key Performance 
Indicators),  39, 
184–189
determining,  189–197
for searches,  187–189

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
319
Index
L
language
jargon,  269
of users, vs. content,  68
of users, vs. metadata,   
250
queries segmented by 
type,  170
search vs. content,  110
lead generation sites,  191
legal hurdles for SSA,  42
LendingTree.com,  191
LEN function,  203
library catalogs,  205
long tail,  8, 34
finding patterns in,  86–89
long tail analysis,  178
Loose relevance rating score,   
114
loyalty, for segmenting 
audience,  167
lunch meetings with 
colleagues,  300–303
M
marketing,  269–271
meaningful failure,  122
metadata,  38, 110, 264
applying,  149
and auto-complete list,   
213
creating set,  71
eliminating terms,  256
testing and tuning,   
249–256
tracking trends,  253–256
metrics
based on query data,   
193–194
for common queries,  8
for current search engine 
experience,  6
for junk log entries,  96
vs. KPI,  184
for precision,  16, 17, 19
quantitative,  283
for relevancy,  16, 17, 19
for searches,  187–189
Michigan State 
University,  247, 261
PERL script from,  29
Microsoft.com, content,  259
Microsoft Excel,  62
Microsoft Support,  192
Misplaced (M) rating,  113
Morningstar.com,  104
Mortensen, Dennis,  184
N
National Cancer Institute,   
208
natural boundary object,   
308–313
navigation,  38
contextual,  238–246

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
320
Index
Navigation pages content 
type,  84
NCSA extended Web server 
log format,  48
Near (N) rating,  112
needs of searcher,  135
Netflix,  123–126
News and Announcements 
content type,  84
New York Times,  190
Nielsen, Jakob,  36
“No Results Found” page, 
improving,  214–216
Norton (WW), session 
analysis,  142–147
NOT Boolean operator,  207
noun phrases,  73
Nudelman, Greg,  104–127
null results reports,  102
O
Omniture,  29
OpenOffice, spreadsheet,  62
Open University,  176–178
OR Boolean operator,  206
organization
research agenda,  305
unique audience segments,  
173
organizational brain,   
304–313
organizational sites, types,   
190
organization names,  226
outliers,  10, 91, 245
P
page design, and thrashing,   
104
Pareto Principle,  33
parsing queries, PERL script 
for,  62
patent information, zero 
results query and,  101
pattern analysis,  40, 57–98
answer patterns,  83–86
anti-pattern analysis,  90
as form of play,  57–61
in audience analysis,  175
considerations,  66–86
finding patterns in long 
tail,  86–89
getting started,  61–65
question patterns,  79–82
synonym patterns,  68–75
tonal patterns,  67–68
percentage of overall search 
activity, for each 
query,  64
PERL script
for parsing data,  29
for parsing queries,  62

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
321
Index
Permissive relevance rating 
score,  114
personal names,  225
personas,  162, 288–291
Peterson, Eric T., The 
Big Book of Key 
Performance 
Indicators,  193
phrase queries,  73–98
Pirolli, Peter,  216
place names,  226
policies and procedures,   
272–273
politics
and design,  295–297
hurdles for SSA,  42
in recommended links 
selection,  209
Power Laws,  33
precision,  9, 12–15
metrics,  16, 17, 19
preferred term, analysis to 
determine,  71
privacy protection,  131
problem-solving, 
integrated,  280–297
projects. See information 
architecture (IA) 
projects
proper noun phrase,  73
proper nouns,  224
Q
quantitative metrics,  283
queries,  311
alphabetical index built 
around,  247
analysis,  8–15
classification by users,  145
customization,  220–236
empty,  92
motivations for revising,   
217
rank by frequency,  64
repeat,  93
search metrics based on,   
193–194
on SKU numbers,  286
starting point for,  238, 
242
text-entry box for,   
202–205
user differences,  164
zero results,  38, 102–110
query test, for metadata,   
250–251
Quesenbery, Whitney,  175
question patterns,  79–82
R
random sample, for long tail 
pattern analysis,  87
Rappoport, Avi,  48, 92–98

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
322
Index
rating results, scale for 
precision testing,  12–14
raw data, for site search 
analytics,  28–32
real-estate sites, searches,   
220, 222
recommended links,  208–211
Reference pages content type,  
85
“referer” field,  50
registration process,  293
regular expressions,  95
relevance,  9–12
to business,  108
limitations of testing,  11
metrics,  16, 17, 19
of content, increasing,   
263–265
of query results,  7, 112–116
for phrase queries,  73
ranking algorithm weighting 
configuration,  141
Relevant (R) rating,  112
repeat queries,  93
reports,  37
results
analysis of. See analysis
reverse lookup,  252–253
robot crawlers,  93
Rohrer, Christian,  305
ROT (Redundant, Outdated, 
and Trivial) content,  259
S
Sandia National Labs,  272
scent of information,  216
search engine
indexing by,  109
metrics for current 
experience,  6
performance 
comparison,  16
planned launch,  2
plugging gaps in 
index,  201–202
transaction logs for,  48
troubleshooting,  4
searches
data availability vs. 
privacy,  154
goal-setting and,  183
metrics and KPI,  187–189
page originating,  239
parameters in log entry,   
52
search field spam,  95
search improvement,   
201–236
accommodating strange 
syntax,  205–208
auto-completion,  211–213
best bets,  208–211
“No Results Found” page 
improvement,  214–216

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
323
Index
search improvement 
(continued)
plugging gaps in search 
engine’s index,  201
results design around 
specialized content 
types,  228–234
results design around 
specialized query 
types,  224–228
revisions for better 
results,  216–223
text-entry box,  202–205
search log analysis,  292
search log entry
anatomy,  48–55
basic fields,  49
extended,  51
search logs,  28
removing junk,  96
taxonomy of junk,  92–98
URLs in,  227
search results, best match 
location,  116–118
search scoping, site search 
analytics and,  231–236
seasonality, of information 
usage,  76
segmentation,  288–291
segmenting audience,   
160–165
benefits,  161
comparing and 
contrasting,  175
process,  165–174
selection rate metric,  118
SelectQuote.com,  191
self-service/support sites,  192
SEM (Search Engine 
Marketing),  54
senior leadership, in 
user research 
integration,  303–313
SEO (Search Engine 
Optimization),  54, 150
server hacks,  94
session analysis,  40, 129–157
in audience analysis,  175
for failed sessions,  148
granularity of terms,   
149–151
reasons,  134–136
selecting sessions 
for,  147–148
TFANet example,   
138–142
who, what and 
when,  130–134
WW Norton long 
session,  142–147
sessions
defining,  136–138
short head,  34
focus on,  159

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
324
Index
site search analytics,  312
basics,  23–27
case study,  2–21
importance of,  18
natural boundary 
object,  308–313
obstacles,  41–43
raw data for,  28–32
reasons to use,  27–28
responsibility for,  43–47
and search scoping,   
231–236
use options,  37–41
site search query data,  311
site traffic analysis,  292
SKU numbers, customer 
search of,  286
spam, search field,  95
spider,  93
Spool, Jared,  286
spreadsheet
for data analysis,  29
for pattern analysis,  62
template use,  66
stemmer,  74
Stirling, Viki,  175
Strict relevance rating score,   
114
style conventions,  272
subscription, income 
generation,  191
surveys, vs. query 
analysis,  189
synonym patterns,  68–75
synonyms,  256
T
tag cloud,  152
task analysis,  293–295
Teach for America,  130–134
technical hurdles for SSA,  41
template for spreadsheet,  63
using,  66
testing metadata,  249–256
text-entry box, for query,   
202–205
TFANet,  130–134
session analysis example,   
138–142
third-party resources, on 
search results pages,   
107
thrashing,  104–127
time constraints of session,   
137
time of day, and retail 
customer searches,  78
time zones,  50
timing, for segmenting 
audience,  168
titling documents,  263
tolerances, range for precision 
levels,  14
tonal patterns,  67–68
top-down analysis,  194

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
325
Index
tracking goals,  184–189
traffic sources, for segmenting 
audience,  167
transaction logs, for search 
engine,  48
trends in metadata, 
tracking,  253
troubleshooting search 
engine,  4
type-ahead for queries,   
211–213
U
Underwood, Walter,  73–98
Unica,  29
University of Alaska 
Fairbanks, Advanced 
Search interface,  218
URLs
in query logs,  227
search for,  90
usability test,  293
user-centered thinking,  6
user experience,  276, 312
of search,  5
web analytics vs.,  280
user experience people, 
analysis by,  45
user information, cookies for,   
30
User Interface 
Engineering,  239
user research
brown bag series on,  302
discussion over 
lunch,  300–303
inputs,  305
integrating,  297–308
methods,  306
web analytics as,  291–293
users
analysis of sessions,   
152–155
characteristics,  111
content disconnect 
with,  110
intent of,  47, 101
needs of,  135
query classification by,   
145
query differences,  164
V
Vanguard Group,  112–116
vocabulary
adding new term to,  255
analysis to determine 
preferred term,  71
converting words to base 
forms,  74
jargon,  269
session analysis and 
granularity of,  149–151
users vs. site,  292

Search Analytics for Your Site by Louis Rosenfeld
Rosenfeld Media, 2011; version 1.0
326
Index
W
Washtenaw Community 
College,  270
web analytics,  276, 312
as user research,  291–293
vs. user experience,  280
Web Analytics: An Hour a 
Day (Kaushik),  193
Web Analytics Forum Yahoo 
Group,  44
width of search box,  203, 
295
Wiggins, Rich,  26, 76
Wikipedia,  308
writing quality,  264
Y
YouTube,  190
Z
zero results queries,  38, 
102–110
and indexing gaps,  201
patent information 
and,  101
reducing thrashing,   
104–127
reviewing,  260
Zipf distribution,  33–37
Zipf, George Kingsley,   
32–37

327
﻿Acknowledgments
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I
’ve heard it’s lonely at the top. It also must 
be lonely at the (fore)front. I say that 
because the smartest people I know—the 
ones five or ten years ahead of the rest of us—
are invariably the ones who are most willing 
to share what they know. Perhaps they’re just 
dying for someone to see that they’ve stumbled 
upon a fantastic new way to solve a problem. 
Or maybe being brilliant and generous just go 
hand in hand. 
Whatever it is, a few of those really smart 
people shared what they knew with me, 
and without them, this book wouldn’t have 
happened. One was my old friend from 
Michigan, Rich Wiggins. He introduced me 
to site search analytics about 10 years ago. Rich 
knew that SSA could close a critical feedback 
loop in the user experience of search, and 
somehow managed to convince his bosses at 
Michigan State University to let him institute 
an SSA program. Today, MSU is one of the 
most successful institutional users of SSA, and 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
many of this book’s examples are a product of 
its—and Rich’s—excellent work. 
Rich’s and my shared interest in SSA 
connected us with two other smart people, Avi 
Rappoport and Walter Underwood, who 
have both made short contributions to this 
book. If you’re looking for people to analyze 
your query data, you won’t find any better than 
Avi and Walter.
Like a lot of people in user experience, I’m very 
much a right-brain person, and I’m not entirely 
comfortable with data. Marko Hurst is one 
of those few people fortunate to function with 
a full brain. Marko can combine qualitative 
and quantitative analyses like no one I’ve met 
in the field, and he made sure this book took a 
far more balanced perspective on how to derive 
value from query data.
I was fortunate to have five tough technical 
reviewers who reflected a healthy variety of 
perspectives. Steve Krug, Avi Rappoport, 
328
﻿Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Vivian Bliss, John Godinez, and Anil 
Batra were truly a dream team of practical 
advisors and healthy challengers; the book is 
much improved thanks to their efforts. And it 
benefited further from great contributions by 
these experts: Gary Angel, Martin Belam, 
Tom Chi, and Greg Nudelman.
A huge cadre contributed stories (and 
sometimes data) about their work for me to 
use in this book (most of which I used). They 
were often the same people who kept at me 
over too many years to get the book written, 
and I’m grateful to them: Mary Ambrosio, 
Meredith Anderson, Ricardo Baeza-
Yates, Jeannine Bartlett, Fred Beecher, 
Christopher Billick, Mandy Brown, 
Lorelei Brown, Christine Connors, Justin 
Cutroni, Richard Dalton, Liz Danzico, 
John Ferrara, Alexandra Fox, Manya 
Kapikian, Nick Finck, Zach Gemignani, 
Dave Gray, Steve Hatch, Jason Hibbets, 
Caroline Jarrett, Avinash Kaushik, Phil 
329
﻿Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Kemelor, Neil Kohl, Chris Kutler, Jeff 
Lash, Fred Leise, Helen Lippell, Karen 
Loasby, Lydia Mann, Matthew Marco, 
Ravi Mynampaty, Cynthia Osiecki, 
Robert Piddocke, Whitney Quesenbery, 
Brendan Quinn, Susan Rogers, Shaun 
Ryan, Denise Shanks, Tito Sierra, Johnny 
Snellgrove, Jared Spool, Mike Steckel, 
R. Todd Stephens, Walter Underwood, 
Guy Valerio, Javier Velasco, Abbie Walsh, 
Jennifer Whalen, Denise Wood, and 
Jeffrey Zeldman.
It’s strange when the author is also the 
publisher. Yet everyone involved in the book’s 
development and production made life easier 
for me, regardless of which hat I wore. It 
was an absolute joy to work with Stephanie 
Zhong, the book’s developmental editor. 
Given that she is using SSA at her day job at 
Teach for America, she was the ideal editor 
to work with. (It also helps that she’s very 
patient.) Karen Corbett, Rosenfeld Media’s 
330
﻿Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Director of Operations, helped me in more 
ways on a daily basis than I can recount. (She’s 
also very patient.) And Rosenfeld Media’s 
crack production team maintained its high 
standards in creating and assembling the final 
product; many, many thanks to Marta Justak 
(our managing editor), Danielle Foster (our 
interior designer), The Heads of State (who 
create our covers), Chuck Hutchinson 
(proofreader), and Nancy Guenther 
(indexer). 
Finally, my wife, Mary Jean Babic, always 
looks at my new books’ acknowledgments 
pages first—as well she should. She knows 
when she’s owed big time, and this book—
which took me forever to write—is such a case. 
Hopefully, Iris and Nate will inherit her genes 
for supportiveness and good counsel, rather 
than mine for procrastination and metaphor 
mixology.
331
﻿Acknowledgments

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I’m very glad that brilliant and generous often 
do go hand in hand. 
Thanks all.
—Louis Rosenfeld
  Brooklyn, NY
  March, 2011
332
﻿Acknowledgments

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lou Rosenfeld wears two hats. 
As an information architecture 
consultant, he helps Fortune 
500s and other large, highly 
political organizations make 
their messy information easier 
to find. His past clients include 
PayPal, Caterpillar, Ford, The Centers for 
Disease Control, SIGGRAPH, AT&T, 
and Borders. With Peter Morville, Lou co-
authored Information Architecture for the 
World Wide Web (O’Reilly & Associates; 
3rd edition, 2006), regarded as the bible of 
information architecture, and has been a 
regular contributor to Web Review, Internet 
World, and CIO magazines. Lou co-founded 
the Information Architecture Institute. He still 
blogs occasionally at www.louisrosenfeld.com.
As a publisher, Lou founded Rosenfeld 
Media, so that there would be at least one 
publishing house dedicated to serving the 
PHOTO BY MYRA KLARMAN  
(HTTP://MYRAKLARMAN.COM/)
333
﻿About the Author

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
needs of the growing community of user 
experience practitioners. In its short life, the 
company has published such seminal titles 
as Luke Wroblewski’s Web Form Design and 
Storytelling for User Experience by Whitney 
Quesenbery and Kevin Brooks. Lou’s book 
is the eighth title that Rosenfeld Media has 
published, and about a dozen more should be 
available by 2013.
Lou holds a Masters in Information and Library 
Studies and a B.A. in History, both from the 
University of Michigan. He lives in Brooklyn, 
New York with his wife, Mary Jean Babic, their 
children, Iris and Nate, and two cats that don’t 
seem to be even remotely interested in user 
experience.
334
﻿About the Author

TESTIMONIALS
“Search is one of those mission-critical aspects of 
every Web site that is sadly all too often forgotten 
until the damage has already been done. Lou, on 
the other hand, is one of those guys who under-
stands search analytics and the opportunity associ-
ated with digging into the nuances of customer and 
search behaviors to mine for organizational gold. In 
Search Analytics for Your Site, Lou lays out pretty 
much everything you need to know to mine for that 
gold and convert it into a positive customer experi-
ence on your site.”
—Eric T. Peterson, Founder and Author, Web Ana-
lytics Demystified
“Clients have asked me countless times to pretty 
up their search results page design, as if this would 
distract users from realizing that they’re getting 
lousy results. That’s no longer necessary, thanks to 
Lou’s book.”
—Karen McGrane, Managing Partner, Bond Art + 
Science

TESTIMONIALS
“At last a book that explains exactly how to get the 
best from search analytics so that users can actually 
find what they are looking for.”
—Martin White, Managing Director, Intranet Focus 
Ltd, and author of Making Search Work
“Analytics are the single most important tool you 
have to improve your search experience, and Lou 
Rosenfeld’s world-class expertise in user-centered 
design is the place to start.”
—Pete Bell, co-founder, Endeca

TESTIMONIALS
“Louis Rosenfeld’s Search Analytics for Your Site is 
a superlative work from the initial story to the final 
chapter on bridging web analytics and UX prac-
tice. I’m somewhat experienced with event logging 
methods, but Lou’s book opened my mind to new 
ways to use analytics. Each chapter is packed with 
useful information, clear examples, and refresh-
ing caveats that could only come from a master of 
search analytics. The book is written in an engaging 
style that makes you feel like Louis is with you on 
every page. I plan to apply some of the knowledge 
and techniques immediately. Great book!”
—Chauncey Wilson, Senior Manager, User Research
“If we all agree that user feedback will improve 
any site’s user experience, why aren’t we spending 
more time with the actual words our audience uses 
when asking us for stuff? I can’t imagine a more ex-
perienced guide than Lou Rosenfeld to help us put 
this amazing data to work.”
—Jeffrey Veen, Founder & CEO, Typekit

TESTIMONIALS
“Lou is the perfect author to tackle what is essen-
tially unexplored territory in the UX community. 
With Search Analytics for Your Site, he has uncov-
ered a huge goldmine for UX professionals of all 
stripes: now we have the tools to finally, finally fix 
our Web site and intranet search experiences. This 
is one of those rare books that makes me pound the 
table with my fist and yell, ‘Yes! Exactly! Awesome!’ 
while I’m reading it.”
—Kristina Halvorson, CEO, Brain Traffic, and author, 
Content Strategy for the Web
“Lou Rosenfeld provides remarkable clarity, insight, 
and humor on the complicated world of search 
site analytics. Search Analytics for Your Site will 
no doubt be an indispensable resource for anyone 
involved in user experience and web analytics.” 
—Bill Albert, Ph.D, Director, Design and Usability 
Center, Bentley University

TESTIMONIALS
“The potential value behind the queries issued by 
your customers is in practice unbounded. So do not 
waste this potential—use the knowledge behind 
these queries. For that, you have to understand 
search analytics, and hence you must read this 
book.”
—Ricardo Baeza-Yates, VP of Yahoo! Research



Agile Experience Design
by Anders Ramsay‚ to be published 2011
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/agile-experience/
The Art and Craft of User Research 
Interviewing: Diving Deep for Insight 
by Steve Portigal‚ to be published 2012
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/user-interviews/
Designing for Care: The Design Disciplines 
as Critical Healthcare Professions
by Peter Jones‚ to be published 2011
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/health-care/
Eye Tracking the User Experience: 
A Practical Guide
by Aga Bojko‚ to be published 2012
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/eye-tracking/
Make It So: Interaction Design 
Lessons from Science Fiction
by Nathan Shedroff & Chris Noessel‚ to be published 
2012
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/science-fiction-
interface/
UPCOMING BOOKS FROM 
 ROSENFELD MEDIA

The Mobile Frontier: A Guide for 
Designing Mobile Experiences
by Rachel Hinman‚ to be published 2011 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/mobile-design/
Playful Design: Creating Game 
Experiences in Everyday Interfaces
by John Ferrara‚ to be published 2011 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/game-design/
See What I Mean: How to Use 
Comics to Communicate Ideas
by Kevin Cheng‚ to be published 2011 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/comics/
Service Design: Designing Useful, 
Usable, and Desirable Services
by Andy Polaine, Lavrans Løvlie, & Ben Reason‚ to be 
published 2012 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/service-design/
Surveys That Work
by Caroline Jarrett‚ to be published 2012 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/survey-design/
UPCOMING BOOKS FROM 
 ROSENFELD MEDIA

UX Team of One
by Leah Buley‚ to be published 2012 
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/ux-team-of-one/
Universal Design for Web Accessibility: 
Solutions for Barrier-Free User Experiences
by Sarah Horton & Whitney Quesenbery‚ to be 
published 2012
 www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/web-accessibility/
UPCOMING BOOKS FROM 
 ROSENFELD MEDIA

We’d love to let you know of new book signings, 
discounts and promotions, author presentations, 
and other Rosenfeld Media news. There are 
plenty of ways to stay in touch:
•	Subscribe to our free monthly newsletter, 
the Rosenfeld Review: is.gd/9viTRS
•	Visit our site:  www.rosenfeldmedia.com
•	Subscribe to our RSS feed:  
 feeds.rosenfeldmedia.com/rosenfeldmedia
•	Follow us on Twitter: @rosenfeldmedia
•	Email us: info@rosenfeldmedia.com
KEEP UP WITH  
 ROSENFELD MEDIA

When users search your site, they’re telling you in their own words 
what they want from your organization. In Search Analytics for Your Site, 
Lou Rosenfeld shows you how to harvest and analyze search query  
data to improve your site’s search performance, content, navigation, 
metadata, effectiveness, and overall user experience.
“If we all agree that user feedback will improve any site’s user experience, why aren’t we spending 
more time with the actual words our audience uses when asking us for stuff? I can’t imagine a more 
experienced guide than Lou Rosenfeld to help us put this amazing data to work.”
JEFFREY VEEN 
Founder & CEO, Typekit
 
“Search Analytics for Your Site lays out pretty much everything you need to know to mine your query 
data and convert it into a positive customer experience.”
Eric T. Peterson 
Founder and Author, Web Analytics Demystified
 
“Lou Rosenfeld’s Search Analytics for Your Site is a superlative work from the initial story to the final 
chapter on bridging web analytics and UX practice. Great book!”
Chauncey Wilson  
senior Manager, User Research
 
“This is one of those rare books that makes me pound the table with my fist and yell, ‘Yes! Exactly! 
Awesome!’ while I’m reading it.”
Kristina Halvorson  
CEO, Brain Traffic and author, Content Strategy for the Web
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON SEARCH ANALYTICS FOR YOUR SITE
www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/searchanalytics/

