

SECRETS TO DRAWING REALISTIC FACES

Diana, Shiloh and Aynslee Stuart
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)

NORTH LIGHT BOOKS
CINCINNATI, OHIO
www.artistsnetwork.com
secrets to
FACES
DRAWING
REALISTIC
CARRIE STUART PARKS

CARRIE STUART PARKS is an award-winning
watercolorist and internationally known forensic artist and
instructor.
In 1981, Carrie began working as a part time forensic artist
for the North Idaho Regional Crime Lab in Coeur d’Alene,
Idaho. Four years later she attended a composite drawing class
taught by the FBI, and became the ﬁrst composite artist in her
area. Soon Carrie’s peers were asking her to share her knowl-
edge with them. Carrie developed a sure-ﬁre and condensed
instructional course to teach anyone—whatever age or skill
level—how to create realistic portraits.
Carrie and her husband, Rick, travel across the nation
teaching composite drawing courses to FBI and Secret Service
agents, law enforcement agencies and civilian adults and chil-
dren. Carrie has won numerous awards for excellence for her
instruction and general career excellence. 
Carrie’s strikingly realistic composites have helped success-
fully identify and capture suspects across the country, including
serial murders, rapists, white supremacists and bombers. Car-
rie’s composites have also been featured on America’s Most
Wanted and 20/20.
Rick and Carrie (Stuart) Parks reside on a 680-acre ranch in
North Idaho where Carrie grew up. You may contact her by 
e-mail at banjoart@nidlink.com or at her Web site
http://www.imbris.net/~banjoart/table.html
Metric Conversion Chart
to convert
to
multiply by
Inches
Centimeters
2.54
Centimeters
Inches
0.4
Feet
Centimeters
30.5
Centimeters
Feet
0.03
Yards
Meters
0.9
Meters
Yards
1.1
Sq. Inches
Sq. Centimeters
6.45
Sq. Centimeters
Sq. Inches
0.16
Sq. Feet
Sq. Meters
0.09
Sq. Meters
Sq. Feet
10.8
Sq. Yards
Sq. Meters
0.8
Sq. Meters
Sq. Yards
1.2
Pounds
Kilograms
0.45
Kilograms
Pounds
2.2
Ounces
Grams
28.3
Grams
Ounces
0.035
Secrets to Drawing Realistic Faces. Copyright © 2003 by Carrie Stuart Parks.
Manufactured in Singapore. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means including
information storage and retrieval systems without permission in writing from
the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review.
Published by North Light Books, an imprint of F&W Publications, Inc., 4700
East Galbraith Road, Cincinnati, Ohio 45236. (800) 289-0963. First edition.
Other ﬁne North Light Books are available from your local bookstore, art sup-
ply store or direct from the publisher.
06    05   04    03       5    4    3    2    1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Parks, Carrie
Secrets to drawing realistic faces / Carrie Stuart Parks.-- 1st ed.
p.cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 1-58180-216-1 (alk. paper)
 ISBN-13: 978-1-60061-495-8 (EPUB)
1. Face in art. 2. Drawing--Technique. I. Title.
NC770 .P285 2002
743.4’2--dc21                                                                     2002023509
Editors: Mike Berger and Bethe Ferguson
Designer: Wendy Dunning
Production Coordinator: Mark Grifﬁn

DEDICATION
This book is dedicated to the memory of
my dad, Edwin Zaring Stuart (“Ned”),
and to the everyday heroes in our lives.
I feel like I should say thank you to every person I have ever
met. However, if I indulged this idea there would be no room
for the rest of the text in this book. Instead, I’ll try to concen-
trate on the folks who made this possible, and I hope that the
rest of the world will understand. The level of my gratitude is
not to be measured by the location or order of the names.
I am indebted to North Light Books, starting with Rachel
Rubin Wolf, who gave me the chance to write this book. I am
so grateful that she opened the door. Thank you to Michael
Berger, who ﬁrst made sense of it all, and to Bethe Ferguson
and the rest of the staff who will bring this book into focus.
Once again, I thank the many people listed in the back of
the book for their wonderful art and beautiful faces.
I thank my mom and dad for a lifetime of love and encour-
agement. I thank my “big” brother, Steve, and his wife Diana
and daughter Shiloh for their patience. I thank my “little”
brother, Scott and his gracious family, Laurie, Jeff, Bentley and
Aynslee for putting up with my camera in their faces for years
(smile for Aunt Carrie). I thank Don Parks for his caring and
the gift of my wonderful husband, Rick. I thank Donna, J.B.
Cole, Skylar and Cortney Lindsey for their continuing love.
To the many people over the years who supported us by let-
ting us into their homes and hearts, a deeply-felt thank you is
long overdue; for Boyd and Cindy Bryant, Kami and Gerry
Hines, Aida and Jim Remele, Kathy and Bob Gonzales, Debbie
and Pat Torok, Ed Jany, Jim and Cathy Champion, Toni Red-
ding and Norma Shepherd.
I thank my dear friends Frank and Barbara Peretti for their
personal and artistic inspiration and love over the years. I am
truly, eternally grateful.
The best for last—I thank my wonderful husband, Rick, for
his constant love, patience, friendship and artistic inspiration.
Most of all, I thank the Lord Jesus for his blessings and
grace.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
8
! Looking the Part: 
Materials and Supplies 12
Pencils and Erasers   •   Other Tools
$ The Problem 18
Why is Drawing so Hard?   •   Natural Artists
% Site 28
SITE TOOL: Measuring   •   SITE TOOLS: Flattening and
Optical Indexing
Q Shape 42
Train Your Mind   •   SHAPE TOOL: Isolate   •   SHAPE
TOOLS: Simplify and Relate   •   SHAPE TOOL: Measure
•   SHAPE TOOL: Invert   •   SHAPE TOOLS: Rename
and Incline   •   SHAPE TOOL: Negative   •   SHAPE
TOOL: Question   •   SHAPE TOOL: Compare   •
SHAPE TOOL: Flatten
W Shade 58
Understanding Shade Tools   •   SHADE TOOL:
Values/Lines   •   SHADE TOOLS: Isolate, Squint and
Compare   •   SHADE TOOL: Question   •   SHADE
TOOL: Seek   •   Accuracy-Checking Techniques
E Drawing Eyes 76
Eyes as Shapes   •   Centering   •   Relate   •   Eyelid
Creases   •   Shading and Filling the Eye   •   Eyebrows
and Eyelashes
R Drawing Noses 94
The Nose as a Shape   •   Nose Site   •   Wing Site   •
Basic Wing Shape   •   Nostril Basics    •   Nostril Shapes
•   Nose Tricks
T Drawing Lips and Teeth 106
Parts of the Mouth   •   Shading the Mouth   •   Dealing
with Teeth
U Drawing the Head 116
The Structure of the Head   •   Head Shapes   •   Cheeks
•   Chins   •   Necks   •   The Female Face   •   Child vs.
Adult Head Shapes   •   Drawing Ears
I Drawing Hair 132
Creating Different Types of Hair   •   Different Hairstyles
CONCLUSION
141
INDEX
142-143


9
For the first ten years of my artistic career I
only painted animals and used the wet-on-
wet watercolor technique. I began painting
birds, and they all had fur rather than feath-
ers! I now use my bird paintings for competi-
tions.
Wings as Eagles
Watercolor
Collection of the Frame of Mind Gallery,
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho
28" × 22" (71cm × 57cm)
INTRODUCTION
Y
ou will quickly notice in this
book that I approach drawing
faces from a very different
direction. It might be easier for you to
understand if I share some of the roads I
have traveled down to get here.
My background is similar to that of
most artists. I was originally trained as a
commercial artist in the days before
computers did all the layout and letter-
ing work. I would sit with my classmates
and peer at a table full of junk that the
instructor called a “still life.” It was
assumed that we knew what to look for
and how to render it in charcoal or pen-
cil. The professor would wander about
the room and comment, or shudder, at
our efforts. We were in the art depart-
ment, which meant that we were
“artists,” and as such we were supposed
to somehow instinctively know how to
draw. We were taught a few techniques
and then left to struggle. It was believed
that art could not to be taught—it was a
natural talent that people were born
with. Because I found drawing hard, I
ﬁgured I lacked drawing talent and that
was that.
I decided to focus my efforts on
watercolor painting. I was an impatient
artist and watercolors were fast. I could
draw well enough to get a few basic
shapes into the painting and the rest was
all technique. 

Starting in 1981, I worked part time
as a forensic artist for the North Idaho
Regional Crime Lab in Coeur d’Alene,
Idaho. I’d like to boast that I was hired
because I had brilliant drawing ability
like Leonardo da Vinci, crime-solving
skills like Sherlock Holmes and court-
room experience like F. Lee Bailey...
Well, not exactly. I was hired because
my dad was the director of the crime
lab, and I was the only artist he knew.
My original duties were to sketch
crime scenes and prepare trial exhibits
for the physical evidence presented in
court. One day a ﬂyer for upcoming
composite drawing classes at the FBI
Academy came across Dad’s desk. Dad
always thought FBI training was inter-
esting, so in 1985 I started a two-week
class in composite sketches at the FBI
Academy in Quantico, Virginia. I was
clueless as to exactly what this meant. I
would be the ﬁrst composite artist from
Idaho.
I learned that a composite drawing
usually is a face created by combining
separate facial features that the victim or
witness of a crime selects from a book of
faces. The composite is a form of visual
communication between law enforce-
ment agencies and the witness. It’s used
to identify an unknown suspect.
Upon returning to Idaho, I traveled
about the state and eastern Washington
sketching “the bad guys.” I had some
successful identiﬁcations, and my draw-
ings improved. In 1986 a detective
approached me and asked if I would
teach him how to draw composites.
I thought a lot about his request for
the next year. Could I teach composite
sketching? If I taught, would I still be
able to sketch, or would I ﬁnd myself
out of work? I ﬁnally decided that I
would be more effective in this ﬁeld if I
taught. After all, I was doing thirty to
forty drawings a year for various agen-
cies. If I taught ten students to draw,
three hundred to four hundred drawings
a year would be produced and more sus-
pects would be identiﬁed. 
Now I had to decide what to teach. A
composite artist must do two things
well: draw and interview. For the next
year I attended various courses and
training sessions in interviewing, I read
every article and book on the subject
and interviewed ofﬁcers. I was then
ready to teach the interview section. As
for the drawing part, fortunately the
man I met at the FBI Academy, a bril-
liant and gifted artist, became my hus-
band and drawing mentor. With his
help, my drawing skills improved. 
At this point I made a decision about
my composite drawing classes that had
never been done before. I decided to
teach composite drawing and not
assume that my students could draw.
Having chosen this route, I set my
course of action.  The classes were to be
one week long, for a total of forty hours.
In that time, I only had two and a half
days to teach every aspect of the human
face. I needed a half day for the inter-
view and a day for the students to prac-
tice. I reserved Friday for special needs.
Many of my law enforcement stu-
dents were already gifted artists, and
many had great doodling skills. But
some couldn’t draw blood with a knife.
They all learned to draw equally well.
I now have three binders overﬂowing
with the success of this program. My
husband and I travel across the country
teaching composite and forensic art to
law enforcement agencies ranging from
the FBI to two-person departments. Our
students’ sketches have identiﬁed such
perpetrators as child killers, rapists,
abductors, murderers, bank robbers,
drug dealers and the largest serial arson-
ist in U.S. history.
My original reference materials were
“draw the face” type books. I soon real-
ized that a more detailed book, such as
this one, was a necessity. The level of
facial information I was teaching to my
students didn’t exist in any drawing
book. Composite artists cannot draw
what they feel or take artistic license like
regular artists. Their drawings come not
from their creative dreams but from a
witness’s nightmares.
I had a great advantage. No other
author of portrait books had the same
access to faces that I did—boxes ﬁlled
with thousands of mug shots. Over the
years, I placed the mug shots on an
opaque projector and measured thou-
sands of faces for the information in this
book. I also had to ﬁgure out how to
teach people to draw well in an extreme-
ly short time. I studied my students’
drawings in class and the composites
they sent me after successful identiﬁca-
tions. I listened to their questions and
my answers. 
Through teaching adult education
and artist-in-residence programs, I
expanded the classes to civilians and
children. Their work also is included
here.  
I hope you will enjoy learning about
faces in this book.  God bless you on
your artistic journey.
10

11
Composite faces are made up of a variety of features chosen by vic-
tims or witnesses from mug shots or from the FBI’s book of facial fea-
tures. These drawings act as a tool to help identify unknown suspects.
I created this fictional composite from at least ten faces.
Composite drawing
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)


Looking the Part:
Materials and Supplies
M
y composite drawing classes are quite dif-
ferent from most drawing classes. Unlike
a college class or one taught through an
arts organization, these classes are completed quickly
and with the maximum amount of information
crammed into ﬁve days. The participants have only
two and a half days to learn how to draw any face.
Most students are very nervous and intimidated by the
prospect of learning how to draw anything in two
days. Students also feel pressure because their depart-
ments have paid a fair amount of money for this class,
and there are rape victims and homicide cases often
depending on how well they do. If that isn’t enough,
my typical students are armed police ofﬁcers. It’s
important that I clearly explain the ﬁrst rule of art (see
below) to establish the correct atmosphere for learning.
These drawings are both by the same artist,
John Hinds, one of my students. Look what a
difference just one week of instruction made
in his technique!
Self-Portrait
John Hinds
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
The first rule of art
It’s not how well you draw; it’s how
cool your drawing stuff is.
!

TIP Keep your pen-
cils sharp. Dull pencils
are not only difficult to use, they
are not cool (see The First Rule
of Art on the previous page).
B
14
Ha! So you thought you knew art. You
simply gotta have the right toys to play
with the art guys. Most of the materials
and supplies I mention are available in
art stores, drafting supply stores and the
drafting/arts section of many ofﬁce sup-
ply stores. 
Get the lead out
Pencils come in a variety of lead grades, although the term “lead” is
incorrect. You are actually using graphite. The yellow school pencil
everyone has used is usually an HB lead. If you lined up the pencils
with the HB in the middle, the numbers would get larger as they
moved out from the center. An easy way to remember this is to think
of H as “Hard”—the farther out from HB, the harder the lead. Hard = a
lighter line. Going the other way, the B might stand for “Bold,” and the
leads would become progressively darker. Choose leads depending on
your hand pressure, the paper, personal taste and your budget. I gen-
erally use a variety including 2H, HB, 2B and 6B. 
Make a point
I prefer using a lead holder because I can get a very sharp point on it
using a lead pointer (a special pencil sharpener for this type of pencil).
Regular drawing pencils take too long for me to sharpen, not to men-
tion that you need to sharpen them with a craft knife or a razor blade.
Sharp razor blades cut things close to me, like fingers, so I avoid
them. If you’re using a lead holder (middle pencil), be sure it is just
that—there are also mechanical pencils (bottom pencil), which seem
like lead holders, but the main difference is that they hold a very thin
lead that cannot be sharpened.
Basic materials

15
More than kneads the eye
Kneaded rubber erasers start out in neat and dignified-looking
squares, but they soon resemble wads of chewing gum under your
desk. Kneaded erasers are very useful for a variety of reasons. They
are “clean erasers,” that is, they will not make any eraser mess on
your paper and they clean themselves when you pull them out and 
re-form them into another shape. Kneaded erasers have two important
qualities: They can be pulled into a variety of shapes to erase itsy-
bitsy areas, and they can be pushed straight down on your drawing to
lighten a tone without messing up a particularly brilliant drawing.
The secret life of pink erasers
Very few people have spent enough quality
time with their erasers. Oh, sure, you buy a
big, fat pink eraser and think you’re on top.
The truth is, pink erasers don’t like your
paper. They are fine for those big, industrial-
strength boo-boos, but they’ll tear up your
paper if you use them too much. Get one, but
keep it for emergencies.

16
The gentle eraser
Next to the kneaded eraser, the best all-around eraser is the white
plastic eraser. It erases well, is gentle on your paper and comes in a
“click” pen—always a fashion statement.
Only the best
OK, everybody always laughs at my portable electric eraser. They think
I’m a slave to the latest trends, fancy cars and color weaves. All this
turns to envy when they see how well this little puppy erases. Nothing
is greater than an electric eraser. It is small, lightweight and can be
held like a pencil. It quickly and cleanly re-establishes your edges. Not
only does it erase better than any other eraser ever invented, but by
using it you are immediately branded as a real “artist.”
Flossing your drawing
Erasing shields are the dental floss of drawing—inexpensive and indis-
pensable tools that allow you to clean hard-to-reach areas. I have a
mondo version that allows me to shade outside the lines and erase
the overflow up to the very edge without affecting my drawing.

17
Blending tools
Paper stumps and tortillions blend pencil strokes into smooth, finished
drawings. A paper stump is a compressed wad of paper that you use
on its side to smooth and shade the pencil lead. The tortillion is rolled
paper that you use on the tip for tiny areas that need smudging. Using
the tortillion on its side will result in corduroy skin.
Rulers and templates
Ever say to yourself, “I can’t even draw a straight line”? Neither can I.
Nor can I draw a perfect circle. This is where a plastic C-Thru ruler—my
personal favorite brand name, but you can use whatever ruler works
best for you—and a circle template come in handy. The ruler has a
very useful grid on it and a centering row of numbers. You can find a
similar ruler at the fabric store. The circle template is indispensable in
making your irises perfect circles.
A few words on paper
On the first day of any of my classes, both watercolor and drawing,
I always go over materials and supplies—even if my students are
experienced artists. It’s because there is a method to my madness
and a reason I use the tools I use. I once had a woman in class
who ignored my paper suggestion. She bought the cheap, worthless
stuff that is passed off to clueless, emerging artists. She just 
couldn’t figure out why her art looked so bad. The paper you use
will make a difference in your art. For drawing I use plate—or
smooth-finish bristol board. Tracing paper is also important.
A cheap pad of tracing paper has thousands of uses (OK,
so some cheap materials do work well).


The Problem
G
rowing up I was very inﬂuenced by my par-
ents. Both my dad and mom were teachers.
To this day, their students who had a class
with Mom or Dad thirty to forty years ago, will come
up to me and tell me how much they learned from and
liked my folks. Dad, especially, was considered a tough
teacher—he taught chemistry, physics, math and law
enforcement. Mom and Dad shared their teaching
secret with me, and it has been my rule of thumb for
all of my teaching experience: If a student doesn’t
learn, it’s because you are failing as a teacher.
Over the years, I have kept that ﬁrmly in mind. If
someone does not draw well in my class, it’s my fault. I
haven’t found the way to communicate the necessary
information to the person in a way that makes sense
and works for him or her. This is why I explain why,
how and what it takes to draw. This is why I have so
many approaches to drawing. And this is why I meas-
ure, listen, watch, talk, review and continually improve
the ﬁne art of learning to draw.
Most importantly, I truly care that you learn to
draw well. I hold back no secrets. I present all the
information in many different ways, because one way
might make something clearer to you. In my classes, I
never doubt that my students will not learn, because I
will not fail them as a teacher. 
Here are two before-and-after drawings by
another of my students, Greg Bean.
Sunbathing Baby Hannah in
her Daddy’s Hands
Greg Bean
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
$

No matter how you look at it, you know these are all examples of the
letter a. Thanks to your mind’s ability to memorize patterns, you don’t
have to relearn what this symbol means every time you see it. These
patterns also allow you to quickly recall the sound associated with
the letter.
20
Before you continue in this book, I
strongly advise you to complete a pre-
instructional drawing. This is a yardstick
by which you will see improvement in
your skill level of drawing. As your
drawing skills improve, your knowledge
of drawing leaps ahead of your actual
ability to draw. It is easy to become frus-
trated by your apparent lack of progress.
Yet, in fact, your abilities have improved
tremendously. Tracking progress by
using pre-instructional drawings will
help you see clearly what you have
learned and will provide a great deal of
amusement when you go back and see
your original efforts.
Most people, including many artists,
have trouble drawing faces. Why is this?
It’s because drawing is “seeing.” Most
people draw what they think faces look
like, and the end result may not match
the image in their minds. So, ﬁrst I will
help you discover why you have trouble
seeing. Then, I will show you how artists
see and what tools they use to help them
translate their mental images into draw-
ings. Finally, you will learn what to see,
or how to render the facial features
themselves.  
Drawing things the way they really
are is not a gift given to artists. You may
think drawing has something to do with
hand-eye coordination, but it really has
everything to do with how the mind
works. Your mind takes information
from the surrounding environment and
places it into patterns—symbols repre-
senting an idea, concept or information.
This organization into understandable
patterns is called perception. 
There are three important points you
should know about perceptions: 
• Perceptions are ﬁlters through
which you see the world.
• Perceptions are powerful.
• Perceptions do not change.
Perceptions are ﬁlters
Perceptions are ﬁlters through which you
see the world. Your mind records and
processes information through the ﬁve
senses. This information, however, is not
recorded like a movie camera. Instead,
it’s translated into an understandable
form for future use. 
When you ﬁrst started school, you
learned that the shape shown below was
the letter a. Whenever you saw that
shape, you knew what it meant and the
sound it made. It was not necessary to
relearn that shape every time you read it
in a word. It could look like any of the
shapes you see below, and you would
still know it was the letter a and that it
represented a sound. In fact, you didn’t
even think about the shape of the letter a
after you learned it. Your mind provided
the information for you. You no longer
really “saw” or had to think about the
letter a.
Simply stated, this is how the mind
processes information. It memorizes
what a shape represents, like how the let-
ter a represents a sound, and every time
you need to write that sound, your mind
Why is drawing so hard?

21
TIP Your drawings
are based on percep-
tions formed from pattern
recognition and memorization.
B
provides this shape: a. It’s important that
your mind does this. Imagine what
would happen if every time you came to
this letter you had to relearn what it
meant! 
Thus, the ﬁrst point you need to real-
ize is that the untrained mind draws pic-
tures from memorized patterns. When
you draw a face, your mind provides the
memorized shapes representing the eyes,
nose and mouth, not the real shape of
the facial features. You draw what you
perceive to be real, not what is real.
Where did your mind get these
shapes? Let’s look at some pre-instruc-
tional drawings and ﬁgure out the source
of the shapes.
Memorized facial patterns
These drawings are typical pre-instruc-
tional drawings by nonartists. They have
some rather standard patterns represent-
ing the face.
A typical pre-instruc-
tional facial drawing.
Eye patterns
These eyes are part of pattern memorization
for the average person.
Nose patterns
Noses offer a variety of shapes such as these.
Mouth patterns
Mouths might have a “have a nice day” smile
or an upper and a lower pair of lips.

22
Pre-instructional drawing
This drawing is by Taylor Perkins. She was looking at her face when
she drew this sketch—every detail was in front of her—yet the infor-
mation was meaningless. Notice, for example, that her eyes are placed
near the top of her head. Had she been able to see her face without
filters, she would have noticed that her eyes are in the middle of her
face.
TIP To break pat-
terns, you must first
recognize that you have them.
B
Perceptions are powerful
Perceptional ﬁlters will prevent you from
seeing information that is clearly before
you. These ﬁlters may prevent you from
drawing something accurately, even if it
is right in front of you.
Perceptions do not change
Perceptions do not change unless a sig-
niﬁcant event occurs. Without instruc-
tion, you will continue to see and do
things according to your understanding
of them. My greatest wish is that this
book will constitute a signiﬁcant event
and that as a result, your perceptions on
drawing faces will change.

23
After instruction
The photograph that Taylor was looking at provided all the information
she needed to create a realistic self-portrait, as shown by this drawing
she completed after a bit of instruction. The power of perceptional fil-
ters and the persistent nature of the mind to continually process infor-
mation into patterns is the challenge to drawing well—but you can
learn!
Taylor Perkins, Age 7, 
self-portrait
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
Collection of the Perkins Family

24
People I call “natural artists” are those
who, for some reason, have been able to
draw accurately without knowing exact-
ly why or how they are able to do this.
Generally speaking, this ability seems to
be spotty. They can draw some things
well and other subjects not so well. Such
comments as, “I can draw animals and
landscapes great, but I can’t draw peo-
ple,” are very common. 
These artists have learned some draw-
ing techniques naturally, but have yet to
learn how to change all their perceptions
about the world around them.
Natural artists who have undergone
some form of art training are usually
able to draw most everything well. How-
ever, whether you are a trained artist or
are a natural artist, your mind still places
all incoming information into a pattern
of perception. After a short time, you
stop seeing what you are rendering and
draw a pattern. It’s a more sophisticated
pattern, a well-drawn pattern, but a pat-
tern nevertheless.
Without having the phenomenon of
pattern-memorization explained, you
might have used some technique to
“review” the completed drawing. You
might have to take a break from your
drawing, turn your drawing to a mirror
or place it up on an easel. Now you can
see why this is necessary. It helps break
the patterns and to “see” your work of
art with fresh eyes. This is called check-
ing for accuracy, and it’s a drawing tool
that natural artists use.
What are you looking at?
The best way to begin your artistic jour-
ney is to learn how to look at things.
Drawing is seeing. 
Natural artists
I have taught many art workshops. I
remember in particular this sweet
woman and her ﬁrst oil painting. It was 
a half-completed bowl of daisies on a
table. The daisies were all facing toward
the viewer, and every one was identical.
There wasn’t a single small or big daisy
reaching for the sky. I asked the eager
artist if I could see the reference photo
she used for this painting. I needed to
point out the variety of images, shapes
and colors. She said there wasn’t a refer-
ence photo, the image came from her
mind.
Your mind pretty much has a pattern
for everything. Never try to imagine
something in your early art career—look
at it. Then you will be able to draw it
accurately. Always look at it.
OK, so I’m looking at it
I have told you so far that drawing is see-
ing, that your brain uses patterns to
record the information and that you rely
on those patterns to draw. Furthermore,
you know that you need to break those
patterns of perception by having some-
thing in front of you to draw. OK, so
you’re looking at it. Now, a miracle hap-
pens and you can draw, right?
Ah, not quite. Knowing what the
problem is doesn’t solve the problem.
You’ve just completed step one: Why you
can’t draw. Now I will go into step two:
What are you looking at? 
There is simply too much information
for your tired, pattern-hungry brain 
to go through without some kind of
manual or guideline. You need to learn
how to sift through all the information
to make sense of it and be able to use it.
Like a “some assembly required” kit, the
parts are all there, but it takes a manual
to know what you are looking at and
where it goes. There are four basic com-
ponents to assembling a kit—and to
drawing: 
• Site
• Shape 
• Shade
• Accuracy
You need to know what the parts
look like (shape), where they go (site),
what the ﬁnished product looks like
(how to make it look real—shade) and
how to ﬁx the wobbly parts (accuracy).
Site
It’s easy to say that artists need to learn
how to see things the way they really are,
not the way they think or perceive them
to be. Most books say that. Not only do
most people not see the reality of the
world around them, they also don’t place
the objects in the correct location. Sure,
they know that the eyes are above the
nose and mouth and that somewhere
beyond that is hair. But there’s more to it
than that.
Measuring and determining the cor-
rect location and size of different items is
called proportion. When something is in
proportion, it’s correct in scale to the
other items in the picture. It’s easy to
look at a picture and know when some-
thing is out of proportion, but how do
you draw something in proportion?
Learning how to correctly proportion
images in a picture through the use of
artistic tools will be covered in chapter
three.

Heather
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
25
Natural artist?
You weren’t born with the innate ability to
know how long a meter is or how many cups
are in a gallon. You learned which of the vari-
ous measuring tools to use for each applica-
tion. Drawing also has measuring tools. Look
at the two examples shown here, both drawn
by the same student. Notice the relative size
and location of the facial features in the pre-
instructional drawing. Even if the features
were correctly drawn, they are still in the
wrong place. Note the difference in the later
drawing.

26
Simplification
The visible world around you is rich in infor-
mation—actually, there is too much informa-
tion for any emerging artist to understand. It
first needs to be simplified for you to see just
exactly what it is that you are looking at. This
is why it’s easy for people (especially chil-
dren) to draw cartoon characters so well. The
shapes are simplified, outlined in black and
easy to see. Most people can draw these
shapes with little or no instruction, other than
what they’ve learned about drawing letters.
Shape
Basic shapes are not easy to identify
when drawing. You need to know what
to look for. Shape Identiﬁcation 101
started in kindergarten, and ceased
shortly thereafter. Most people are not
formally trained to see shapes for draw-
ing purposes. You have to learn this
skill. Once you’ve determined the cor-
rect size and location of an object, you
can then concentrate on the shapes of
the object you wish to draw.
An artist automatically ﬁlters out all
but the barest shapes to begin with. This
is not talent, it’s training. We are training
our minds to see the subtle shapes in the
visual world around us.
Shade
The next step in the drawing process is
shading. Shading makes something look
real (as shown in the example to the
right). Most people have never learned,
however, to evaluate and see shading.
Yes, you can see that black jeans are
darker than blue jeans. But shading
requires more special knowledge and
tools. Learning to shade also involves
learning more about your mind and the
power of your perceptions.
Accuracy
Finally, you need to be able to learn how
to overcome your brain’s desire to put
the world back into patterns. How can
you keep checking to see if you are
doing well? In the back of most do-it-
yourself kits is a problem-solving sec-
tion. You need a similar chapter in your
drawing routine. Ask, “What is wrong
with the shape of this face?” This is
checking the accuracy of the image. 
This is the photo-
graph that the draw-
ing on the following
page is based upon.
Seeing without outlines
Many children show great interest and talent in drawing cartoons.
Often when they are introduced to regular drawing, they will lose
interest or give up. The problem is not their lack of talent or even
interest; it’s in how they are taught to see the same simple
shapes in the photograph (or world). Drawing the world
around you involves using the same basic shapes. They’re
just not outlined in black ink anymore.

27
Photo by Kelly Dulanty
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
Look at the girl’s hair and face. Without the appropriate shading her
features would have looked unrealistic and incomplete. Learning how
to shade properly can save your drawing from the recycle bin. 


Site
W
hen artists ﬁrst start to draw, they usually begin by sketching
the overall images—the location and placement of where
things will go. If they intend to make a realistic picture,
they’ll need to make sure everything ﬁts and is the correct size. Once every-
thing is scaled, they’ll start reﬁning the details. I will teach you to approach
drawing the face in the same way. We will start with the locations, or sites,
of the facial features. Then I will instruct you how to render the correct
proportions of the average adult face. 
Learning proportions and scaling a picture is not a skill people are
born with. I’ll teach you how to ﬁgure out the proportions using tools to
help you. You’ll learn three primary tools in this chapter: measuring, ﬂat-
tening and optical indexing. In the past, you’ve probably heard about van-
ishing points, eye levels, two-point perspective, horizon line and parallel
perspective. Scrub all that. You can draw anything in perspective using
only measuring, optical indexing and ﬂattening.
Don Parks
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
%

Any object in front of you is measurable.
Most people have been taught to meas-
ure an object by comparing it to some-
thing they know. Traditionally, you may
compare something to a speciﬁc meas-
urement, such as a ruler. There is an
expression “bigger than a bread box”—
though most young people today have
never seen a bread box. This is a com-
parison. Everything in front of you can
be compared. An object is either the
same size as, larger than or smaller than
something else. 
Bigger than a bread box
Using a map as an example, you check
the distance from one point to the next
by comparing it to the map scale. You
don’t use the scale to measure another
map or the length of a baseball ﬁeld—
only the contents of this particular map. 
You can measure a variety of objects
using other forms of measurement, such
as a gallon or a meterstick Artists also
measure objects. The difference is that
they measure an object by comparing it
to itself. 
All about baselines
A baseline is a comparison system. For
example, when compared in a range of
Chihuahuas to Great Danes, a “big” dog
is a German shepherd. A German shep-
herd, however, is not all that big when
compared to an elephant. Size is relative
to what is being compared. When you
use this system in art, you compare the
baseline in the image in front of you to
something else in the same image. For
example, you may wish to compare an
object’s length to its width. Because
you’ll be drawing this object, you also
have a straight line that you can use as a
baseline in your drawing.
Establishing baselines in 
photographs
The easiest way to measure objects with
a baseline is to use photographs. Photos
don’t move, are already in two dimen-
sions and are easy to refer to. To do this
simple exercise, you will need a pencil,
an eraser, a sketch pad, a scrap of paper
and a large, easy-to-see photograph.
Proportions
Proportions are like maps—they provide an overall view of where things are and how they fit
into the whole picture. Most people have a pretty good idea where the facial features are
located. The eyes are above the nose and the nose is above the mouth and so forth. The first
drawing concept is on how to locate various items we wish to draw with more exactness. 
Some books written about faces are not always correct on the placement of the facial fea-
tures. They may generalize or use some kind of Greek idealized face with a long, thin nose.
Once again, it’s important to look at something to draw as you continue this process. It’s hard
to measure, line up and view images that you’ve created in your mind.
Proportions are a comparison, a relationship between objects dealing with size, 
volume or degree. You may be able to draw the greatest eyes in the world, but if they
are in the wrong place, the drawing will be off. Proportion is the relationship of dif-
ferent elements in a work of art.
Site Tools
Measuring
30

Choose a baseline
Select an object in the photograph that is
measurable with a straight line, such as the
width of the eye from side to side. Your
baseline should be easy to see and a fairly
short line (a small area like the eye). Take a
scrap of paper and measure that width.
Transfer the baseline width to
your paper
Place the same length of line on your
paper. The line you have marked on your
paper is your baseline. With this one single,
simple line, you can proportion and render
every other facial feature.
Place the correct measurements
Mark each measurement on your paper.
Compare and measure the
other features
Compare the proportion of one feature to
the baseline. Using the same scrap of
paper, you can now measure every other
part of the face by comparing it to the
width of the eye.
Eye
Eye
Eye
Eye
Establishing baselines in photographs
!
$
%
Q
31

32
How to establish a baseline on a three-dimensional subject
Select the baseline on the subject
Select a portion of the face or body to use as your baseline. The
baseline should be a fairly small horizontal or vertical line. Remem-
ber that a baseline is something you will compare everything else
to in your drawing. 
Measure the baseline
Extend your arm straight out in front of you, holding the pencil as
illustrated here. Close one eye and use the tip of the pencil to
mark the start of the head. Use your thumb to mark the end of the
head. This measurement is your baseline.
!
$

33
Compare the baseline measurement to the figure
Using the measurement of the tip of the pencil to your thumb,
compare the figure to establish if something is the same size, larg-
er than or smaller than that measurement. For example, compared
to the height of the head, the height of this person’s body is six
“heads.”
Using this system, you can compare the height of the head to
all other parts of the body. Whatever measurement you choose to
make the head on your paper, you will compare the rest of the
body to that starting point. 
%
Anticipated problems
Three important secrets to using a pencil as a measuring device:
1. Hold your pencil as if it were a piece of paper in front of you. In
other words, don’t angle the pencil away from you. You’re trying to
draw a three-dimensional object on a two-dimensional piece of
paper. You cannot draw into the paper, so hold your pencil flat.  
2. Extend your arm fully. If you keep moving your arm to
varying lengths, your measuring will be off.
3.  Always close the same eye.

34
OK, so I measured it. Now what?
Let’s summarize what you’ve learned so
far. To establish the correct proportions
of a three-dimensional world and put it
onto your two-dimensional piece of
paper, you do the following: 
1. Select a baseline from some object in
front of you that should be straight,
short and horizontal or vertical to you. 
2. Use a pencil, pen or other straight
object held in front of you at arm’s
length to record the length of the 
baseline.
3. Make a mark on your paper to repre-
sent that same length.
4. Use the baseline measurement for
comparison to other objects in the pic-
ture in front of you. Everything should
be the same length, longer or shorter
than that baseline.
5. Use the drawing baseline to make the
same proportions on your paper.
Measuring the face
You can locate the eyes by using the
same concept of measuring the head and
comparing it to the body. This is an easy
exercise for all ages.
Here’s the finished drawing that will be the base for the exercise in
measurement.

35
Measure the location of the eyes
Compare the distance from the top of the head to the eyes. This
will be the first and simplest baseline. 
Lay one hand flat on top of your head, and take a pencil in
your other hand. Hold the pencil tip with your flat hand. The hand
holding the pencil should point toward your eyes. Use the pencil
to help you measure the distance from the top of your head to
your eyes and locate the eyes.
Compare to the distance between the eyes and chin
Compare the previous distance to the distance from your eyes to
your chin. On most people, the distance between the top of the
head and the eyes is about the same as the distance between the
eyes and the chin.
Measure the face to locate features
!
$

36
Enlarge your drawing the easy way
Scrappy solution
To enlarge a drawing, take a scrap of paper and mark the original
measurement on one side and the enlarged measurement on the
other. In other words, make the baseline larger. 
Eyeball it
By establishing the eye as the original baseline, you can now com-
pare that measurement to every other feature on the face. Use the
original baseline side of the paper every time you measure a fea-
ture on the original photo.
Original Photo 
My Sketch 
Original Photo 
My Sketch 
!
$

37
Reuse or Reverse
You will use the enlarged side of the paper to draw that same fea-
ture again and again. You can proportionally enlarge a drawing to
any size using this method. Reverse it to make something smaller.
More measuring aids
This site-measuring technique is very useful. Not only can you
measure something in front of you and draw it the same size, you
also can use the same tool to enlarge or reduce a picture. To draw
something the same size, mark the established baseline and one
other measurement on your paper.
There are more tools—some of them are pretty expensive—to
help you measure. Besides being able to enlarge or reduce the size
of a picture, you can also use these tools to help you measure
curved shapes. Probably the most useful tool, although expensive,
is the proportional divider. This device offers an adjustable way to
measure and compare two images. It has a sliding screw that
allows you to adjust the width to any two images—your drawing
and the image you wish to draw.
Original Photo 
My Sketch 
%

38
Measuring curved shapes
Measuring a curved shape with a straight
edge can cause you problems. It is difﬁ-
cult to correctly see and accurately draw
curved shapes. How can you measure a
curve with your straight-edged measur-
ing tool? The good news is that you use
the same tool, you just measure the start
and ﬁnish of the curve.
Straighten the curve
You can measure the curve of the cheek in the photograph by using
the eye baseline. Draw two lines, one at the start of the curve of the
cheek and one at the chin. The horizontal and vertical lines are meas-
urable distances and give you the start and end of the curve. Take the
measurement of the eye and compare it to the cheek. Her cheek
curves down two and a half eyes and over one-half eyes. Measure how
far up and over the curve goes. You have also created a negative
space that will be explored in more detail in chapter four.
Width of eye

If I make an imaginary line straight down from the eye in this photo-
graph, it will bring me to the outside of the nose. I now know how far
down the nose comes to (because I measured it compared to the eye)
and how wide the nose is.
Flattening and Optical Indexing
Site Tools
39
Flattening Tool
When you ﬁrst used your pencil as a
measuring device, you extended your
arm and closed one eye. Why did I ask
you to close one eye? Try it with both
eyes open. It doesn’t work. It takes both
eyes to have depth perception, which you
don’t want, because you’re drawing on a
two-dimensional piece of paper. Closing
one eye ﬂattens the world around you.
Aha! You’ve just established a drawing
technique! To draw a three-dimensional
image on a two-dimensional piece of
paper, you must close one eye.
Optical Indexing Tool
The next tool to help you ﬁnd out where
the facial features are located is called
“optical indexing.” That is a fancy way
of saying things line up. What features
on your face line up? Is it possible to use
the location of one facial feature to ﬁnd
out where the others are located? Take a
look at the two drawings on this page
and the two photos on the next page,
and notice how the features line up.
The edges of the
male nose line up with
the start of the
white of the eye.
The mouth is roughly as wide as
the center of the eye.
The eyebrow often ends in line
with the nose on the outside of
the eye.
Ears are roughly as
long as the nose, and
may run from the
eyes/eyebrows to the
base of the nose.
The eyebrow will
often start at the
inside corner of
the eye.
Note: You will soon begin to notice that
you will see the same generic male and
female faces throughout the book. Using
the same face to teach multiple lessons
will help you to better see all the parts
that make up the whole. Refer back to
individual lessons as necessary.

TIP You can create a reusable grid
through a variety of methods:
• Make a grid on a computer and print it on an
acetate overhead.
• Draw a grid on acetate overhead material.
• Draw a grid, run it through a copier and make
copies on acetate.
• Make a grid on a clear insert or folder, and
slide the photo into the insert.
B
40
Grid/optical indexing
Using a grid is probably one of the old-
est systems artists have used to establish
correct proportions. There are two types
of grids (or optical indexing) you can
use: First, you can draw equally-spaced
horizontal and vertical lines across your
paper. Repeat this pattern on your pho-
to. Now draw the shapes that occur
within each square and locate where the
shapes cross the guidelines. If your grid
is the same size as your photo, you can
draw each shape the same proportion on
your paper. You can also enlarge or
reduce the size of drawings by simply
adjusting the size of the grid on your
paper and proportionally changing the
size of the shapes on your paper. Second-
ly, draw an occasional horizontal and
vertical line or two (or as many as you
need) to orient you on the paper. This
will help you establish location and pro-
portion on your drawing. Either of the
forms of optical indexing are extremely
useful for establishing proportions.

Using the flattening and optical indexing tools, I was able to accurate-
ly line up the features of Jeffery’s face. The optical indexing tool was
especially useful for helping me draw his glasses in proportion to the
rest of his face.
41
jeffery stuart
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)


Shape
Y
ou have learned how to map out the locations of the facial fea-
tures. Now you need to focus on the features themselves—the
shapes that make up the face—train your mind how to seek out
shapes. In this chapter you’ll learn about a series of tools and techniques
that artists have learned or developed to help them see better. Artists gen-
erally use these tools without even really thinking about them. The more
tools or “ways of seeing” you have at your disposal, the easier it is for you
to draw accurately.
Even young children can demonstrate this ability to seek out and dis-
tinguish shapes. It is this ability that enables them to write letters. Drawing
is the same concept, but you must hone this ability to a higher level. This
chapter will teach you to discern the subtle shapes in the information-rich
visual world.
This drawing is based on an award-winning
photograph by B. Kelly Dullanty. It was
used with his written permission and the
release of the subject in the photograph.
That might seem to be a lot of work for just
this one drawing, but the alternative is
copyright infringement—also known as
stealing.
wedding
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
Q

44
Learning to recognize shapes in a photo-
graph or image takes training. You need
to train your mind what to look for.
Once you become aware of something,
it’s easier to see it. For example, when
you are buying a new car you spend time
studying the cars on the market. You
then go to a dealer and look over the
selection. You might fall in lust with a
particular model and color. Afterwards,
it seems like everybody has the car you
were looking at. Did everyone suddenly
go out and buy the same car? No, you
have simply become aware of the shape
and color of that particular car, and you
now recognize it among all the other cars
on the road. The same thing happens
with the shapes in facial features.
Say “cheese”
Because drawing is seeing, you should
always have a reference image in front of
you. Ninety-eight percent of success
comes from having the correct photo-
graph. Your selected photograph should
be clear, interesting, big and preferably
black and white. If the photograph is
small, enlarge it. A computer with a
scanner and a reasonable photo program
will do the job nicely. Or take the photo-
graph to a copy center and enlarge it to a
8" × 10" (20cm × 25cm) image. Use their
best copier to retain all the detail.
Many people start with a studio 
photograph of a family member. Though
theses types of photographs are clear,
large and well done, there are a few
drawbacks. They’re copyrighted by the
photographer, so if your drawing turns
out well, you can’t display it. Second, the
lighting is often boring. Flattering, but
boring.
Oldies but goodies
Consider the antique photographs sitting in the attic of Great-Grandma
Sparks or the wife of your second cousin once removed. An interesting
drawing comes from a photograph that is easy to see, clear, large in
detail, interestingly lit and preferably black and white. Artists should
also own or have a clear copyright use of the photograph. You’ll often
find these qualities in the antique photos of your family.
Train your mind
• Measure
• Invert
• Rename
• Incline
• Negative space
• Question
• Compare
• Flatten
Tools of the trade
Okay, so you have found the perfect
photograph, now it’s time to move on to
learning some tools to help you train
your mind to recognize shapes. They
are:
• Isolate
• Simplify
• Relate

Everyone needs practice
See, nobody’s perfect. Here’s an example of one of my early efforts.
Look at me now!
Isolating features can help you better see the individual shapes that
make up the entire drawing. Once I learned this tool, I was better able
to accurately draw a horse. 
When I was a little girl, I loved horses. I
loved to ride horses, and I loved to draw
horses. I was very fortunate because I
lived on a 680-acre ranch where we
could have lots of horses. Like the draw-
ing on the right, my ﬁrst efforts at draw-
ing a horse were typical of a young
child. I knew the horse didn’t look like
my drawing, especially the hooves. I
could see horses' hooves. I studied them.
I looked at photographs, and I traced
the shape of the hoof with my ﬁnger. I
isolated the hoof and looked at it sepa-
rately from the rest of the horse, as
shown in the drawing on the right. The
ﬁrst artistic technique I used was to iso-
late the shape. Look at the works of any
artist, and you will ﬁnd sketches of eyes,
hands and parts of the face. These artists
are isolating each of the different com-
ponents of the whole of the art that they
will be doing.
45
Isolate
Shape Tools
DEFINITION
Isolate
To see shapes by studying
individual shapes separately.

46
In chapter two, I mentioned that children
ﬁnd drawing cartoon and comic strip
characters easy. This is because the draw-
ings are outlined with black ink. The
simple shapes—curves and lines—are
easy to see. A photograph, or real life,
doesn’t have the same black outlines to
show the artist what to look for. To see
the subtlety of the shapes takes training. 
In linear drawing, there are only two
basic shapes: a straight line or a curved
line. The lines go up, down, right, left,
but they are either straight or curved.
When artists look at the face, they don’t
try to ﬁnd eyes or lips, they seek the sim-
plest linear shapes. Seeking the simple
shapes removes your memorized, incor-
rect perception of what constitutes an eye
and allows you to focus on the actual
reality of an eye. Artists seek the simplest
expression of shape as a foundation for
building the face. They look for the sim-
ple curve, line, circle or shape, rather
than an eye, nose or lips.
The dictionary deﬁnes “relate” as bring-
ing into logical or natural association, to
have reference. The face has a unique
shape that helps artists relate other infor-
mation. The iris, the colored part of the
eye, is a perfect circle. The pupil, the
black center of the iris, is also a perfect
circle and is in the center of the iris. The
average adult iris does not vary much
from face to face. You can use this infor-
mation to help you see and draw better.
Look at the correctly drawn eye on
the next page. Then, follow the steps to
learn how to draw a correctly propor-
tioned iris.
Bad drawing, bad, bad! Now sit...
Using the relate tool, place the pupil in the center of the iris before
drawing the lid and other eye parts. You’ll resolve the problem of off-
centered pupils and the resulting comments like, “I don’t know, Marge,
there’s something wrong with this picture.”
Simplify and Relate
Shape Tools
DEFINITION
Simplify
A tool for learning to see shapes
by seeking the simplest expres-
sion of that shape in the form of
a straight or curving line.
DEFINITION
Relate
A tool for learning to see shapes
by using one shape to help see a
second shape.
Pupil secrets
You might be wondering how big to
make the pupil of the eye. The answer is:
It depends. The pupil expands and con-
tracts to light. Studies have shown that it
also expands and contracts as a reaction
to seeing something likable or unlikable.
Most artists unconsciously record this
piece of information. Therefore, an eye
with a small pupil is less likeable than an
eye with a larger pupil. If you want peo-
ple to like your drawing (or in other
words, get paid for your portrait), make
the pupil large. If you are drawing 
a bad-guy composite of a cold-
blooded killer, make those pupils
pinpoint—you’ll naturally 
dislike the guy.

47
A correctly propor-
tioned eye.
Relating shapes
There is an association between the various parts of the eye that
you can base on the circle of the iris. Using a circle template, draw
a circle.
X marks the spot
Using the top and bottom sides of the circle in the template, con-
nect the lines to the center of that circle. 
Circles within circles
Center the pupil of the eye in the middle of the iris. Check that you
are using the correct circle size on the template; it should fit nicely
around the center of the lines.
Draw a correctly proportioned eye using your template
!
$
%

48
In the last chapter, you learned that you
can measure anything in front of you.
This method helps locate the facial fea-
tures, which then can be measured. Once
a single shape is in place, you can use
that shape to locate and determine other
locations and shapes. Remember that
there is one shape that occurs in every
average face: It’s the perfect circle of the
iris.
Go ﬁgure...
Measure it for yourself. Knowing that
you can correctly measure an eye on a
photograph means you should never
draw an incorrect eye. It’s truly as plain
as the nose on your face. 
You can use the width of the eye to
measure the height of the eyebrow, the
length of the nose and any other meas-
urement you might need to check.
Just as you established a baseline
within the site tools section, you can
select and use a baseline in the shape
tools.
Eyeballing a measurement
You can use the width of the iris to determine how wide the eye will
be. The iris of the average adult eye is one-half the width of the white
of the eye. Note that I said white—not the entire eye. You still have a
bit of your eye left over.
Shape Tools
Measure
1⁄4
1⁄4
1⁄2
DEFINITION
Measure
A tool for seeing shapes by
measuring a smaller shape and
comparing it to a larger shape.

49
Another way to learn to see shapes is to
invert, or turn, the line drawing upside
down. Sometimes the mind can’t make
“heads or tails” (pardon the pun) of the
picture you want to draw, so instead of
looking for a speciﬁc feature, try com-
pleting your drawing using shapes. By
working upside down, as shown in the
example on this page, you focus on see-
ing shapes rather than the familiar
image. Turning a photo upside down and
checking your work is also a way to
check for accuracy, which is covered in
chapter six.
DEFINITION
Invert
A technique for seeing shapes by
turning the line drawing you’re
trying to copy upside down.
TIP The invert tool is an aid to help
artists “see” better, however, it works
best if used on line drawings. Turning a photo
upside down and trying to draw it is quite diffi-
cult. Instead, use a line drawing to help you
copy the image on your paper. The inversion
tool is excellent training for anyone.
B
Invert
Shape Tools

50
Turning something upside down forces
your brain to look for shapes. Even the
verbal or mental act of referring to facial
features within the image you’re drawing
as “shapes” is a way to train your mind.
For example, when you refer to the iris,
call it by its shape, a circle. By speaking
or thinking of something in terms of
shapes, you start to really see things in
terms of shape.
Speaking is believing
In college I studied various theories of
psychological thought. Though I never
studied psychology and art together,
there is at least one shared concept: label-
ing. In the behavioristic model of infor-
mation processing, labeling is where an
Remember to rename
It is hard to realize the effect the labeling of a
facial feature has on the way you think about
it, but look at this pre-instructional drawing.
The instructions were to draw a face. What
was meant was to draw the entire head that
includes the face and the hair—but to the
artist the word “face” meant eyes, nose and
mouth. Look how disproportionate this draw-
ing appears. It is almost all “face.”
Enter the lowly ruler
The amazing plastic, grid ruler comes to the
rescue for inclines. Using the side of the pho-
tograph as a vertical guide, you can place the
grid of the ruler over the shapes of the facial
feature and check to see what is where. The
tilt of the eye is easy to see using the guide-
lines. Don’t assume that you can see the sub-
tle curve or angle of a shape.
Shape Tools
Rename and Incline
DEFINITION
Rename
A tool for seeing the shape in
facial features by renaming that
feature in terms of shape.
Facial features are not always symmetri-
cal, and will vary from one side to the
other. Eyes may be level with each other,
or one may be higher or lower. Eyes may
tilt up in the corner or down. Lips go up,
down, wiggle about or curve. Unfortu-
nately, people’s eyes have difﬁculty see-
ing these subtle variations.
object or situation has been given a
name, and actions are made in terms of
that name. For example, if you label a
feature an iris, you will think of it as an
iris and draw your memorized pattern of
an iris. If you think of it as a circle, you
will begin your drawing with a circle
and draw the shapes you actually see.
DEFINITION
Incline
A tool for checking subtle
angles in the facial features by
using a ruler.

51
Negative space is deﬁned as the empty
space surrounding a positive (solid)
shape. The whole of a picture is made up
of positive and negative spaces (or
shapes). People normally look at a shape
and draw it—like a vase or a ﬂower. If
the drawing doesn’t look right, they
wonder how it became distorted. Artists,
being the tricky folks that they are, pay
attention not only to the subject (positive
shape or space) but also to the “nothing-
ness” next to that subject—the shapes
created between the ﬂowers or next to
the vase.
I’ve been framed!
It’s often easier to see negative space if it is framed by a viewfinder. A
viewfinder places a box around something so that the edges of the
subject touch the edges of the box. By looking through a viewfinder,
you can more clearly teach your mind to concentrate on the true
appearance of a shape. You can make a simple viewfinder by cutting a
square out of a piece of paper. Look through the open area and you
will see the world nicely framed.
DEFINITION
Negative Space
A tool that allows you to see 
a positive shape (solid space)
clearer by focusing on the 
negative shape (empty space)
next to it.
Negative Space
Shape Tools

52
Are you positive?
How can there be negative space on a face when the entire face is a positive shape? Actually,
positive space is really the object you’re drawing, and negative space is the area between those
objects. Drawing the eyes and eyebrows means that there will be space between the two. This
spacing is just as critical as the shape of the features. 
When I look at certain shapes, I always check both the positive and negative shapes. For
example, I will check to see if an iris is drawn correctly by checking the shape and size of the
white of the eye.
Negative space: 
distance between
the eyebrow and
hairline.
Negative space: 
distance between 
the eye and 
eyebrow. 
Negative space: 
distance between 
the nose and mouth.
Negative space: 
distance between 
the mouth and chin.
Negative space: 
distance between
the nose and the
side of face.
Negative space: 
distance between
the eye and eyelid.

From the beginning
This tool is so
named because you
ask questions: What
is the line/edge
doing? In what direc-
tion is it going?
53
I was ﬂying home late one night from
teaching a composite drawing class. I
had read every book I brought, I didn’t
enjoy reading any of the provided maga-
zines, there was no movie and I was
bored to tears. Fortunately, the young
boy sitting next to me was also bored
and was trying to sketch pictures from
the ﬂight magazine. They were very com-
plex photographs. After watching him
struggle for a few moments, I asked him
if he wanted help. “Sure,” he said. 
He had roughed in a head shape, so I
placed my ﬁnger in the neck area. (Sim-
plify—I was literally pointing out the
location and shape to the child.) I asked,
“What does this edge do?” He replied,
“It is going slightly downward and
away” (from the face). He then drew
that edge in the correct downward angle.
I said, “Does it go downward forever?”  
Child: “No, it changes direction and
goes down the arm.”
Me: “Where does it change direction?”
Child: “Right here” (pointing to the
location).
We had identiﬁed the shape and the
location on the drawing where some-
thing was different. The particular spot
on the photo we were drawing was both
measurable and locatable using optical
indexing.
Using this questioning technique, the
child was able to complete a very com-
plex drawing of a model. My ﬁnger on
the location on the photograph and my
verbal questions required the child to
both see that information and articulate
what he was seeing. The resulting draw-
ing was quite remarkably skilled.
Question
Shape Tools
DEFINITION
Question
A tool for seeing angles and
shapes more clearly by asking
yourself exactly what it is you
are seeing.

54
Does this line go on forever?
As you are drawing the first line in one direction, the face eventually
has another angle, and your line goes too far. Something has changed,
so you might ask, “What happened?” In what direction is your
line/edge going now? Your final question is, “Where on the face did
this change occur?” Asking questions makes you articulate certain
points and locations that are not guesswork or trial and error. They
can be seen, but first you have to know what you are looking for.
Angle checkpoints
The average face tends to have certain places where an angle would
be located: the transition between the chin and jaw, the jaw and
cheekbone, the cheekbone to temple and the temple across the fore-
head.

55
It’s often a struggle to make a drawing
and a picture look alike. This is espec-
ially true when you are drawing a family
member. It may be that the mouth is
causing the difﬁculties, so you draw it
again. And again. And again. The paper
starts to thin in that area from all your
erasings. You may become frustrated
because you can’t see what the problem
is in that shape.
Drawing is difﬁcult at times, especially
when the shapes you see are subtle.
There is a simple solution to helping
your poor, beleaguered brain see the elu-
sive shape: the compare tool.
Cheat
Place a sheet of tracing paper over the photograph and trace the
outline of the shape causing the difficulties. 
Compare
Make your drawing look real
DEFINITION
Compare
A tool for seeing shapes more
clearly by tracing that shape
from the photograph, tracing
your own drawing and comparing
the two shapes as line drawings.
Shape Tools
!

And the answer is...
Move your hand over, and look at the two shapes side by side.
You have removed the “background noise” of the information-rich
photograph and created the shape in its simplest form. The subtle
difference between the shapes is apparent when you compared it
in this manner.
Trace again
Move the tracing paper over to your drawing. Place your hand 
over the tracing you have just done, so you can’t be influenced 
by it. Trace the same shape on your drawing that is causing you
problems. 
56
$
%

By closing my one eye, I was better able to
translate this three-dimensional image to my
two-dimensional paper. Without this tech-
nique, Aynslee’s image would most likely
have looked strange and out of proportion,
almost like looking into one of those carnival
mirrors.
57
You previously learned how to take a
three-dimensional image in front of you
and transform it into a two-dimensional
image on your paper by closing one eye.
This is true for ﬁnding the site or location
of an object as well as the shape of an
object. A facial feature, like the nose, can
be difﬁcult if you don’t ﬂatten it by clos-
ing one eye.
Aynslee
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
Flatten
Shape Tools
DEFINITION
Flatten
A tool for seeing a three-
dimensional shape more clearly by
closing one eye to level the
image into two dimensions.


Shade
P
robably the single most requested topic my students ask for is
information about shading. How do you make something look
real? This chapter covers techniques on how to “see” shading and
the correct shading that is speciﬁc to each feature. 
Understanding shading is the critical step for taking a line drawing
and transforming it into a lifelike work of art. Shading brings a three-
dimensional quality to the drawing. Traditional training in shading at
most art schools involves an instructor placing a variety of white objects
such as balls, plates, sheets and boxes on a table with a light on one side
and then telling the horriﬁed students, “Draw this.” If your instructor was
somewhat enlightened, he or she might give you a clue like “squint.”
Yeah, right. Your brain tells you that the objects are shapes, white, differ-
ent from each other and, er, well, white...  After all, if you could draw stuff
like that with no instruction, you could have saved yourself the class fees.
corrine
16" × 20" (41cm × 51cm)
W

60
To understand shading, you need to
know three things: What to look for,
how to evaluate what you’re seeing and
any useful techniques to make your
drawings better. The only additional tip
for shading your drawing is practice.
Shading involves hand-eye coordination.
Emerging artists have trouble with 
shading not because it is more technical
or difﬁcult; they struggle because it
requires new physical skills that come
with practice. 
Shading involves training the eye to
see what artists call “value changes.”
Value means the lightness or darkness of
a color. A value change is where some-
thing changes from light to dark or vice
versa. The ﬁve tools you will learn are:
• Values/Lines
• Isolate
• Compare
• Question
• Seek
Shading techniques
There are many techniques for shading,
including varying the pencil direction,
making linear strokes, building up lead
and smudging the lead. I prefer the shad-
ing technique of smudging the lead.
Smudging requires a smooth paper sur-
face. It has a few tricky areas, but it’s
faster and requires less pressure and con-
trol of the pencil. 
Understanding shading tools
Rub a dub-dub
Smudging requires a paper stump or tortillion (see chapter one). The
stump is just rolled paper with nothing on it. You use it to pick up
lead (graphite) from one area of the drawing and blend it out. The
paper needs to be smooth, plate-finish bristol board or illustration
board. Textured paper is better for other techniques because it snags
the lead.
The fine art of smudging
The lead may come from the drawing itself or by scribbling on a piece
of paper with a soft pencil (2B-6B work well). As you pick up lead and
move it around with the paper stump, it gradually gets lighter as the
lead is worn off the stump. This is why it’s easier to smudge—the tool
is helping you maintain the correct amount of lead.

61
Hold it right there
This is the standard way you hold your stump. It only works if you are
smudging a small area. Use the tip of the paper stump for these small
areas. You will use the stump’s tapered side, held flat against the
paper, for larger areas. Place it across your flat hand and smudge
using the tapered area.
Keep your grubby fingers off
Your hands contain oils that will transfer to the paper, causing the
paper to react with the graphite in adverse ways. Place a piece of trac-
ing paper under your smudging hand as shown here.
The white stuff
Preserve the white areas of your drawing. Remember that you are
grinding lead into the paper, and though the paper is smooth and
cleans up well, you want to keep from grinding lead into the areas
you know will remain white. Work from your dark areas and blend
toward your lighter areas.
The long and short of it
To make the skin on the drawing look smooth, use long smooth
strokes on your paper. Short, jerky strokes make for bad skin. If neces-
sary, go outside the edges of the face and erase later. (I know, I know,
I just told you to not smudge where you want to retain the white
areas, which might be outside the face. That’s okay. Sometimes you
need to break an art rule to achieve a goal—in this case, smooth
skin.) 
The same holds true for your original pencil shading—long, smooth
strokes applied with an even hand make for smooth skin and hair. I’m
starting to feel like a commercial.
Layers
When you smudge, you lift a small part of the lead from one area
and transfer it to another. This means that not only are you
blending into one area, you are lightening another. Smudging
is not a one-time application. You may need to go back
and darken the original area again and apply layers of
blending to get the right value.

Apply even pressure
Take your paper stump and blend into the face using long, smooth strokes. 
Establish an edge
Start with an HB pencil. Using the side of the face as an example, evenly scribble a
smooth, continuous tone next to the line that represents the side of the face. Keep your
pencil on the paper and the pressure on the pencil even and steady. 
62
Using the right pencil hardness, pressure
and stroke make a terriﬁc difference in
your shading. You cannot go back and
try to blend a zig-zag black line done
with a 6B lead. You will end up with a
zig-zag smudge.
!
$
Step-by-step shading technique

Repeat as necessary
Your goal is to not go immediately to the finished value but to build values up on the
face. You may need to go back and add more lead, smudge again, add more lead and
smudge again.
63
%
Shading techniques summary 
• Use smooth paper.
• Use the right tool.
• Hold it correctly.
• Keep tracing paper under your hand as you smudge.
• Preserve your white areas.
• Use long strokes for smooth skin.
• Keep applying more dark layers as you smudge.
• Use even pressure and smooth pencil strokes.

Shade Tools
Values/Lines
64
Now we will delve into the deep, inner
psychology of art, asking the age-old
question, “What is a line?” When you
draw, you usually start with lines to tell
you where you are on the paper and
where the edges of various items occur.
Beyond algebra and other math applica-
tions, you have probably never thought
any more about lines. Your brain, how-
ever, loves lines and will lie to you about
them.
It’s true. In chapter two, you learned
that the mind places everything into pat-
terns of perception, memorizes that pat-
tern and uses that pattern instead of the
reality of what is actually present in the
photo. Your mind ﬁgures it knows all
about things like facial features and
therefore will provide information about
that feature, regardless of reality. Percep-
tions are more powerful than facts. 
Drawing lines represent one of two
things: a thin, dark value on the face
(such as the crease in the eyelid) or a 
value change. A line in the latter instance
I got you, babe
Because your mind tells you that there is a line on the bottom lid, you
draw it in. This is fine if you’re drawing Cher, circa 1965, “I Got You,
Babe...” but it is incorrect for most other eyes. 
Look at this illustration. Your mind accepts the lines you originally
use as correctly defining the shapes of the face. Your mind (percep-
tions) really likes those same lines and will leave them in place at the
end of the drawing. 
DEFINITION
Values/Lines
A tool for understanding
values/lines in which the closer
in value two shapes are to each
other, the less a line is needed
to separate them.
shows where a dark and a light value
come together. Here’s a secret: There are
few true lines on the face. Most of the
shading on the face comes from value
changes, not lines. When you draw lines
to indicate value changes, you tend to
leave the lines in place. I think of this as
Carrie’s Dictum: The closer in value two
shapes are to each other, the less you can
draw a line to separate them.
Eyeball to eyeball
A close examination of the eyes, for example, will show us that the
bottom lid is a shelf. This shelf picks up light and is light in color. You
see it often because it is actually lighter than the so-called white of the
eye. There are no lines on the bottom lid; it’s a series of value
changes.

65
Once drawn, never erased
Look at this drawing. You know it is incorrect, and certainly doesn’t
appear real. But what’s the problem? Your mind has accepted the lines
as reality, but they are not really there and so you are frustrated. 
Handling lines like an adult
You have two choices when shading: Either kill the line (that is, shade
up to the line and make the line disappear because it’s now the same
shade at that point), or don’t draw the line in the first place.

66
Line killing
The side of the face is an example of line
killing (and you thought this was a nonviolent
art book). You do have to draw the side of
the face originally with a line, but there is no
line there. You see the face because it is
either lighter or darker than whatever is
beside it. Dark hair, for example, forms the
side of the face. The face may also get darker
as it reaches the edge. This is not a line,
mind you, but a tonal change. Therefore,
shade up to the line and make it disappear.
This will indicate that the area is now all the
same value.

67
No line at all
Better yet, given your mind’s ability to
deceive you, don’t draw some lines in at all.
The upper lip has qualities that you may need
to originally draw, but watch that lower lip. It’s
not necessary to complete the lower lip as a
line. You need only indicate where the lip
ends and the shadow begins.
Problem areas
The most common problem areas in using lines to separate value
changes are the lower eyelids, the sides of the nose, the edge of the
face and around the lips, in particular the lower lip. These areas con-
tain no lines and should not be sketched as linear separations. Either
kill the line by absorbing it into the shading or don’t draw it in at all.
Notice how odd the right side of her face looks with the lines left in
the drawing.
Susie
12" × 9" (30cm ×
23cm)

A way to physically check that your
shading is the correct value is to com-
pare the values between your drawing
and the photograph. To do this, you can
create a value scale.
Shade Tools
Isolate, Squint and Compare
68
The correct values on a drawing will
make the image come to life. A full range
of shades—from the white of the paper
to the darkest dark your pencil can
make—is usually necessary to make an
interesting drawing. The shading, or val-
ues, of a photograph also has a shape. It
has a starting place and an ending place
that you can ﬁnd on the face. Train your
eye to see the shape of the shading.
If you have a photographic modiﬁca-
tion program on your computer, you can
scan a photograph and use a “cutout”
program to isolate the values in the pho-
tograph. This can be useful in showing
you the locations of the shading. 
Shading has a shape. Squinting at the
photograph helps you see the general
outline and shapes of the shadows.
Squinting will also drop out those pesky
lines you felt you needed to separate the
various parts of the face. Squinting is the
original, low-tech way of seeing shading
and values. 
Value scale
The value scale is a simple, homemade tool to help the eyes see the correct light or dark areas
of a photo and the corresponding values in a drawing. To make a value scale, divide a piece of
paper into ten equal boxes. Leave one box on the top white. Make the bottom box the darkest
dark you can make with a pencil. Then shade the boxes so that they get progressively lighter
from the bottom box to the top, white box. Punch a hole in the center of each box. By placing
this simple guide over a photograph, then over your drawing in the same location, you can see
if you have reached the correct value.
DEFINITION
Isolate
A tool for more clearly seeing
the correct shading by isolating
the shading and seeing it as a
shape.
DEFINITION
Squint
A tool for seeing value changes
more clearly by squinting.
DEFINITION
Compare
A tool for seeing value changes
by creating a value scale for
comparison.

Missing something?
In this drawing, you cannot see one side of the face. Your perception
and memory tell you that there are always two eyes on the average
person. You know there are two eyes. The minor fact that the eyes are
not completely visible won’t deter you in your quest to draw that face.
You know there are eyes in there somewhere. 
In the end it doesn’t matter. This drawing still looks complete, even
without being able to see absolutely everything on her face.
Question
69
I have stressed throughout the book that
you need to be looking at your subject in
order to draw it. Even though you are
looking at it, your mind will provide
information that simply isn’t there or
isn’t true. 
Most errors occur when the artist
loses faith in the viewer. The artist thinks
the viewer will not be able to understand
what they are looking at, unless that
artist puts in every little detail. It doesn’t
matter if a part of the photo is missing. 
Ask yourself, “Why do you see it?”
This simple act forces the artist to ques-
tion what exactly makes it visible. Is
something lighter or darker? Is it separat-
ed by a line? If you don’t see it, then
don’t draw it.
Guesswork
You have just stumbled upon a problem. Your brain may tell you that
just because we cannot see something, there is no excuse for not
drawing it, right? So, you draw it. Because you cannot see the details
of the eyes, you guess at what they look like. After all, by golly, you
worry that if you don’t draw those eyes, people are going to think
your drawing is wrong. 
So you are wrong in your guesswork. Ask questions. Talking to
yourself will help you understand what you are trying to shade. Ask:
Why do I see this shape? If it’s the same value, I can’t see it. If I can’t
see it, I don’t draw it. If it looks like a big black blob, that’s what I
draw. If it’s a uniform white, it stays all white. Don’t outline something
just because you know it is there. So does everyone else. Draw what
is actually in the photo. Your viewer also knows that the nose has a
side to it and that the eyes are separate from the skin of the face.
DEFINITION
Question
A tool for seeing value changes
by asking yourself why you see a
particular shape. If you don’t see
it, don’t draw it. If you see it,
there is usually a value change.
Shade Tools

70
It doesn’t have to make sense
My husband, Rick, wanted to do a self-portrait showing himself as an old-time riverboat banjo
picker. He got permission from the local museum to use a historical photograph of a riverboat.
As Rick was shading in the riverboat, all he saw were dabs of light and dark on the deck. When
he took a break from his drawing and stepped back, the dabs became people. He didn’t try to
make the dabs look exactly like people; it was correct and real in the photograph. After he had
used the questioning technique, he came to realize he couldn’t make it “more correct” or “more
real” by applying reasoning to it. Don’t try to argue with reality. Draw what you see, where you
see it, to the correct shade.

Seek
Shade Tools
71
I have a confession: My husband, whom
I adore, loves the banjo. There, I’ve said
it. He studies the banjo. He plays banjo
and bluegrass music in my presence. He
takes banjos apart. He knows who made
what banjo, the year each was at its peak
and every major banjo picker in the
world. Rick can walk into a music store,
a pawn shop, a garage sale, an attic or a
living room, see a banjo and know every-
thing about it in seconds. He knows
what to look for. Why am I rattling on
about banjos? All of you know (or are
married to) someone who has this same
ability—though it might be cars, guns,
dogs, (I can do this with Great Pyrenees),
sports teams, clothes, hair styles or
antiques. You know what you’re looking
for. Your eye is trained to seek some par-
ticular detail that is totally obscure to the
average person. 
Artists, too, seek one particular detail
when they work on their art. Artists seek
to ﬁnd something round or rounded in a
subject. Why seek? Because artists have
learned that round shapes have a particu-
lar shading pattern. If you know the
shading pattern of a rounded surface,
you will know what to look for in the
photograph. Even if it is not clearly pres-
ent in the photo, or is missing altogether,
artists know that if they include this pat-
tern in their drawings, that feature will
appear rounded. 
In fact, some artists draw using only
rounded or round shapes. They think in
round. They teach in round. They illus-
trate in round. The problem with draw-
ing and locating features using rounded
shapes is that curves and curving shapes
vary. My students, in their original draw-
ings, will always err where there is a
curve in the drawing, not where there is
a straight line. Locate using straight lines.
Think shading in curves.
OK, so now you are going to throw
out the fact that I just said if you don’t
see it, don’t draw it. This is the exception
that proves the rule...or something like
that. 
The face has many rounded surfaces.
If you know the shading on a round sur-
face, and you know where the face has
rounded areas, you will know how to
shade the face better. 
Round shading pattern
The ball has a pattern that is as follows: light-
est light, which is the highlight; dark, which is
the shadow area; reflected light, which is light
bouncing off the floor or from other objects;
and a cast shadow, which is the shadow that
is created by the object.
Cast shadow
Reflected light
Dark
Lightest light
DEFINITION
Seek
A tool for seeing a particular
shading pattern by seeking out
round objects in your subject.

72
Round faces
Identify the round shapes on the face: forehead, nose, eyes, cheeks,
lips, chin, ears, face, even hair. Apply this pattern to a face and you
will make it round: lightest light, dark, reflected light and cast shadow.
Cast shadow
Cast shadow
Reflected light
Reflected light
Dark
Dark
Lightest light
Lightest light
Cast shadow
Reflected light
Dark
Lightest light

The seek tool works especially well here. There are many rounded sur-
faces that contain the particular shading pattern of: lightest light,
dark, reflected light and the cast shadow.
73
Courtney
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)

74
The ﬁnal general drawing principle is to
check your work for accuracy. As you
work, your mind is processing and plac-
ing your drawings into patterns of per-
ception. After a fairly short amount of
time, you will no longer really see your
work. You need ways to break that pat-
tern of perception. It’s like proofreading
something.You tend to miss the typos
and other errors, but you can correct this
by having someone else read it or by
reading it aloud.
Many artists already use one or more
techniques to check the accuracy of their
art. These two pages are a summary of
many of these techniques. I advise you to
incorporate one or more of the following
techniques into every work of art you do:
• Invert
• Distance
• Time
• Tools
• Reverse
• Friend and family factor
• Other artist factor
• Combination
Invert
Inverting your art simply means to turn
it upside down so that it looks different.
Turn both your drawing and the original
photo upside down and place them side
by side. You may see any errors or prob-
lems more clearly. 
Distance
Whenever I complete a watercolor or
drawing, I place it at a different distance
from which I painted or drew it. I usually
prop it across the room and study it from
afar. Changing the distance alters the
way the art looks.  I recall one ﬂying
osprey painting I propped in just such a
way. It looked ﬁne, but something was
bothering me. After a day of walking
away, walking back, wandering around
the room and sneaking peeks at the
painting, I realized that the wing was
bent at the wrong angle. I made a simple
correction and this piece was accepted
into a juried show and the traveling
show as well.
Time
Because your mind has placed the draw-
ing into a pattern, if you walk away
from that work, you will see it differ-
ently when you return. I often take a
drawing away from a student, wander
about the room for a minute or two,
then hold it at a distance for the student
to see it with fresh eyes. Build in breaks
away from your work. Caution: When
you ﬁrst return to your drawing, imme-
diately write down the corrections you
see or you will forget.
Tools
There are tools that will help you see
better. Many artists think it’s cheating to
use a tool to help them draw. That’s like
thinking a hammer is cheating because it
helps you to work faster. Tools are just
that—physical aids to make you a better
artist. One common tool is a ruler for
checking for angles. Another tool is a
piece of red ﬁlm held in front of your
eyes. It will block the art into values and
will help you make those corrections.
Other tools will show you shading,
angles and perspective. You may pur-
chase some of these tools or make them
yourself.
Reverse
Holding art up to a mirror is a long-
standing artistic technique. The reverse
of the art shows some problems more
clearly.
Friend and family factor
Sometimes you can’t see it but others
can. Ask your friends and family mem-
bers what they think of the work. I
remember asking my (non-artistic) mom
for her opinion on a painting I liked. She
said all she could see was the blue blob
of paint on the nose. She missed my
wonderful art because a blue blob cap-
tured her attention (and assuming my
purpose was not to express my feelings
on noses, blue blobs, or a commentary
on Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer),
her observation made me revisit the
painting.
Other artist factor
Critiques are useful for getting outside
input on your work. They help you see
the art with fresh eyes. My husband is
an artist, so I have a built-in radar on
my art. Of course, it is not good having
your husband stare critically at your
work, then incredulously state, “You’re
not done yet, are you?” This may not
make for the most harmonious mar-
riage.
Combination
Of course, a combination of the accura-
cy techniques is an artist’s best bet. Each
of my composite sketches and paintings
receives a combination check for accura-
cy. With my composites, I prop the
drawing on the table at a distance, take
a break, return and place the drawing on
the ﬂoor and walk around it. I ask the
witness to take a break and then recheck
the drawing from a different distance
when he or she returns.
Checking for accuracy

Walking away and taking a break helped me iron out some of the
intricate shading issues in this drawing. Sometimes all you need is a
little time for everything to click.
JB & Cole
16" × 20" (41cm × 51cm)
75


Drawing Eyes
S
o much has been written about the eye. Henry Theodore Tucker-
man wrote, “The eye speaks with an eloquence and truthfulness
surpassing speech. It is the window out of which the winged
thoughts often ﬂy unwittingly. It is the tiny magic mirror on whose crystal
surface the moods of feeling ﬁtfully play, like the sunlight and shadow on a
quiet stream.” Given that the eye is indeed the window of the soul, artists
need to get the window right.
drooling child
Photo by Kelly Dulanty
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
E

78
Eyes are shapes, so you will use the shape and shading tech-
niques to help draw them better. This section is the practical,
step-by-step application of the various techniques presented in
the ﬁrst few chapters. You will isolate the feature of the eyes,
simplify the shape and rename the parts of the eye as shapes.
The parts of the eye
Lateral canthus
Crease
Sclera
Shelf of
lower eyelid
Pupil
Iris
Medial canthus
Upper eyelid
Eyebrow
Eyes as shapes

Subtract out the doohickey
You probably thought the inside corner of
the eye was called the medial canthus. I
call it the doohickey. On most people, it is
a small, triangular, pinkish area in the
inside corner of the eye. Now that you
know it is the doohickey, you need to
ignore or subtract out that measurement. 
Look for the incline
When you draw a horizontal line through the eyes, from the out-
side to the inside corners, it’s immediately apparent if the eyes are
level, one higher or lower, or tilted at the corner. 
Start with a line
You will need a ruler, a circle template, a pencil and an eraser to
do this exercise. Draw a line 71⁄2-inches (19cm) long. Break it up
into 11⁄2-inch (4cm) sections. This will become an imaginary line
running across the eyes. You learned earlier that there are “five
eyes” across the average face: an eye between the side of the face
and the eye, the eye itself, an eye between the eyes, a second eye
and the space between the eye and the side of the face.
79
!
$
%
Locate and measure the eye

80
Now that you have established the initial measurements, you
must ﬁnd the center of the white of the eye—not the center of
the entire eye (remember you are ignoring the doohickey). This
is where you center the iris. You might need to refer back to
pages 46-48 to refresh your memory on how to draw a correct-
ly proportioned eye.
Looking for circles
The iris, on the average adult face, is one-half the width of the
white of the eye. You could fit two irises into the white of the eye,
as shown in the photograph above. The point where the two cir-
cles touch is the center. Mark this point.
Place the circles
The circle of the iris is not centered on the line you’ve drawn from
top to bottom; about one-fourth of the circle extends below the
line with most of the iris above the line. Find a circle in the tem-
plate that is one-half the width of the eye. Draw that entire circle,
using the center mark you just made.
Don’t forget to center it
!
$

81
Apt pupils
You will be repeating the process you
learned on page 47, but let’s review it one
more time. Using the marks at the top, bot-
tom and sides of the circle template, con-
nect the lines to find the center of the
circle. Center the pupil of the eye in the
middle of the iris.
%

Wide-open eyes
82
This is a good place to stop and revisit
the topic of “relate.” Remember, this
means that once you have a shape, you
can relate other shapes to that shape.
The circle of the iris is a good example.
Another feature you can relate shapes to
is the upper eyelid. Notice where on the
circle of the iris the eyelid touches. On
wide-open eyes, the entire circle shows.
On average eyes, the lids are above the
pupil. “Sleepy eyes” show very little cir-
cle (see page 84). Don’t vary the circle to
ﬁt into the eye; vary the lids according to
the iris.
Relate

Average eyes
83

Sleepy eyes
84

85
Above the eye, the upper eyelid forms a crease. In the average
eye, this looks like a line following the upper eyelid. When the
crease is very high above the eye, it’s called “heavy lids.” When
it’s very close to the eye or doesn’t show at all, it’s called “over-
hanging lids.” Pay close attention to the location, direction and
appearance of the upper lid crease.
Eyelid creases
Average eyes
Heavy lids
Overhanging lids 

Keep it neat
Before shading the eyes, erase the interior guide lines you have made.
Leave the crosshairs in the iris, as you can use them in shading. 
Eyes contain one or more highlights in them. To keep your whites
white, leave these areas white rather than try and erase out the high-
lights.
86
Both the upper and lower lids have a
thickness to them, as shown in the draw-
ing to the right. The upper lid’s thickness
is indicated by its cast shadow and by the
appearance of an edge in one corner. The
lower lid is a shelf that will often pick up
light. If fact, in the outside corner of the
eye, the shelf of the lower lid is often
lighter than the white of the eye. Make
sure that you haven’t made the shelf a
single line, and that your lines aren’t
showing when you are done shading.
Lower lids

87
Shade the iris
To keep the circle of the iris neat, leave the
circle template in place initially as you
shade. After filling in the black pupil, fan
outward with a dark pencil to keep it from
looking so stark. Go around the outside of
the iris (with the circle template in place),
and fan inward for the same reason. 
Pay close attention to the contrast
between the black pupil and the color of
the eye. Because you’re drawing in black
and white, it’s the contrast between the
black pupil and the shading on the iris that
you see. With some very dark eyes, you
won’t see a separate pupil and an iris—it’s
all dark. Some eyes have a darker rim on
the edge of the iris.
Back to the step-by-step demonstration. You will need to
incorporate all of the lessons from the last few pages, so don’t
be afraid to go back to the information at any point.
Finish the eye with flair
TIP Shade outward
from the black pupil to
the edge of the circle template.
This will enhance the appear-
ance of the eye.
B
!

Add the finishing touches
Finally, use your kneaded eraser to lighten the iris on the side
opposite of the highlight. This creates the appearance of light
passing through the transparent cornea. 
Shade the eye
Using the paper stump, place the shadow cast by the upper lid,
and a shadow in the corners where the “ball” of the eye goes back
into the head. Erase and absorb the lines of the lower lid into the
shading.
Fill in the iris
The iris is made up of linear shapes fanning out from the center. Using an HB pencil (on
lighter colored eyes), fill in between the pupil and the outer rim. Keep the highlight white.
Then, use a paper stump to blend the shading together, again saving the highlight. On
dark-colored eyes, use a darker lead to fill in the space between the pupil and iris edge.
88
$
%
Q

89
Eyebrows are made of short hairs. Inter-
estingly enough, a pencil stroke is shaped
like a hair; fat where it starts and taper-
ing off into a thinner end. “Comb” eye-
brow hair with your pencil—place the
pencil lines in the direction the eyebrow
hair grows.
Eyebrows and eyelashes
Eyelashes
You generally won’t be able to see eyelashes
when you look straight on at most eyes. The
exceptions to this are mascara-coated lashes
and very heavy, long lashes. The lashes come
forward and curl upward, appearing as a
ragged edge. One way to imply long lashes is
to place their shadow into the highlight of the
eye. 
Eyebrow location
Eyebrows vary quite a bit. Most start at the
edge of the eye and end in a line that runs
from the nose past the eyes.

90
Eyebrow shape
Eyebrows may curve, be straight, close to the eyes, have a bend in
them or arch high or low. 

91
Use your tools!
Once again, use the tools for “seeing” that
you have learned about in the past few chap-
ters. Eyebrows have a site that you can deter-
mine by measuring. As shown in these three
photos, place a ruler next to the eyebrows to
see their incline. Then use the eyes to relate
the location of the curve of the brows.

92
Overhanging lids of a person of European descent
Overhanging lids of a person of Asian descent
Examples of completed eyes
So, you think you have learned how to draw every eye, huh?
Not so fast! You must also take into consideration how vary-
ing eyelids and eye shapes can change the appearance of irises
and eyelashes. Study the next few examples, and see if you can
point out the differences between them.

93
Iris raised
Bulging eyes
Deep-set eyes
Heavy eyes


Drawing Noses
Y
ou might have noticed that few poets have waxed eloquently on
the nose. Even emerging artists seem to stumble when it comes to
drawing noses. If much of this chapter seems remedial, it is
because the nose needs more attention... you don’t want to blow it. OK, a
number of puns and nose comments are running through my mind. I
admit this is a hard chapter to write. But noses are really quite simple to
draw once you understand the structure of what you are looking at.
Cris Harnisch
12" × 9" (30cm × 23cm)
R

96
Once again note that noses are shapes.
As seen in the illustration, the nose shape
is created from two rounded shapes: the
ball and the column. The nose is not cre-
ated from lines.
The parts of the nose
Wing
Septum
Nostril
Tip
Bridge
Know your nose
One shot
Look at your photo and try to ﬁnd the multiple shapes that
make up the nose in that one image. Drawing a nose will
become much easier once you have identiﬁed all the indi-
vidual parts that create the total image.

Male
The width of the nose is bigger; it starts at
the white of the eye.
Female
Notice how the width of the nose begins at
the corner of the eyes.
97
Note: I am referring to the average nose
in the following description. 
The site of the nose is contained with-
in a rectangle that begins in the forehead.
It is as wide as the inside corner of the
eyes on the female face (shown on the
bottom left) and the start of the white of
the eye on the male face (shown on the
bottom right). Most people make the
nose too long and too narrow. This is
because the nose causes the artist to over-
rule what he or she really sees and per-
ceives to be true. The nose starts in the
forehead, but artists really don’t pay
attention to it until it is level with the eye.
They therefore draw the nose the correct
length from the eye down to the tip, not
from the forehead, and the resulting nose
is too long. Most books also show the
male nose as too narrow—the width of
the nose on the female face. Male noses
are wider.
Nose site

98
The wings of the nose are about one-
third the height of the nose, if you meas-
ure from nose tip to the top of the
eyebrow, as shown in this drawing. 
1⁄3
1⁄3
1⁄3
Wing site

Basic wing shapes
99
The wings of the nose may be round,
ﬂared, ﬂattened or any combination of
these shapes (as seen here).

To get the hang of the nose (if you pardon the expression),
study the nostril area. OK, so art isn’t as glamorous as you
once thought. The size and shape of the nostril help deﬁne the
shape of the tip of the nose. The more the nostril shows, the
more the tip of the nose tends to tilt up; the less the nostril
shows, the more the tip of the nose tends to turn down. On
some people, you cannot see the nostrils at all.
Nostril basics
100

The nostrils have differing shapes. Some
nostrils are round, some are more trian-
gular and some are quite oval.
Nostril shapes
A word about bridges
You’ve looked at the tip of the nose. Now
study the start of the nose, the bridge.
The nose begins in the forehead. I know
that may seem obvious, but I have seen
some drawings where the nose is con-
nected to the eye. Some noses are on the
same plane as the forehead. Some noses
dip inward at a point below the eye-
brows, while others are very flat across
the bridge or protrude like the bow
of a ship. Artists create all the
shape of the bridge of the
nose by shading.
101

102
If you identify the shape of the nose high-
light, ﬁnd where the nose picks up the
most light and “read” the nose as a series
of lights and darks, you will have cor-
rectly shaded the nose... up to a point.
There are a few tricks to make your nose
look more realistic. Many of these tricks
involve not drawing the photograph
exactly as you see it but adding or sub-
tracting details. The tricks are:
• Seek reﬂected light.
• Watch the level of nostril darkness.
• Avoid lines.
• Ask yourself questions.
• Link to other features.
Now, look at the man’s face again and
see if you can you use these tricks to help
you make the nose look more realistic.
Seek the
reflected
light.
Ask questions: Why
do you see the side
of the nose? Is it
lighter or darker?
Avoid drawing
lines.
Watch that you
don’t make this
a black hole.
Place the
highlight.
Link to other
features. 
Nose tricks

103
Seek reﬂected light
In chapter ﬁve, I reviewed the technique
for making something round—I called it
“seek.” Artists seek to ﬁnd round pat-
terns and, when discovered, they shade
that round object with a speciﬁc shading
pattern. The tip of the nose is rounded
(as in the drawing to the right); if you
shade that particular pattern, even if you
don’t see it, you will have rounded the
nose.
Watch the level of nostril darkness
Be careful when you draw the dark areas
of the nostril. Two gigantic black holes in
the face make viewers feel like they are
staring down a shotgun barrel. Even if
the photograph shows the nostrils as two
black holes, don’t get out the 6B lead and
darken them in to that level. Make the
darkest area near the top, as shown in
the lower two drawings, and get lighter
toward the bottom.
Look at the image on the left; it looks like
two black holes rather than nostrils. Compare
that to the image on the right, which is shad-
ed more realistically. This just goes to show
that shading can make or break your draw-
ing. Keep these images in mind when you go
to grab that 6B pencil. 

Begin with the bottom
Create the bottom of the nose with lines.
Finish the shading
Create the top and sides of the nose with
shading only. This will show the distinction
between the cheek and nose without using
any of those pesky lines.
Blend away the Lines
Shade this area, all the while remembering
to blend in the lines of the nose. Resist
the temptation to leave them in!
104
Get into the habit of never using lines to indicate the side of the
nose. Avoiding lines on the side of the nose will limit the temp-
tation to leave them in your completed drawing.
Shade the nose without lines
!
$
%

105
Ask yourself questions
Ask yourself why you see the various
parts of the nose. If two areas are the
same shade, your eye cannot separate
them, so you can’t draw them separate.
Lighting varies from photo to photo and
face to face. Look at this drawing, study
and question the areas of light and dark.
Link to other features
Be sure you link the nostrils, tip, length,
direction, general shape of the nose and
shading to the other available informa-
tion on a face. Use the tools presented in
the earlier chapters to help you. Remem-
ber, your mind is always trying to get the
upper hand and tell you what it thinks is
true of the art you’re working on, not
what is visually true.
You can see this wing
of the nose because
it is lighter than 
the cheek. 
You can see the
reflected light area
because of the dark
shadow that is cast
beneath the nose.
The nose wing is lighter
than the cheek.
You are able to see this
side of the nose because
it goes from light to
dark, then back to light.


Drawing Lips and Teeth
L
ips are a fairly simple series of shapes. You will quickly notice a
line that forms where the upper and lower lip meet. The upper lip
looks like a mountain range with two distinct peaks; the lower lip
looks basically like a half-circle. You will also quickly notice that a smile
effects the other facial features. The lips widen and thin out, the cheeks
pucker, the eyes crinkle and the jaw changes.
Teeth, on the other hand, are a real problem for many people. They
can be difﬁcult to shade realistically, especially as they move farther back
in the mouth. This is also one of the few places you will be able to use
some artistic license when drawing the face. If you draw exactly what you
see, the hard lines between the teeth will create the appearance a picket
fence.
In this chapter, you’ll tackle both lips and teeth. I will show you some
helpful tricks and techniques to realistically render the mouth and avoid
the picket fence look.
Christian Easterling
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
T

108
The lips can be divided into three major
areas of concentration: the upper lip, the
line where the lips come together and the
lower lip.
The parts of the mouth
Parting line
Lower lip
Upper lip
Philtrum
Parts of the mouth

109
OK, so the face has one line...
I usually start with the line of the mouth. Yes, the mouth is one of the few facial areas that
actually contains a line. It is formed from the upper lip and lower lip touching each other. Pay
particular attention to this line. Does it go up or down at the corners? Is it straight or wavy? Use
a ruler to help you see the direction.

110
Upper lips
The upper lip is like a mountain range with
two mountains. Some people have rolling
hills, some have the Rockies and some have
the Himalayas. Pay close attention to the
location and shape of the two points of the
upper lip.

111
In the groove
The top of the two mountains come to a
point at two ridges that extend up to the
nose and form a rounded groove called the
philtrum. Some people have a pronounced
philtrum, while on others it is slight.
Lower lips
The lower lip may be equal in size to the
upper lip or smaller or larger. Use caution in
indicating the lower lip. The top example is
the correct way, while the lower example is
incorrect. Do not completely outline the lower
lip. Remember in chapter five the lower lip
was used as an example of a problem area. 

112
Correct shading
Though upper and lower lips are about the same shade, artists usu-
ally shade the upper lip darker than the lower lip. This will help dif-
ferentiate the two lips and add to the illusion of depth in the work.
Think of a pumpkin
Consider a pumpkin when you shade the mouth. The ribs of the
pumpkin help define its roundness. The “ribs” of the mouth help to
define the roundness of the lip. This concept of shading something
while thinking of the roundness of a pumpkin, is the same for shading
mustaches, hair and other features.
Don’t drop the ball
We could, in a manner of speaking, say that the lips contain “five
balls,” that is, the lips form rounded shapes. These shapes may not
appear in many mouths, but if you are sensitive to them, you will seek
them when you shade the mouth.
What to look for
Within the lip there are small lines or grooves. Use caution here, as
they are usually subtle. Shading in the direction of the lip structure will
help you define the roundness of the lips. 
Shading the mouth

113
Lip rims
Around the mouth you might see a lighter
area caused by a lip rim. This is a narrow area
where light is captured around the mouth.
Other mouth shapes
The mouth forms a barrel, or rounded shape,
over the teeth. There may be pouches and
dips of lighter or darker areas caused by the
shape of the underlying teeth, jaw and 
muscles.

114
Drawing teeth seems to cause a great
deal of grief to some budding artists.
This is usually due to the “picket fence
effect.” They draw each tooth as a sepa-
rate shape and place hard lines between
the teeth. 
Gently, gently
Think of shading teeth as gently indicating the location and shape of teeth, rather than pound-
ing out the details of each tooth. Don’t floss the teeth with your pencil. Gradually shade the
teeth darker as they go back into the mouth. Then indicate the gum line, add shadows to
round the teeth and call it quits.
Round the bottom of
the tooth.
Don’t draw lines to
separate individual
teeth.
Increase the shading
as you move toward
the back of the
mouth.
These areas are
very dark.
Indicate the top shape of the tooth.
Dealing with teeth
Don’t fence them in
If you emphasize the
separations between
each tooth, your draw-
ing of the mouth
becomes distracting
and unrealistic.

115
Smile changes
When a person smiles, not only does the mouth change size and
shape, the entire face becomes involved. Eyes pucker, cheeks bulge
and the nose broadens and flattens. There is no hard-and-fast rule as
to what changes take shape within a smiling face. The important part
is to draw what you see using the tools provided.
Detective Carolyn Crawford
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)


Drawing the Head
I
have placed drawing the head toward the end of this book, because I
tend to draw from the center of the face outward. There is no hard-
and-fast rule on this. In this chapter, you will learn about head shapes
and ears. In addition, I’ll review the difference between the adult, child and
male/female proportions.
In general, I will be teaching you how to draw the head as if you
were looking at the person straight on. Obviously, not all drawings will
include this angle, but it would be almost impossible for me to include
examples of every angle. The best understanding of the basic head shapes
will come from the level, straight-on view of the head.
Diana, Shiloh and Aynslee
Stuart (detail)
14" × 11" (28cm × 36cm)
U

118
Facial reconstruction
Forensic artists have a number of duties, including facial reconstruc-
tion or approximation. They start with the skull of an unknown person
and attach tissue-depth markers made from an electric eraser (as seen
here). This provides the outline of the face.
I have developed a different attitude
toward drawing heads ever since I com-
pleted a facial reconstruction class by
Betty Pat Gatliff. This remarkable
woman has spent years teaching (and
creating) three-dimensional facial recon-
structions. She sculpts with clay directly
over the skulls of unidentiﬁed people, as
shown in the drawing. Handling skulls,
even if they’re plastic ones you can pur-
chase through art supply stores, is a
wonderful way to understand the struc-
ture of the face.
Egghead
Generally speaking, people’s heads are
egg-shaped. The bones and muscles of
the face combine to create many different
appearances. 
Location, location, location
Although faces differ with the underlying
bone structure, I seek certain points on
the face where “something happens.”
For example, I know that if the person
has prominent cheekbones, the bottom
of their cheek will be even with the base
of the nose. This is not always the case,
but it is an example of certain parts of
the face that I check.
The structure of the head

The parts of the head
Here are a few areas to seek out before you begin to draw any face;
you can expect “something to happen” in each of these locations.
Knowing these points and how they influence the appearance of the
facial features will give you a great jumping off point.
119
The bottom of the
cheek occurs at the
base of the nose.
The chin tends to round
at the outside corners
of the mouth.
The jaw will 
generally angle in to
the chin below 
the level of the
mouth opening.
If the face has 
hollow cheeks, 
they tend to occur 
in this area.
The top of the
cheek is below eye
level.

Long
Round
120
To give you a general idea, I have shown some of the most
common head shapes. The shape of the forehead is created by
the hairline (or lack thereof). Foreheads may be high, low,
rounded, squared or a variety of different shapes.
Head shapes

Oval
Triangular
121
Rectangular

122
Prominent 
Sunken
Cheeks may be prominent, average or
sunken. The cheeks generally start below
the eye and end near the bottom of the
nose.
Cheeks

123
On average, the lower face tends to be
divided into three parts between the base
of the nose and the chin. The ﬁrst part is
between the nose and the opening of the
mouth. The second section is between
the mouth opening and the deepest point
on the mandible (lower jaw). The third
section is between the deepest point on
the chin and the bottom of the chin. A
chin may be long, short, rounded,
square, pointed, double, protruding or
receding, or it may have a cleft.
About 1⁄3 of
the face
Chins

Don’t stretch your drawing too thin!
There is one fact that you must remember when drawing necks: You
must start them at the shoulder area and continue it up to the ear
area. Don’t forget to check that the length of the neck is in proportion
to the angle you are viewing it at.
124
Like other parts of the face, necks vary in
size and shape. If there is a common mis-
take that artists make, it is in making the
neck too long and thin. The neck begins
at the shoulder area and attaches at the
chin, but it doesn’t end there. It continues
up to the ear area, although we usually
don’t see the entire length when we look
at a person straight on. Therefore, check
that the length of the neck is in propor-
tion to the angle you are viewing it at.
(The neck will appear shorter if you look
at it straight on, and longer if you view it
from the back.) Clothing ﬁts relatively
high up on the neck.
Necks

125
Female faces tend to be more narrow in the chin and jaw area
and have a more narrow nose. The eyes are the same width
apart as on male faces. Yet, because a female face is more nar-
row, the eyes may look larger in relation to the rest of the fea-
tures. Also, the eyebrows tend to be higher and thinner on
female faces.
The female face

This drawing clearly shows how faces can change in appearance as
the person ages. Notice how the lower face lengthens, the lips
become fuller and hair tends to be less fine. Look at the illustration
on the next page for more details that are specific to the faces of 
children.
126
Children have different proportions that change as they grow
older (this is especially apparent in the face). The lower face
grows and lengthens with age.
Diana, Shiloh and Aynslee Stuart
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
Child vs. adult features

127
Drawing a child’s face
Many people have trouble making children look young. You need to
be aware of certain secrets when drawing the face of a child. For
example, the child’s face should have very little mid-face shading—
especially around the eyes and nose—the iris is very large and the
hair is fine.
The eyebrows tend
to be thin.
The corners of the
eyes are rounded and
very small.
Children have very
short noses.
The lips are smaller
and may be fuller.
Keep the shading
very light.
There is almost no
shading on the side
of the nose.
The iris is very large
and the white areas
are very small.
Hair is fine; 
use a very 
sharp pencil.

Triangular fossa
128
The main parts of the ear
Learning the parts of the ear early on will save you a lot of grief later;
you will always know what parts to look for, no matter how much
they may vary from person to person. Plus, you can impress your 
friends with your in-depth knowledge of ear anatomy!
The ears are an important and difﬁcult feature to accurately
draw. They are very detailed and vary greatly from person to
person.
Antihelix
Antitragus
Lobe
Tragus
Helix
Drawing ears

129
More locations
If you looked at the front of a face, level, you
would see that the ears start at the eyebrows
and end around the base of the nose. Stated
another way, ears are about as long as the
nose. 
Ears are about as
long as the nose.

130
Profile
From the side, the distance from the back of the eye to the back of
the ear is about the same as from the bottom of the eye to the chin.

131
Two views
The ear looks different from the side than from the front. 


Drawing Hair
D
rawing hair can be interesting, to say the least. Because there are
so many hairstyles, this chapter covers just a few general tricks
and techniques.
In order to make “great” hair, you should be prepared to spend some
quality time with your pencil; you are going to be at it for awhile.
Dull pencil points make for “ﬂat” hair, not ﬁne hair.  Don’t just start
scribbling somewhere; hair has a start, end, highlights and dark areas.
Drawing hair also includes beards and mustaches. You will apply the same
principles to facial hair as you did to create the hair on top of the head.
bentley stuart
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
I

134
Hair may be ﬁne, coarse, thick or thin,
straight or wavy and a host of other
appearances. You can draw many of
these variables by varying the thickness
of the pencil lead and using different
grades of lead. Draw thick, coarse hair
with a blunt 6B pencil. Use a sharp HB
lead for ﬁne hair. Children’s hair is usual-
ly ﬁne, so make sure your pencil point is
sharp.
Combing the hair
As shown in this series of steps, use your
pencil to “comb” the hair. Lay your pen-
cil strokes the direction the hair would be
growing or combed.
Build darks
Once you establish the direction, start to
ﬁll in the strokes. If the hair is ﬁne, do
not try to get dark in a single layer of
pencil lines. Build the darks by continu-
ing to place more lines in the same place.
Start with a very sharp 2H or HB pencil.
Progressively move to darker leads 
(2B-6B).
Pencil lines
A pencil stroke is like
a hair—fat at the
beginning and fine
toward the end. 
Establish an outline
Start by getting the basic information down
on paper.
Creating different types of hair
Create long, dark hair
!

Don’t be impatient!
Keep building up the smooth strokes. Hair
takes time to accurately render.
135
Start to form the hair
Lay your pencil flat and begin to establish
the direction of the hair. 
$
%

Ahh... Finally done!
The end result was definitely worth the wait! Just remember to
keep building up your strokes until you hair looks complete.
136
Gina Garofano
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
Q

Continue to build
Keep layering the strokes and begin to establish the dark and
light areas.
Begin the highlights
Establish the outline of the hair and highlights. Begin to place
your pencil strokes back into the highlight. Remember, the end of
the stroke should reach into the highlight.
137
It’s better to leave space for the highlights in the hair rather
than to try and erase them out. The highlight in the hair should
have the end stroke of the pencil coming into it. This means
you need to place your pencil lines “backward” into the high-
light on the top, as shown in the next four images. Don’t leave
the highlight a large, white area. Place a line or two completely
across the white highlight area.
Build hair highlights
!
$

Anchor your highlights
Place a few strands across the light areas to blend them into the
rest of the hair. This will help save the hair from looking like it has
floating white spaces.
Don’t forget the light areas
As the hair becomes more defined, check and make sure you are
leaving lighter areas for the highlight.
138
%
Q

139
Pencil strokes
You can create some hairstyles by placing a 6B pencil on its side and
making very small strokes.
Curly or wavy hair
Treat curly or wavy hair the same as straight hair. Establish the direc-
tion of your pencil strokes and where the highlights will occur. Then,
settle in for a long afternoon of lines, lines and more lines. 
Different hairstyles

140
Light-colored hair
Gray or blonde hair will still have dark areas in it. Remember to squint
to see those darks. 
Susie Toronto, A.K.A.
“Kukana”
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)

I
hope you have arrived at a better
understanding of drawing in general
and drawing the face in particular. I
think drawing is the underlying discipline
of all good art. It is the basis which other
skills are built upon. Creativity in art is
knowledge based—and you now have a
great deal of foundational knowledge. 
I would love to see any of you in one
of my classes some day. I enjoy teaching
and seeing you grow as an artist.
I would like to take a bit of time to
thank and talk about a number of very
special people who have either appeared
in this book or allowed me to use their
work.
The watercolor appearing in the front
is located at the gallery that represents
me: Frame of Mind Gallery, 119 N 2nd,
Coeur d’Alene, ID 83814 (208) 667-
6889. A big hug and thank you to the
owners Shane and Merlin Berger. We
have been together for a wonderful eight-
een years and counting. 
John Hinds and Greg Bean are former
law enforcement students—and previ-
ously untrained artists—who have taken
their art well beyond the forensic art
ﬁeld. Both ofﬁcers have had considerable
success in their composite identiﬁcations
as well. John Hinds is a retired sheriff’s
detective who currently works as a foren-
sic artist in the New England area. His
training in forensic art started in 1989
with extensive training through Stuart
Parks Forensic Consultants, then further
training with the FBI at Quantico, Vir-
ginia. John’s composites have been fea-
CONCLUSION
tured in newspapers and news programs,
such as “Dateline NBC”. One of his
drawings led to the identiﬁcation, arrest
and conviction of the worst serial arson-
ist in U.S. history. 
Detective Greg Bean, Bellevue Police
Department, Bellevue, Washington, sent
me his pre-instructional and the two
drawings: “Sunbathing baby Hannah in
her daddy’s hands. Family reunion, Stur-
gis, Michigan, August, 2001” and “Cort-
ney from a photograph by Jean at
Mount Rushmore, August, 2001.”
Taylor Perkins, age 7, is a home-
schooled student who attended a
special class I offered for home-schooled
students.
Kyle and Suzan Helmhout, Hayden
Lake, Idaho, attended my class at North
Idaho College in Coeur d’Alene. They
drew their daughters, Laci, age 1, and
Heather, age 5, after four lessons of two
hours each.
After a chance, but wonderful, meet-
ing at an art show, I worked out a great
working relationship with the talented
photographer Kelly Dullanty. Kelly has a
couple passions in life: jewelry design
and photography. As a gifted designer for
over ﬁfteen years, he has created count-
less jewelry pieces that are works of art
in and of themselves and are treasured by
their owners. Photography has been a
part of Kelly’s life for over thirty years,
working in the darkroom and casually
developing his skills. During the past
four years he has taken this passion seri-
ously and has become an award-winning
artist in this medium. His portraits and
still life studies draw the viewer into the
energy of the moment.
The wonderful faces that formed the
photographs and drawings: Garrett
McDonald, age 12, a rising young artist
in North Idaho; Corrine Oberg, a beauti-
ful young lady and aspiring model; Cros-
by Cross, age 8, a multi-talented young
man, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho; Alexis
Emery, art student, Coeur d’Alene, Chris-
tian Easterling, age10, a visitor to our
ranch and the son of a friend of my
brother. Thank you all for your smiling
inspiration.
Many law enforcement students
agreed to let me turn them into “mugs”
for my book and I do owe them a great
big “thank you” and a frog sticker.
Thanks to Detective Cris Harnisch,
Oconomowoc Police Department,
Oconomowoc, Wisconsin, Gina Garo-
fano, Poughkeepsie, New York, Detec-
tive Carolyn Crawford, Portland Police
Bureau and Detective Lieutenant Jerry
Scalley, Woburn Police Department,
Woburn, MA. Thanks, guys.
Once again I thank my husband, Rick
Parks, for his drawing for the book. You
have great facial features (your ears,
nose, eyes, and proﬁle really helped the
cause). You are a brilliant artist, banjo
picker and Christian man. What more
could I want?
Finally, thank you Susie Toronto,
Hayden Lake, Idaho ( aka “Kukana”).
One talented artist and “Wild, Wacky
Woman.” Keep it up, girl.

A
Accuracy, tools for checking, 24, 25, 74–75
Angles, inclined, 50
Asymmetry, 50
B
Baselines, 30–33
Blending tools, 17
Bone structure and head shape, 118–119
Bridge, of the nose, 101
C
Cartoons, 25
Centering eyes, 80
Cheekbones, 119
Cheeks, 38, 122
Children's head shapes, 126
Chins, 119, 123, 125
Circles, shading, 71
Color of eyes, 87, 88
Color of hair, 140
Comparing value changes, 68
Composite drawing, 10
Computers, as drawing aides, 68
Contrast, within the iris, 87
Curly hair, 139
Curves
cheek, 122
of eyebrows, 93
measuring, 38
D
Darkness, 105, 134
Distance, and accuracy, 74
E
Ears, 128–131
Electric pencils, 14
Enlarging, 36–37
Erasers, 15–16
Expression
and eyes, 82–84
and facial feature change, 115
Eyebrows, 89–93
Eyelashes, 89–93
Eyes, 78–93
children's, 127
INDEX
and expression, 82–84
and eyelids, 85–86
and iris location, 46–47, 48, 80
measuring their location, 35, 78–79
in various shapes, 89–90
F
Facial features
checking subtle angles of, 50
and curves, 38
measuring their location, 34–35
and optical indexing, 39–40
and shading based on shape, 71–73
See also speciﬁc feature name
Facial reconstruction, 9, 118
Female faces, 97, 125
Flattening to two-dimensions, 57
Foreheads, and nose placement, 97
G
Gender, and facial differences, 97, 125
Graphite, 14
Grid rulers, 50
Grids, 40
H
Hair, 134–140
children's, 127
eyebrows and eyelashes, 89–93
highlighting, 137–138
shading, 112
styles, 139–140
texture, 134–135
HB lead, 14
Head shapes
and bone structure, 118–119
child vs. adult, 126–127
Highlighting
eyes, 87, 88
hair, 137–138
noses, 102
Holders, lead, 14
I
Inclined angles, 50
Indexing, optical, 39
Inverting images, 49, 74
Irises
measuring, 47, 48
and pupil placement, 80
shading, 87–88
Isolating shapes, 45, 68
J
Jaws, 119, 123, 125
K
Kneaded rubber erasers, 15–16
L
Lead, grades of, 14
Light
and changes in value, 60
and feature visibility, 105
and shading of eyes, 88
and shading of lips, 113
and shading of noses, 102
Lines
avoiding on noses, 104
of hair, 134
killing, 65–66
of the mouth, 67, 109, 112
and value change, 64
Lips. See mouths
Location. See site
Long head shape, 120
Lower eyelids, 86
Lower lips, 67, 108, 111
M
Male noses, 97
Materials
for drawing eyes, 79
erasers, 15–16
for measuring, 33, 37
paper, 17
pencils, 14
templates and blending tools, 17
Measuring
chins, 123
curves, 38
ear location, 129–130
eyes, 48, 78–79
proportions, 30

tools for, 37
Mechanical pencils, 14
Memorization, 21
Mirror technique, 75
Mouths, 108–113
children's, 127
and lines, 67, 109
and lip shape, 110–111
shading, 112
N
Necks, 124
Negative space, 51, 52
Noses, 96–105
children's, 127
and ears, 129
female, 125
placement of, 98
and shape of nasal wings, 99
Nostrils, 100–101
O
Optical tools, 39
Outlines, 26
Oval head shape, 121
P
Paper, 17
Paper stump, 60
Patterns, perceived
breaking, 24
and untrained drawings, 20–23
Pencils
and eye color, 88
handling of, 61
and lead grades, 14
and measuring proportions, 32–33, 35
Perception
questioning, 53–54
testing the accuracy of, 74
and untrained drawings, 20–23, 24
Philtrum, 108, 111
Photographs
and checking subtle angles, 50
and establishing baselines, 30–31
as references, 44
Pointers, lead, 14
Positive space, 51, 52
Pre-instructional drawings, 19–22
Proportional divider, 37
Proportions
enlarging, 36–37
of iris to eye, 47
measuring, 30–33
and use of grids, 40
Pupils, 46–47, 80
Q
Questioning perception, 53–54, 69
R
Rectangular head shape, 121
References
choosing the right, 44
importance of using, 24
and measuring baselines, 30–33
reﬂected light, 103
Renaming, 50
Round shapes
of heads, 120
within the jaw, 113
within the lips, 112
shading of, 71, 103
Rubber erasers, 15
Rulers, 15, 50
S
Scale, of values, 68
Seeing, drawing as, 20, 24
Shading, 60–73
children's faces, 127
deﬁned, 24, 25
of eyes, 87
limited to visible value changes, 68–69
and lines, 64–67
of lips, 67, 112
of noses, 101, 103–104
Step-by-step techniques for, 62–63
of teeth, 114–115
shape, 44–57
deﬁned, 24, 25
of eyebrows, 92–93
of eyes, 47–48, 78–79
ﬂattening, 57
of heads, 118–121
of noses, 96, 99, 101
Shading and, 71–73, 103
Sharpeners, pencil, 14
Shields, for erasing, 16
Simpliﬁcation, 46
Site, 30–41
deﬁned, 24
and enlarging, 36–37
and measuring proportions, 30–33
of noses, 97, 98
and optical indexing, 39–40
and the pencil technique, 34–35
See also measuring
Skin texture, 61
Smiles, 115
Smudging, 60–61
Squinting, 68, 140
Symmetry, 50
T
Techniques of feature assembly, 24–26
Teeth, 114–115
Templates, 17, 79
Three-dimensional subjects
ﬂattening to two-dimensions, 57
and measuring baselines, 32–33
Tortillion, 17
Tracing, 55–56
Triangular head shape, 121
Two-dimensional references
and checking subtle angles, 50
establishing baselines in, 30–31
ﬂattening objects to, 57
U
Upper lips, 67, 108, 110, 111
V
Values
changing, 60
and lines, 64
scale of, 68
Viewﬁnders, 51
W
Wings of the nose, 96, 98–99

Learn how to render the male and female
human form in a classic style! Clem Robins
makes it easy by combining direct observa-
tion of the human form with an analytical
study of anatomy, perspective, light, shade,
and composition. Each chapter includes
explanatory text, plus annotated drawings or
step-by-step demonstrations.
ISBN 1-58180-204-8, paperback, 144 pages,
#31984-K
Get the ﬁnest 
in drawing 
instruction from
NORTH LIGHT
BOOKS
Bert Dodson’s successful methods of teaching
have made this book one of the most popu-
lar, best-selling art books in history! He pro-
vides a complete system for developing
drawing skills, including 48 practice exercises,
reviews, and self-evaluations. Topics include
learning to control proportion, scale, move-
ment, depth, pattern, and more!
ISBN 0-89134-337-7, paperback, 224 pages,
#30220
A bestseller for three decades, this extraordi-
nary book shows you how to reduce complex
figures into a variety of easy-to-draw shapes.
It’s a powerful combination of classic, proven
instruction, detailed anatomy studies examin-
ing bone and muscle structure, and special
guidelines for drawing the head, hands and
feet. 
ISBN 0-89134-097-1, paperback, 144 pages,
#7571-K
The key to creating a likeness is to see and
draw the big shapes of dark and light. This
book makes it easy. In nine step-by-step
demos, you’ll learn how to master basic draw-
ing techniques, render facial features and
expressions, then draw a variety of people in
different poses and lighting conditions.
ISBN 1-58180-245-5, paperback, 128 pages,
#32023-K
These books and other ﬁne 
North Light titles are available
from your local art & craft 
retailer, bookstore, online supplier
or by calling 1-800-448-0915.


