
Thank you for downloading Secret Societies box set which includes the
following eight books:
 
 
 

 


Copyrights
All rights reserved © 2018 by Conrad Bauer and Maplewood Publishing. No part of this publication
or the information in it may be quoted from or reproduced in any form by means such as printing,
scanning, photocopying, or otherwise without prior written permission of the copyright holder.
 
Disclaimer and Terms of Use
Effort has been made to ensure that the information in this book is accurate and complete. However,
the author and the publisher do not warrant the accuracy of the information, text, and graphics
contained within the book due to the rapidly changing nature of science, research, known and
unknown facts, and internet. The author and the publisher do not hold any responsibility for errors,
omissions, or contrary interpretation of the subject matter herein. This book is presented solely for
motivational and informational purposes only
 
 
 


Contents
 
Volume 1 The Knights Templar
 
Volume 2: On the Trail of The Knights Templar Treasure
 
Volume 3: The Freemasons
 
Volume 4: History of Freemasonry in the Last 100 Years
 
Volume 5: The Illuminati
 
Volume 6: Skull and Bones
 
Volume 7: The Priory of Sion
 
Volume 8: Opus Dei
 
Your FREE Gift!
 
Also by Conrad Bauer
 
Review


JUST FOR MY READERS!
100% FREE BONUS!
 
To thank you for downloading my book, here is a FREE book that I am sure
you will enjoy! Click here to get your FREE gift.
 
FOR A LIMITED TIME ONLY
this 100% FREE book
The Most Haunted Places in America
 
 
 
Click here to download your FREE copy!


Volume 1
 



Contents
 
Introduction
The Savagery of the First Crusade
Protection for Pilgrims
Preparing for the Crusade
Arriving in the Holy Land
The Battle for Jerusalem
Formation
Foundation of an Order
Growing the Coffers
Endorsement from the Pope
Becoming the Bankers
The Downfall
The Squadron Charge
The Second Crusade
Leaving the Holy Land
The King of France
Dissolution
The Templar Fleet
Fleeing to Scotland
A Stop in Portugal
A Local Rebellion
Relics
The Temple of Solomon
The Copper Scroll
The Turin Shroud
The Ark of the Covenant
The Holy Grail
De Molay’s Curse
The Freemasons
Legacy
Conclusion
Further Readings


Introduction
 
The Knights Templar existed officially for less than 200 years. Founded to
protect pilgrims who were traveling through the Holy Lands, their rise to
power was sudden. They became some of the most feared warriors in the
region, they had a mandate from God, they controlled perhaps the world’s
first real banking system, and they waged war against anyone who tried to
wrestle Christianity’s holiest grounds from the control of the Catholic
Church. Within their short lifespan, they quickly became one of the most
powerful societies in Europe, if not the world.
 
But, just as they rose to power with relative speed, they fell from grace just
as fast. Forged in the crucible of Middle Eastern conflict, their power was
soon resented and feared. Before they could become even more powerful,
the greatest nations in Europe and the Church turned on them. The once
powerful Templars were hunted, caught, tortured, and eventually burned at
the stake. According to their prosecutors, they were a devil-worshipping
secret society who spat on the cross and plotted against the Pope. They
were officially disbanded and their members treated with extreme contempt
and prejudice.
 
Or so goes the official story. In this book, we will not only look into the
official history of the Knights Templar, but will examine the various ways
their influence and ideas have tunneled their way into the modern world. A
group this powerful does not vanish overnight. Instead, their history has
been linked to the Freemasons, to vicious curses, to the butchery of the
Crusades, and even to Christian relics such as the Holy Grail. For many
people, the Templars did not vanish and they did not relinquish their tight
grip on the power structures of medieval Europe. Instead, they went
underground. Read on to discover the dark and twisted secret history of the
Knights Templar.


The Savagery of the First Crusade
 
It is important to understand the context in which the Knights Templar were
founded. Their formation was not as simple as a group of knights agreeing
to gather together under one banner. Instead, their order was forged in the
midst of the violence, conflict, and religious turmoil that was the medieval
Holy Land. Much like our world today, the Near East of the turn of the first
century was not a calm place. For centuries, it had been the area from which
many of the world’s major religions had been formed. The three huge
Abrahamic religions – Judaism, Christianity, and Islam – were all born in
the same area. Indeed, they share many of the same principles, historical
figures, and even religious texts. With all three religions deriving from the
same geographical location, the fight for supremacy in the region led to
constant conflict.
 
To Western readers, this conflict is most familiar through the Crusades.
From the Christian perspective, the Crusades were a series of military
campaigns waged in the Near East and divinely sanctioned by the Catholic
Church. At the time, Islam controlled much of the region and Christian
pilgrims were struggling to find safe passage to the holy sites they wished
to visit. Christianity was facing a major schism, as the collapse of the
Roman Empire had led to divisions forming between the Western head of
the Church in the Vatican in Rome and his Eastern equivalent in Byzantine
(the city later known as Constantinople and eventually Istanbul.) According
to historian Paul Everett Pierson, Pope Urban II not only saw the first
campaign as a chance to protect Christians in the Holy Land, but as a
chance to reunite the disparate branches of the Church back under his
control.
 
Protection for Pilgrims
 
The first Crusade was prompted by a letter sent from the Byzantine
Emperor Alexios I in 1095. Alexios begged the Pope for assistance,
knowing that the head of the Church might be able to rally an army in order

to protect the citizens from around the world who were attempting to make
the journey to holy sites in cities such as Jerusalem as these citizens were
often finding themselves in trouble. Though the Muslim rulers in Palestine
and throughout the Holy Land nominally allowed for Catholic pilgrims to
journey through their lands without an issue, this was not always the reality.
The crimes supposedly committed by the Muslim rulers in the Holy Land
were violent, vicious, and offensive to Christian sensibilities. These
included suggestions that the Turks who controlled the area had ravaged the
churches belonging to Christians in the region, that they had captured the
city of Christ (Jerusalem) and had blasphemed against it by selling the
Christian institutions (government offices, shops, merchants, tax offices,
etc.) into abominable slavery, and that they had been harassing, bullying,
and even committing acts of violence against the good Christians who
simply wished to journey to the land of their savior.
 
As with many proclamations calling for violence and war, however, these
claims were likely exaggerated. Emperor Alexios was himself facing a
difficult reign, his Byzantine Empire having to disband their standing army
following economic worries and the inflation of their currency. He needed
help projecting power in the region, so turned to the place where his empire
had traditionally been associated: Rome. He begged the Pope for assistance,
for the military liberation of the region, and for help in turning back the
wave of Muslim rule imposed by the conquering Turks.
 
In November of 1095, the Catholic Church held a conference to determine
whether or not to assist Alexios. The Council of Clermont is documented in
a number of different contemporary texts, by a number of writers who may
have been present at the Council. The accounts do not tell the same story.
Robert the Monk – who was present – suggests that Pope Urban decreed
that it was God’s will to intervene in the region. In return, Robert writes, the
Pope promised absolution (forgiveness for mortal sins) to the men who
would become crusaders. Other sources have suggested that the Pope
instead offered an indulgence (an award that would reduce the punishment
for any sins committed.) However, all of our accounts remember that the
Pope focused more on the conquest of the Holy Lands, rather than
providing assistance to the Byzantine Empire. It was agreed that the

mission would be put into motion on the 15th of August, a date important in
the Catholic Church. Led by Adhemar of Le Puy, the first Crusade would
set out on the same day as the Assumption of Mary.
 
Preparing for the Crusade
 
In a pre-Reformation Europe, the Catholic Church held a monopoly over
religion. All Christian doctrine and its interpretation flowed through the
corridors of Vatican City. While only a small district within the once-
powerful city of Rome, the Vatican’s power was on a similar level to that of
France, Britain, and the other major countries. At the time, however, the
Church had no standing army. If they were to launch a Crusade – a military
campaign – then they would need soldiers. Not only would they need troops
to fight, they would need men to lead. As such, Pope Urban issued his
decree to the countries around Europe and requested that they send men of
high and low birth to fight on behalf of the church. As well as the soldiers, a
preacher named Peter the Hermit gathered together a group of 20,000
pilgrims and began the journey to the Holy Land.
 
But they did not travel far before they became embroiled in controversy and
religious warfare. In 1096, as the 20,000 pilgrims passed through the
Rhineland in Germany, they came across the cities of Worms, Speyer,
Cologne, and Mainz. At the time, these cities had large Jewish
communities. Such was the religious fervor of those embarking upon the
First Crusade, that these Jewish communities presented an easy target for
the mob’s pent up wrath. As well as this, it was their first chance to practice
their violence on a large scale. Bands of both knights and peasants who
were traveling with the group became increasingly violent as they
encountered Jewish communities. This violence included attempts at forced
conversion, beatings, torture, and execution.
 
Perhaps the most violent of these early Crusader armies was the one lead by
Count Emicho. Under his authority, a group of 10,000 Crusaders – both
nobility and peasants – began to slaughter Jewish communities in large
numbers. Though many of the local clergy objected – as did the Catholic

Church itself – there was little that could be done to stop the marauding
bands of Crusaders. Communities of 800, 900, and even 1,000 were killed.
Sources tell of one Jewish man who, after being forcibly converted to
Christianity, was so overcome with the guilt of his actions that his killed his
entire family and himself. One woman, hoping to escape the cruel violence
of the Crusaders, killed her entire family before they could be subjected to
the whims of the massed ranks. For historian David Nirenberg, the events of
late 1096 planted the seeds of violent anti-Semitism which would
eventually grow into the horrific slaughter of the Holocaust. The Rhineland
massacres – as they came to be known – were an early indication of the
kind of religious warfare promised by the Crusades.
 
Arriving in the Holy Land
 
The main army of the Crusaders was composed of French and Norman
knights, backed up by soldiers from across Europe. They fought under the
banner of the Church, with up to 100,000 men journeying to Byzantine to
wage their war. Because they fought for a religious cause, the Church was
able to offer them spiritual rewards. The importance of promises such as
indulgences or absolution meant that not only would crimes committed
during the Crusades be forgiven, but that sins already committed at home
were less likely to deny the perpetrator entrance into the kingdom of
heaven. For those who fervently believed in the Christian faith, this was a
cause they could get behind.
 
Once the forces had gathered in modern-day Istanbul, the Crusade could
begin in earnest. It was not a short campaign, lasting for many years. One of
the first major conflicts came when the Crusaders tried to take the city of
Antioch and laid siege to the city. Though the residents lasted almost a year
behind the walls, they eventually fell to the Crusaders. Once inside, the
Christians offered no quarter in their treatment of the Muslim population.
They slaughtered them, soldiers and civilians both. The sacking of the city
was so complete that a Muslim army was able to creep up on the Crusaders
and lay siege to the city themselves. The Crusaders rallied their troops
within Antioch and went out to meet the army being led by Muslim

commander Kerbogha. They triumphed and held on to the strategically
important city.
 
The Battle for Jerusalem
 
From Antioch, the majority of the Crusader army marched south. Their goal
– as it had been from the start – was to take the city in the name of
Christianity. At the time, it was under Islamic control, but the city’s
population of Jews were able to live and practice their religion in relative
peace. Even visiting Christian pilgrims were permitted to visit the holy sites
and pray. This was not enough. Jerusalem was to be under Christian rule
and the Crusaders would fight tooth and nail to wrest the city from their
enemy’s grasp.
 
Both the Muslims and Jews within Jerusalem fought long and hard against
the Crusaders. But they would not hold out forever. On the 15th of July,
1099, the Christians took control of the city. What followed was a massacre.
Much like at Antioch, the Crusaders pillaged the city. Anyone found to be a
Muslim or a Jew was killed. Civilians were slaughtered en masse. The
buildings that had been erected by Islamic architects were torn down, from
mosques to other civil institutions. For one Crusader, Raymond D'Aguilers,
the massacre was vindicated. He wrote a book titled ‘Historia Francorum
qui ceperunt Iherusalem,’ in which he describes the Christians’ entry into
the city. His description of the Temple Mount suggests that the Crusaders’
butchery was so great that blood rose to the knees of the men as they rode
their horses.
 
Another source – Fulcher of Chartres – tells of 10,000 citizens being
slaughtered, including women and children. Others report that the stench of
the dead bodies was so great that they had to be carried beyond the city
walls and left to rot outside. The funeral pyres, we are told, were so big they
resembled pyramids. Only God alone could know the true number of men,
women, and children killed that day.
 

Following the capture of Jerusalem, the Crusaders had control of four major
cities in the Holy Land. These were Antioch, Tripoli, Edessa, and — the
jewel in the crown — Jerusalem. For historians such as Riley Smith,
however, the result of the First Crusade was not simply the territory now
under Christian control, but the ‘wave of pious, Catholic fury’ which had
been unleashed. The various massacres stretching from Germany to
Jerusalem were indicative of the extent to which the Catholic Church’s
armies were able to use violence to achieve their goals.
 
After this campaign of violence, it seemed as though the Church had been
at least partially successful. The Crusade had provided a banner under
which Christians could unite and had exhibited the military power that the
Church was able to project. For Christian pilgrims, passage to the Holy
Land was now much safer. With Tripoli and Antioch both lying close to the
Mediterranean Sea, the journey to Jerusalem could be conducted along
Christian-held routes. But while protection for these pilgrims had initially
been a goal, it had been supplanted in the name of control. Passage for
Christians was not enough; now, they had to hold on to the Holy Lands.
 
Following a period of fearsome, church-backed violence, this was the world
into which the Knights Templar would emerge. Already tainted by the
violent butchery of the First Crusade, the blood of the massacres would
linger over their formation and dictate their doctrine from their very first
moments.
 


Formation
 
The Knights Templar were formed in a world of religiously motivated
slaughter and butchery. It is perhaps fitting that an organization so
embroiled in secrecy and rumor was founded at a time when trying to
discern right from wrong, and fact from fiction, was so incredibly hard.
When we look into the formation of the Knights Templar, it is difficult to
tell the facts from the legend.
 
In 1099, following the capture of Jerusalem, it became more and more
common for pilgrims to want to make the journey to the Holy Land. From
all over Europe, those who were dedicated to the Christian faith (and those
who could afford it) traveled from Britain, France, Germany, and other
countries to visit the sites where Christ had lived and died. The First
Crusade had been fought to restore this territory to the Catholic Church’s
control and they had succeeded in taking a number of important cities. But
the land between the cities was not under their control. If anything, they had
managed to make the environment even more hostile to the presence of
Christians. Thanks to the bloodlust of the Crusaders, people across the Holy
Land began to bear a grudge against them.
 
Bandits and highwaymen were regular threats to those pilgrims who sought
to make the journey to the sacred sites. After the Crusaders had elevated the
levels of violence in the region, there was little to prevent these locals from
killing the Christians they came across, and these journeying Christians
were sometimes killed in their hundreds. Despite one of the initial goals of
the Crusade being to protect these travelers, they had failed. By the time
1119 rolled around, something needed to be done. Christian authority in the
cities they controlled had been cemented enough that a king had been
installed in Jerusalem – King Baldwin II – and a patriarch named Warmund
assisted him.
 
Foundation of an Order
 

The idea of the Knights Templar was suggested by a French knight named
Hughes de Payens. The proposal was for the creation of a dedicated,
monastic group of knights who would use their military abilities to protect
the Christians traveling from Jaffa to the interior sites of the Holy Land.
The Church’s support was not instant, but the Council of Nablus held in
1120 approved the idea. The Knights Templar was formed and King
Baldwin II provided the order with their headquarters, located in one of the
wings of the Royal Palace on Templar Mount. This was previously part of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, said to be built on the original site of King Solomon’s
temple and one of the places where the Crusaders had shed the most blood
during their invasion of the city. This mystical location would forever be
linked to the order.
 
The new collection of knights named themselves the ‘Poor Knights of
Christ and the Temple of Solomon.’ This was often shortened to simply
‘Templar Knights’ or ‘Templars.’ At the beginning, there were nine
members. As well as Hughes de Payens, Godfrey de Saint-Omer and Andre
de Montbard would be important founding members, while their numbers
also included Payne de Monteverdi, Archambaud de St. Agnan, and two
other knights known simply as Gondamer and Rossal. One important bond
shared by the founding members was that they were all related, whether by
blood or marriage. To this day, we still do not know the identity of the final,
ninth knight.
 
The Knights Templar, as a brand new order, found themselves with very
little financial backing, hence the inclusion of ‘poor’ in their title. In order
to really drive this point home, their emblem was drawn as two knights
sharing a single horse. This impoverished, monastic existence would be a
far cry from the Templar’s later years.
 
Indeed, life in the early years of the Templars soon became anything but
impoverished. One of the order’s chief backers was a leading figure in the
Catholic Church, named Bernard of Clairvaux. Bernard was not only a
powerful French abbot, but he was the nephew of Andre de Montbard. He
backed the order from the very start, writing letters to other authority
figures praising the new Knights Templar. With blessings like these, the

Templars soon gained a very valuable standing in the Church, becoming a
favored charity. This formal endorsement from the religious figures of
Europe meant that they were now able to receive donations of money, land,
businesses, and other financial enterprises from backers throughout
Christendom. As well as this, the order could take in the sons of noble
families to swell their ranks. For aristocrats who wanted to help in the
Crusades but did not want to take part themselves, a son could be
dispatched to serve in the Knights Templar and it would be treated as a
great honor.
 
Growing the Coffers
 
The growth of the Templars’ coffers is one of the key factors that people
point to when discussing the shadowy nature of the organization. During the
first nine years of their existence, very little is known about the group.
Despite the known presence of biographers and writers in the Holy Land –
specifically in Jerusalem – at this time, they are notably absent from many
of the primary sources we have from this time. This lack of evidence is
taken by some people as being indicative of an active suppression of
discussion about the Templars’ activities. There is no doubt that the group
was quickly noted for their importance, as they were permitted to house
themselves in the Temple of Solomon, one of the holiest of sites in one of
the holiest of cities in all of the Christian world. That they should not be
present in histories and descriptions of the time, according to some, is
evidence that their existence was not allowed to be discussed. This is a
difficult theory to prove, however, and few historians or academics lend the
idea much credence. However, as we begin to look through their history and
notice their sudden accumulation of wealth, power, and reputation, we
should consider why they went through such a notably fallow period during
their early years.
 
During those first years, the Knights Templar remained largely silent. They
faced criticism at first, including arguments from people who suggested that
truly religious men would never be able to carry a sword. But their
intentions and objectives were praised by various members of the clergy

and soon the arguments began to die down. One of the key defenses of the
group involved the idea of a ‘just war,’ that is, a war intended to defend the
Church from violence. Over time, the Templars began to resemble an order
of warrior monks. Bernard of Clairvaux wrote in defense of the ‘fearless
knight,’ whose soul would be protected by an ‘armor of faith,’ who would
fear ‘neither demons nor men.’ From the outset, the Templars were
permitted their use of violence in order to accomplish nominally Christian
gains. Based in a temple noted for the Muslim bloodshed, with their
violence ordained by the Church, the Templars’ numbers began to grow.
 
Their fame was also spreading throughout Europe. Their goal of defending
the Christian faith against a Muslim invasion (however unlikely this was)
was not only limited to the Holy Land. On hearing about the order,
Portugal’s Countess Teresa promised the Templars Soure Castle in the south
of the country. Soure was close enough to North Africa that the reigning
European monarchy feared that they may be caught in a pincer movement,
with Islam threatening Christianity on two fronts. Needless to say, the
Templars took charge of the castle as a part of their burgeoning land
holdings. Similar lands and finances were gained in 1131, when Count
Ramon Bereguer III gave to the Templars his border stronghold named
Granyena, near Barcelona. In 1134, they gained their biggest donation yet
when King Alfonso I of Aragon died and bequeathed his kingdom to the
order. Shortly after, they expanded their control over the Amanus March
(the area surrounding Antioch) and were given lands in England. Templar-
owned properties and fortifications were appearing all across Europe and
the Near East.
 
Endorsement from the Pope
 
Another huge benefit came in 1139, when Pope Innocent II decreed that the
Knights Templar were to be considered exempt from local laws. The rulings
of the Church superseded local governance, so this allowed the Templars to
pass from one country to another without needing permission, pay taxes, or
bow to any authority other than the Pope, so this decree gave them a huge
amount of power. Now, the Templars were almost an international

organization, able to move across Europe at their pleasure and work
throughout Christendom in their mission to defend the pilgrims who were
traveling to the Holy Land.
 
Throughout the early years of the order, some of the most important records
we have of their existence relates to their trail of legal documents. Not only
were the order being given properties throughout Europe, but they were
beginning to make purchases themselves. We have documents from the
period suggesting that the Knights Templar purchased property in 1122,
1123, 1125, and 1126, as well as many more in 1127 and 1128. These
purchases were made possible thanks to donations, but it was not just
money, livestock, property, and land that was donated. Some aristocrats,
upon their passing, left behind a set amount of labor from their indentured
serfs. This provided the Templars with access to a number of workforces.
Because they could move freely between countries and were not to be
subjected to any taxation (on Papal orders), the wealth of the Templars was
exponentially rising. Within two decades of their founding, without the
modern communications networks enjoyed by modern businesses, the order
had properties and chapters throughout Europe, including stations in
France, Scotland, Spain, Portugal, and England, as well as their bases in the
Holy Land cities. As suggested by numerous historians, including Karen
Ralls and Michael Benson, the Knights Templar could be considered the
first multinational corporation in the history of the world.
 
With power and wealth came influence. The fame of the Knights Templar
grew and grew. Despite their original aim being to protect pilgrims as they
traveled across the Holy Lands, they were soon a cornerstone of a Crusader
military in the Holy Lands. With bases across the region and support and
members arriving from the richest, most powerful families of Europe, the
Christians in the region depended on this cadre of organized, educated
knights to lead the vanguard of the defense of the most sacred sites. John
Robinson describes the Templars as the ‘largest standing army in the
Christian kingdom’. An order which had first been formed under the guise
of poverty and chastity soon found itself the favored charity of the Christian
world, with riches flooding into its coffers. Thanks to the wealth they had

accrued, the Templars began to embark on an enterprise which may actually
have led to their downfall.
 
Becoming the Bankers
 
Armed with a papal endorsement and a freedom from taxation, the
Templars found themselves ideally positioned to become a bank. Any
members joining the order took vows of poverty and donated their
possessions to the Templars. Added to the gifts from others, donations,
business dealings, and loot from military campaigns, the poverty-sworn
monks found themselves with both a large amount of wealth and the
ownership of a powerful, recognized international infrastructure. This
allowed them to position themselves as a trusted institution, a place that the
nobles of Europe would be able to use in legal dealings or as a bank.
 
For example, when a nobleman wished to join the Crusades, he might be
away from his home for a number of years. He could entrust his wealth and
power to the Templars and place his business dealings under their control.
In their trust, it would all be safe for him to reclaim when he returned.
Within a short time, the majority of the Templars’ manpower was not
dedicated to military roles, but to their financial wrangling. Their mission
changed. Traditionally established to protect those traveling to the Holy
Lands, their aim was now to protect the wealth of these pilgrims. They
could even issue a form of credit, setting up the system which would evolve
into what we know today as a modern bank. Any pilgrim visiting a Templar
institution in his home country could deposit money or valuables and be
issued a letter noting what they owned. This letter could be presented at any
other Templar holding and would allow the pilgrim to withdraw money
from the amount they had deposited. Without the need to carry around their
wealth, the pilgrims were less of a target for bandits and attackers.
 
A key element of Templar success in this regard was their ability to
communicate in code. When writing letters to one another, they would
make use of an encryption method. This cypher took the familiar alphabet
and passed it through a secret conversion technique, supposedly making use

of the Maltese Cross. Attempts to recreate this code in modern times have
often been linked to freemasonry. As we will discover later in this book,
attempts to uncover the code have led to many of our modern secret
societies attempting to replicate, copy, or break the code without success.
To this day, we have been unable to break the Templars banking cipher.
 
The rise from an impoverished monastic order to international bankers had
not only created one of the world’s first financial institutions, but it had
given the Knights Templar a power beyond anything they could have
expected. Less than a hundred years after their creation, they were one of
the most powerful groups in Europe, if not the world. But they were still
shrouded in secrecy. Only the brothers of the order were privy to their
internal dealings and machinations. Their military contributions had
gradually become overshadowed by their dealings in economics. While still
an essential part of the military in the Holy Land, their true power came
from their wealth, influence, and their holdings. With this power, they
began to attract the jealous attentions of many throughout Europe. Just as
quickly as they had risen to power, the Templars soon found themselves in
peril.


The Downfall
 
In medieval Europe, just as now, it is impossible to build up such a huge
amount of power and influence so quickly without attracting covetous
attention from across the globe. As well as the sworn enemies of the
Templars (the non-Christians), there were an increasing number of people
who sought to undermine, share, and acquire the power they had so quickly
accrued. In a dark time, it would be a dark process by which the enemies of
the Knights Templar would wage their campaign against the order.
 
In addition to the banking and political influence of the Templars, it is
important to remember their military prowess. Following the First Crusade,
those who had been driven from the Holy Land had not simply accepted
defeat. Fighting had continued, though it had ebbed and flowed in its
intensity. As well as cementing their position as a banking institution, the
Templars became more and more important to the Christians’ armed forced.
A key tenet of the Templars was the idea that they would never retreat from
battle. This made them fearsome opponents. While the knights of the order
fought on the front lines, many other members followed them. These
members were tasked with finding anything that might benefit the order,
whether that be loot or items of political importance. As the Christian army
moved across the Near East, the Templars both led the line and scoured the
conquered territories for anything that might help consolidate their power.
 
Also important was their use of tactics. It was one of their chief exponents,
Bernard of Clairvaux, who had suggested that a small force could defeat a
much larger one, should the conditions be right. One of the order’s greatest
victories was a demonstration of this theory, with the Templars lining up in
1177 against the famed Muslim leader Saladin. The ensuing Battle of
Montgisard featured 26,000 Islamic warriors taking on a small band of 500
knights and their various supporting forces. Saladin had set his sights on
moving north into Jerusalem and had pinned down the Christians in a small
coastal town. Arriving to reinforce the Crusaders, 80 Templars met with
their allies. They had initially met Saladin’s forces near Gaza, but the group

had been so small that the larger army had considered them too insignificant
to bother dealing with. The Templars moved to join with the Crusaders
while Saladin permitted his forces the opportunity to pillage some local
villages. The Templars planned a surprise attack with their allies and set an
ambush. They routed the Muslim army who were spread too thin to fight
back, and were forced to retreat. Saladin’s army fled with only ten percent
of their original number, but they lived to fight another day. The battle is
considered an example of the Templar’s incredible military abilities and
their fighting skills.
 
The Squadron Charge
 
One of the most famous tactics of the Templars embodies their commitment
to their faith. A heavily armored group of knights would line up and launch
what was known as a ‘squadron charge’, wherein they would gather
themselves into a tight formation and simply charge as fast as possible at
the enemy. The manner of their charge suggested that they were fully
prepared to die on their arrival and would have the powerful effect of
forcing a hole in the opposing ranks as the soldiers broke away from their
ranks to flee the oncoming Templars.
 
And the Templars were not limited to using their own armies — they would
be key men in almost every Christian military. They fought alongside the
Kings of England and France, either leading the charge or protecting the
army’s most important members. Their fighting was not even limited to the
Near East, as they were vital members of the war efforts in Spain and
Portugal as the European Christians fought back the Muslim forces who we
encroaching as part of the much-feared southerly pincer movement. They
were valued members of the front line wherever Christianity fought its
fiercest battles. Not only were they rich, but they were admired and trusted.
These qualities engendered just as much jealousy as the wealth of the
Templars.
 
The Knights Templar were not the only monastic order. Others, such as the
Teutonic Knights and the Knights Hospitaller had arisen in similar

circumstances, but were not nearly as successful. Though they worked
towards ostensibly the same goals, the other orders soon grew concerned
with the powers and privileges allowed to the Templars. In addition, various
members of the European aristocracy noted their worries about the
emerging political influence of the Knights Templar, who seemed to control
an army of ever-increasing size that was not restrained by recognized
borders.
 
The Second Crusade
 
One of the first stumbles came when the Templars’ famed military acumen
failed them. In 1187, they once again met the forces of Saladin at the Battle
of the Horns of Hattin. This would later become known as a key moment in
the history of the Crusades and one of the turning points in the Islamic
control of the region. While they had beaten Saladin before, this time the
Muslim commander was ready for the Templars. The order’s leader at the
time, Gerard de Ridefort, was not known as a particularly keen tactician and
had only been head of the Templars for a few years. He was in command of
the battle. One of his worst mistakes was venturing forth with his band of
80 knights with inadequate food, drink, and other essential supplies. Before
long, the heat got to them and they were overwhelmed by Saladin’s forces.
The battle was a launching point for the Islamic forces. Within a few short
months, they had captured Jerusalem and the main headquarters of the
Templars.
 
This only prompted further aggression from the Christians and a renewed
desire to retake the territory. Led by Richard I of England – Richard the
Lionheart – a new Crusade was launched. The Templars played a key role
in the military and re-established the Crusader states as they had been many
years before. This time, the Templars chose to set up their headquarters in
the city of Acre. Following this successful Crusade, the Templars took on
even more power. The region became reliant on orders such as their own to
maintain Christian control of the region. Having erected huge castles and
fortifications in the area, it fell on orders such as the Templars – people who
were there permanently – to guard, man, and defend these buildings. As

well as their powers in the region, the Templars’ land holdings reached new
heights when they acquired the island of Cyprus. However, every increase
in wealth and power for the Templars during this century only did more to
hammer the nails into their coffin. As they gained more and more, the
covetous, jealous, and worried nobility of Europe watched. By the time the
end of the thirteenth century came around, people were beginning to
become more and more vocal in their condemnation of the Knights
Templar.
 
Fighting in the Near East continued. In 1244, the Christians would lose
Jerusalem for the last time. A Christian nation would not rule over the city
again until the British invaded during the First World War. As the Islamic
world gained a stronger and stronger foothold in the region, the Templars
were continually forced to relocate. They lost their homes in Acre, Tortosa,
and Atlit. Eventually, they withdrew their headquarters to Cyprus, a good
distance from the Holy Land and the location of all of their original goals.
This, too, was lost. The Mamluks from Egypt invaded and took the final
Templar foothold in the Near East.


Leaving the Holy Land
 
By this time, however, the Knights Templar had a presence in most major
cities. Their power was spread across Europe. They had risen over the last
two centuries to become an ever-present and almost essential part of day-to-
day Christian life. They still owned their Templar houses, many businesses,
and ran their banking empire. They held debts from a number of powerful
people — people who were not pleased to be owing the Templars money.
Free from the laws and taxes of any country, they were essentially a nation
without land, existing wherever they had property. They even had a
standing army, one which no longer had a clear military aim, now that the
Holy Land had been lost. This army was free to move anywhere in Europe.
In addition to this, there had been rumors that the Templars were interested
in founding their own monastic country, a place of their own. Should they
manage to do so, they would become one of the continent’s most influential
power brokers.
 
The death knell began to sound in 1305. Over two hundred years after the
Knights Templar had been founded, their original champions within the
Catholic Church had long since passed away. A new Pope reigned, one with
the idea to merge the Templars with the Hospitallers. He dispatched letters
to the heads of both orders broaching the possibility and was met with
negative reactions from both camps. Though not as powerful as the
Templars, the Hospitallers were a proud order in their own right.
Eventually, persisting with the idea, Pope Clement V invited both Jacques
de Molay of the Templars and Fulk de Villaret of the Hospitallers to meet
him in 1306. The head of the Templars arrived first, though he did not reach
the meeting point until 1307. De Villaret followed a few months later,
neither party in a rush.
 
While waiting for the arrival of De Villaret, the Pope and De Molay
discussed allegations that had been made against the Templars by a
departing member. These allegations had been championed by a powerful
man, King Philip IV. Philip was king of France and no friend to the

Templars. Though most agreed that the allegations and rumors were false,
they were damning enough that the Pope sent a letter to Philip asking for
clarity. Philip had been waging a war with England and had managed to
work himself deep into debt with the Templars. According to historians
such as Malcolm Barber, Philip began to use the allegations to put pressure
on the Church and the order, as a means of potentially freeing himself from
the huge debt. Not only this, but the supposed location for the Templars
new monastic state was Languedoc, in the southeast of France. There was
also a religious motivation. If he was able to demonstrate the heresy of the
Templars, Philip could claim his position as a defender of the Catholic faith
and could cement his importance in the power structure of the Church.
Should he successfully protect the Pope from the Templars’ supposed
influence, his role as protector would rank him above the Holy See, a move
Julien Théry suggests could have led to the establishment of a holy
theocracy in France.
 
The King of France
 
Before the investigation could continue, Philip pre-empted the Pope’s
efforts to investigate the rumors. He launched an operation to have scores of
the Templars’ French members arrested. They were taken away and
tortured. These were not the front line, military leaders of the order, but
rather those focused on the day-to-day economics of the Templars. Under
torture, the members confessed to heretical tendencies, as well as other
offences to God and the Church. Following their confessions, they were
killed. Philip used these confessions to launch a series of charges against
the entire organization of the Knights Templar. He suggested that they had:
 
1. Required new recruits to spit on the cross as part of their initiation.
2. The new recruits were then stripped and their navels, posteriors, and
mouths kissed.
3. The order told new recruits that outlawed lusts (sexual practices) were
in fact natural and practiced regularly.
4. The cords used by members to tie their robes was wrapped around a
false idol and worshipped.

5. And finally, that the members did not partake in mass.
 
As well as these initial charges, Philip’s agents further exaggerated the
crimes. The Templars were accused of worshipping a three-faced cat,
denying Christ, urinating on a crucifix, and worshipping the devil. Over the
coming years, nearly 140 Templars would be arrested, tortured, and often
executed. The vast majority confessed to the charges, whether they were
true or not. The only evidence used was the confessions of the accused. The
Knights Templar desperately sought out the Pope for assistance. Despite
half-heartedly sending a letter, the Pope soon simply allowed the
persecutions to take place.
 
The resulting rumors caused a scandal. Crowds of people took to the streets
to demand the blaspheming Templars be prosecuted. Pressured by both
King Philip and the baying public, Pope Clement laid down the Pastoralis
Praeeminentiae, essentially a death sentence for the order. It decreed that
every monarch in Europe should arrest every Templar they could and seize
every asset they could. Though many rulers did not believe the charges,
they began to make arrests in Germany, England, Italy, and other countries,
including Cyprus. Whether or not the authorities could get a confession was
typically dependent on whether or not the Templars were tortured.
 
Following the arrests, King Philip smashed the Templars’ banking system.
He took their wealth for himself and cancelled his own debts. As Gordon
Napier notes, it is highly unlikely that he actually believed the charges to be
true. Instead, he simply seized on the chance to swing the axe against the
Templars and turn the balance of power in his favor. Whether there was a
grain of truth in the rumors of the devil worshipping, homosexually-
inclined Knights Templar, we may never know. What we do know is that,
following Philip’s orders, hundreds (if not thousands) of people were
arrested, horribly tortured, and then executed across Europe.
 
Dissolution
 

In 1312, following further pressure from King Philip, a new Pope was
convinced to officially dissolve the Knights Templar. A large amount of the
order’s properties were turned over to the papacy, while many of the
Templars who had survived the purges were taken in by orders such as the
Hospitallers. But certain elements of the order survived. In Portugal, the
Templars changed their name to the Order of Christ and continued about
their business. Others fled into the areas considered wilderness by the
Catholic Church: Scotland, the Holy Land, and other countries where the
Church’s influence was not felt quite so invasively in every element of day-
to-day life.
 
But what of the remaining Templars? At the time of the purge, the Knights
Templar had over 15,000 properties across Europe and the Near East. They
owned an armada of ships and an entire army. As well as the Knights and
the main figures within the order, many lesser members were essential to
the daily running of the Templars’ economic empire. In France alone, the
authorities were able to arrest 3,000 members. The Templars’ archives were
never recovered, having been either hidden or destroyed, despite the Pope
ordering they be handed over to the Hospitallers.
 
From the ashes of the Knights Templar have emerged hundreds of theories.
With so much wealth, property, power, and influence, that they could
disappear almost overnight seems impossible. It is during this part of the
tale, when we reflect on the possible alternate histories, potential futures,
and dark secrets of the order that we start to see the truly fascinating
elements of the Templars twisted history.
 
Now that we have a good overview of the history of the Knights Templar,
we can start to look deeper into the secrets, mysteries, and theories
surrounding their demise…and possible survival.


The Templar Fleet
 
One of the most popular theories about the demise of the Knights Templars
combines the typical conspiracy tropes of a mysterious death, a huge
fortune, and the emergence of a secret society. The theory suggests that a
group of French Templars were able to escape persecution and fled to a new
home. It has not only been discussed in more shrouded circles, but one of
the bestselling books on the subject discusses the theory at length.
 
The legend tells us that the Templars had stationed 18 ships in the French
harbor of La Rochelle. When the news first broke of the orders given to
place them under arrest, the members of the order began to prepare for their
departure. The knights gathered up treasure, documents, and important
other valuables into the boats. The depths of the Templar vaults were filled
not only with gold and jewels, but the tools of a true power broking society.
They had paperwork relating to the various members of the order, their
organization, and their structure. They possessed documents detailing their
history and others listing the debts they were owed. They even possessed
strange and mysterious items, relics, and assets which we can only guess at.
All that can be said for sure about these vessels, however, is that they were
heavy with the weight of many of the Templars greatest riches.
 
Just before the warrant for the arrest of every member of the order was
given in 1307, the ships set sail. The evidence we have for this departure
rests on the words of one man, Jean de Châlon, a member of the Templars.
He told people that he had head that Gerard de Villiers had gone to sea with
18 of the Templars’ galleys, while members like Hughes de Chalon had
exited France with the entire treasury belonging to Hughes de Pairaud. All
other utterances of these ships’ departure is notably absent from history. In
situations like this, we can either assume that Jean was spreading rumors, or
that he was the one brother who let slip the existence of a secret exit plan.
We know that the person who wrote down Jean’s statement certainly took it
to be simply rumor, while we also know that Jean was among those who
was prone to inventing (or simply confessing) the wildest truths about the

Knights Templar. Many people doubt the credibility of Jean de Châlon,
while other use his words as the key point in the discussion of what
happened to the Templar fleet.


Fleeing to Scotland
 
The story was made famous by the book, ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail.’ Written
by Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh, and Henry Lincoln, the book has
become a cornerstone of Templar-based scholarly debates. Published in
1982, it is chiefly concerned with the bloodline of Jesus Christ and trying to
map out a possible list of descendants that have survived into the modern
era. The Knights Templars, they suggest, was possibly the military arm of
the organization known as the Priory of Sion. Though we will delve deeper
into the book’s theories (and the arguments for and against its veracity) later
in this book, their account of the escape of the Templar fleet is one of the
best-rounded and most convincing around.
 
As the story is recalled in ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail,’ the Templars who fled
from France departed to Scotland. At the time, Scotland was fighting
against the English for independence and the arrival of a small band of
French monks (or so they appeared) might have escaped comment. Unlike
many of the other major countries around Europe, the distractions and
decentralized nature of the Scottish rebellion meant that there was not a
government in place to execute the Papal orders. The man in charge of the
Scottish rebellion, Robert the Bruce, had been excommunicated from the
Catholic Church at the request of the English. For the Templars, this
provided them with a place they could hide out until the persecution against
their order died down.
 
Other historians have suggested that the Templars traveled to even farther-
flung corners of the Earth. In this version of events, the Templars crossed
the Atlantic Ocean and found themselves in North America. The legend
suggests that they arrived in Nova Scotia, in Canada, whereupon they
buried their treasure at a place called Oak Island. This part of the theory has
been roundly dismissed, however, by historians such as Helen Nicholson.
Nicholson points out that the ships that were available to the Templars at
the time would have been unsuitable for crossing as large a body of water as
the Atlantic, and especially unsuitable for making a journey through

previously uncharted and unknown waters. Even if there exists evidence
that some Old World cultures traveled to the New World before Columbus,
the idea that the Templars would have managed it is somewhat farfetched.
As Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh point out, the Templar fleet was
geared towards Mediterranean travel, or short trips around the area to
restock companions in the Holy Land. Baigent and Leigh also note that
trade with the British Isles was frequent, and that one of their primary ports
for such trade was La Rochelle. Should they have wished to set sail from
this part of France, Scotland was certainly a more likely destination that
Canada. 
 
A Stop in Portugal
 
Should the Templars have managed to escape the French prosecutors,
another possible port of call was Almourol Castle, off the coast of Portugal.
Unlike their Iberian neighbors, Spain and Portugal remained loyal to the
Templars throughout their persecution, even hosting the Order of the
Knights of Christ (an essentially re-branded branch of the Templars). This
castle was representative of many of the fortifications used by the Templars,
including towers and crenulations much like those found on other fortresses
used and operated by the order. The Castle itself was built on the site of
ancient defenses by a man named Gualdim Pais, a Master of the Knights
Templar. Almourol would have provided the perfect destination for a fleet
of fleeing Templars to hide for a short period, whether they were fleeing
elsewhere or stopping in Portugal on a permanent basis.
 
According to Baigent and Leigh, the fleeing Templars made the journey
from France to Almourol. Here, they met up with other members from
across Europe and stayed a short while. They then fled up Ireland’s west
coast – where the order had a number of properties – and made the final
steps of their journey across to Scotland. They arrived at known Templar
locations such as Kilmartin, Kiilmory, and Castle Sweet and began to
unload their vessels. While the majority of the theories relating to the
Templars are focused on the items that were unloaded in these ports –

whether they were treasures, relics, or something else – Baigent and Leigh
go further in their documentation of the Templars actions.
 
A Local Rebellion
 
The arrival of a band of militaristic, persecuted monastic knights in
rebellious Scotland could well have shaped the course of British history. At
the time, Robert the Bruce was leading his Scottish forces against the
English but found himself severely outnumbered. Things came to a head in
1314, just a few years after the departing French Templars supposedly
landed in Scotland. On June 24, Robert the Bruce was about to lead his
6,000 men into the Battle of Bannockburn in a field to the south of
Edinburgh. He was coming up against 20,000 better equipped English
soldiers. Despite the size of the respective forces, Robert emerged the
victor. For Baigent and Leigh, the tide seemed to have been turned by
Templar knights.
 
They note that the majority of scholars agree upon the idea that the Scottish
army was composed chiefly of foot soldiers and that Robert was only able
to count upon a handful of armed, mounted men. However, records indicate
that during the course of the battle a fresh band of forces arrived to the
English rear. These new knights drove the fear of God into the English
soldiers, who turned and fled. While both the Scottish and English armies
were exhausted on the field of battle, Baigent and Leigh note that panic
swept through the English forces very suddenly and the King and his men
were forced to flee the field. His troops followed and the pursuing Scottish
forces were able to rout the departing men. The English abandoned
everything as they fled, including not only their gold and silver, but their
bags and their supplies. For Baigent and Leigh, the sheer terror instilled into
the English army could only have come from one source: a small group of
heavily armored Templars, leading their famous ‘squadron charge.’
Frightened by the arrival of such superior, fearless forces, the English
immediately turned and ran, providing Robert the Bruce with a famous
victory.
 

The idea of the arrival of the Templars on the battlefield is not so
farfetched. King Edward of England was attempting to conquer Scotland
and assert his control over the region. Robert the Bruce, already
excommunicated by the Pope, saw this as an affront to his country and led
his forces against King Edward in the name of freedom. For the Templars,
however, Scotland had become a place of asylum. After fleeing the charges
laid against them in France, much of Europe was still aggressively pursuing
Templar influence in every corner of the continent. But Scotland was one
place they were free from this persecution. It was entirely in their interests
to see Robert victorious. Scotland retained her independence, while the
Templars retained their temporary home away from the persecution of the
rest of Europe.
 
The Templar fleet, while not one of the most blood-ridden or twisted
examples of the Templar theories is, nevertheless, incredibly important. The
idea of the fleeing Templars seeking sanctuary with all manner of treasures
will form the basis for many of the theories we will examine in the coming
chapters. As well as this, it is one of those rare alternative historical theories
that not only has evidence to back it up from a number of sources, but
serves to make a great deal of sense for all of those involved. As we read
on, however, we will discover that the history of the Templars becomes a
little bit more twisted.


Relics
 
Of all of the most enduring Templar myths, many of the most pressing and
most interesting revolve around the existence of a number of historical
relics. With two thousand years of history, the Christian faith has notably
accrued a number of important and supposedly powerful items. These range
from the Shroud of Turin (a piece of cloth supposedly bearing an imprint of
Jesus’s face) to the Arc of the Covenant (the storage device used to keep
safe the tablets from which Moses learned of the Ten Commandments.)
 
Throughout history, the Templars have been linked to numerous relics and
various items of historic importance. While not all are as feasible as the
others, the multitude and regularity of the rumors indicate the suspicion
with which many people treat the Knights Templar. Of all the places to
start, however, it might be best to begin with their very first home, the
Temple of Solomon.
 
The Temple of Solomon
 
Temple Mount is a hugely important religious site in at least four religions.
Found in Jerusalem, it has been used by Paganism, Judaism, Islam, and
Christianity as a place of worship. As well as traditional temples, the site
has also supposedly been home to many events of religious importance. For
the Jewish faith, it is traditionally the holiest place in the world. It was
where God swept together dust to make Adam and was the site of the story
of the binding of Isaac. This was why it was chosen by the Jewish King
Solomon as a site for his temple. Thought to be the wisest man of his age,
he is a figure in all three Abrahamic religions. The temple is built on top of
the Foundation Stone, a rock found right at the heart of the building’s base.
The rock has a tiny hole in one of its corners which enters into a larger
cavern located beneath the stone. This cavern is known as the Well of Souls
and it is thought to be the place on Earth closest to Heaven. As well as these
traditionally Jewish tales, the stories have been passed down through Islam

and Christianity and the site is also hugely significant in these religions
because of this.
 
After the First Crusade swept through Jerusalem, Temple Mount was one of
the most fiercely defended sites. As both Jews and Muslims attempted to
stop the Christian Crusaders gaining entry, they were cut down. According
to sources at the time, the bloodstains went up to the knees of the
Crusaders. But after the fighting had died down, a new order of knights
found themselves in need of a home. The knights were given a wing in the
Temple and took their name from the building, becoming the Knights
Templar. But rather than a simple home and a nice story for the naming of a
band of monastic knights, the significance of Temple Mount could be
greater than anyone was prepared to admit.
 
The Templars were based in their original home for 75 years. For many
researchers, however, the first nine years of their residence in this building
seem to be the most interesting. During this time, the order’s activities were
incredibly clandestine. After appearing in paperwork and documentation at
their founding, the discussions of the order seemed to vanish for nine years.
The group’s activities during this time are hotly disputed. For some, these
nascent years were the source of all of the group’s power. Having been
given the Temple of Solomon as a base of operations, the legend goes, the
Templars set out to discover more about their home. While their activity
was seemingly limited to outsiders, inside they were working furiously.
 
Some scholars have suggested that the Templars discovered items of
historical importance on the site. It is not unlikely that there was something
of archaeological value to be found on Temple Mount. Even before
Solomon had founded his temple on the site, it had been home to numerous
buildings and its importance to Judaism had been noted. Returning to the
book, ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail,’ the suggestion has been that the Templars
excavated the site and were able to find documents that had been hidden
long before their arrival. These documents – whatever they contained –
provided the Templars with enough power and influence to expand their
order across Europe. Rather than being a beneficial set of lucky
circumstances, the Templars’ rise to power – their papal decrees and

accumulation of wealth – related to the information that was contained
within these words.
 
Indeed, the idea that the Templars discovered something beneath the base of
their headquarters is key to almost every theory and mystery. Whatever it
was that they found during those nine years, it was likely the same thing
they hid away when they fled La Rochelle centuries later. The idea that a
relic was recovered by the Templars is supported by a small amount of
evidence. Piers Paul Read notes that some Templar knights were known to
carry a piece of the True Cross (the one on which Jesus was crucified) into
battle. However, Read also notes that this particular relic likely came from
an earlier piece dating back to Saint Helena in the 4th century. If we are to
uncover the truth about the Knights Templar and their powerful order, we
will need to know (or at least, construct an educated guess) as to what
exactly they were able to recover from the grounds of one of the holiest
places in all of the world. With so many distinct possibilities, and with the
order so shrouded in secrecy, the quest to discover the truth behind the
Templars’ power has been an obsession for many, many people.
 
The Copper Scroll
 
Another item purportedly found beneath the temple is known as the Copper
Scroll. Not as famous as many of the other relics we will come across, it
certainly fits well into the story of the rise of the Templars. The Copper
Scroll is part of the ancient collection of writings known as the Dead Sea
Scrolls. But while the other texts in the collection are literary works and
shed light on the early days of Christianity, the Copper Scroll is very
different.
 
For a start, it is not written on the papyrus or paper used by the other
scrolls. Instead, its writing is carved directly into a slab of metal,
specifically copper, with a tiny amount of tin. Most importantly, however, it
is not a piece of literature. Instead, it is simply a list, describing the burial
locations of various amounts of gold, silver, and other treasures.
 

Our modern knowledge of the Copper Scroll comes from its rediscovery in
1952 by a British scholar. It was the last of the collection of scrolls to be
discovered and researchers believe that it was a later addition, added
separately from the main bulk of the collection. The same researchers have
attempted to discern the origins of the treasure. Suggestions have ranged
from it being the treasure of the Temple of the Mount, before one of the
numerous occasions on which it was destroyed, right up to the idea that the
tablet itself is a hoax and a distraction.
 
Robert Eisenman has written at length about the Copper Scroll and has
argued for its authenticity. He claims that the Templars actually found a
duplicate of the piece during their excavations. They traveled across the
Holy Land during the first nine years of their existence and tracked down
the buried gold and silver. This was then used to fund their order and to
begin their banking empire. This would explain the Templars quick rise to
power, their huge wealth, and the fact that very few of the locations listed
on the scroll have proved to be profitable when treasure hunters have gone
searching.
 
The Copper Scroll itself is now on display in a museum in Jordan. If it was
indeed a treasure map detailing the means to find the treasures of
Solomon’s temple, then not only is it potentially one of the most credible
Templar legends, but it could also have been the key to the Templars
discovering other relics scattered across the Holy Land.
 
The Turin Shroud
 
Like the Copper Scroll, the Turin Shroud (or the Shroud of Turin) is a relic
that still exists to this day and is very occasionally shown to the public.
However, it was not always owned by the same people. For long passages
of its life, the Shroud has been out of the public’s eye. It currently resides
(as the name suggests) in Turin, Italy.
 
Despite being a simple piece of ancient linen, the relic gains its power from
supposedly being the cloth which was used to wrap the body of Jesus Christ

before he was first buried. When opened up, the Shroud displays the faint
outlines of a man, including a vague image of a face. If it is real, then the
Shroud is the closest we might ever get to looking upon the face of Jesus.
 
Scientists have attempted to use carbon dating methods to determine the age
of the linen. Their findings seemed to suggest that the cloth came from the
medieval period. While this might render the relic’s holy status as negative,
it does little to disassociate the Shroud’s history from the Templars. Even if
it were a fake, it was a fake good enough to fool people for almost 1,000
years. Should a group have the burial cloth of Jesus, they would hold a
powerful relic. If it were a forgery, the very fact that people believed it to be
authentic renders it almost as powerful.
 
The Turin Shroud’s link to the Templar Knights begins around the time it
was first shown to the public, in 1357. It was displayed by the widow of a
recently deceased nobleman named Geoffrey of Charney. Geoffrey had
supposedly inherited the Shroud from a family member. He could trace his
lineage back to Geoffroi de Charney, one of the men who was executed by
the French for his involvement with the Templars. Geoffroi has been one of
the men burned at the stake after being tortured for a confession, placed
alongside the highest ranking members of the order during his final
moments.
 
But in 2009, paperwork emerged from the Vatican’s Secret Archives which
solidified the bond between the Charney family and the Shroud. Barbara
Frale, a researcher, claimed to have found information which indicated that
the Shroud had fallen into the possession of the Templars in 1204, alongside
a collection of writings believed to be Jesus’s ‘burial certificate.’ These
writings were spread across pieces of a broken tablet, written in Greek,
Hebrew, and Latin. The imprints of the words can still be seen on the
Shroud.
 
Another recent piece of evidence linking the Shroud with the Templars is
the painting found in a church in England during the 1940s. A woman
named Molly Drew was searching through a home in Templecombe when
she came across a picture depicting a man (either Jesus or John the Baptist)

and it contains a copy of the image found on the Shroud of Turin. It is
though that the Templars commissioned the painting while still in
possession of the Shroud and hid it during their persecution. The painting
has been carbon dated to 1280, and it is an indication of the importance the
Templars placed on the Shroud, commissioning paintings to celebrate its
importance and to reflect its images of Jesus.
 
Whether the Turin Shroud is real or not is almost irrelevant in this
discussion. That the Templars almost certainly controlled one of the most
important relics in Christendom is a reflection of the position of power they
held within the Church. Alternatively, the idea that the Shroud is a fake just
demonstrates the length to which the Templars would go to consolidate
their influence and - due to the seeming high quality of the forgery —
demonstrates the skills they possessed at the time of its creation. Whether
fake or real, we know that the Templars possessed the Shroud of Turin for
many centuries and were able to use its power for their own purposes.
 
The Ark of the Covenant
 
One of the stranger suggestions regarding relics the Templars might
possibly have recovered relates to one of the oldest Jewish treasures. The
Ark of the Covenant is the name given to the wooden box which was used
to carry the stone tablets bearing the Ten Commandments Moses had
received from God, as well as other items such as the Rod of Aaron and a
pot of the food from heaven, Manna. The chest was used during the exodus
from Egypt to preserve the words of God and was lost over the ensuing
centuries.
 
The historian Graham Hancock wrote a book titled ‘The Sign and the Seal,’
in which he put forward the idea that the Templars had uncovered
information at the site of Temple Mount that pointed them towards the real
resting place of the Ark. While it had formerly been at the site, it was
moved before the first destruction of a temple on the grounds. The priests
hid the Ark in Ethiopia and the fact that the Templars knew this is
acknowledged in some of the art and architecture they left. One of the best

examples is the Cathedral found in Chartes, which was overseen by Bernard
of Clairvaux, one of the order’s greatest evangelists.
 
As well as discovering the resting place of the Ark, Hancock suggests that
the Templars found many ancient secrets on the grounds of the temple.
These secrets were not simply Church teachings or literature, but trade
methods and building techniques that the Templars used in the construction
of the forts and castles they built during their two centuries in power. While
it is acknowledged that the discovery of the actual Ark of the Covenant is
unlikely, the discussions and collection of ancient Jewish wisdom –
colloquially referred to as the Ark - they might have found at Temple
Mount is certainly a reasonable hypothesis. They then took this knowledge
and used it to bolster their construction techniques and to build some of the
most enduring and amazing fortifications seen at the time.
 
Before the idea is dismissed so readily, it might be worth looking to the
sites that were left behind in Ethiopia. The Church of Saint George in the
country was built during the medieval period and has been suggested by
some scholars as being a Templar tribute to the information they uncovered
in Jerusalem. While they might not have found the actual Ark, the
knowledge they uncovered at the time transformed the order into the force
it was destined to become.
 
Throughout their history, the Knights Templar have been linked with many
of the relics commonly found throughout the history of Christianity. The
items we have listed above are those with the best links to the order. These
relics have allegedly been passed down from generation to generation, from
the height of the Templars’ power to the depths of their secrecy. And the
secrecy plays a huge role in the story of the Knights Templar. Because they
were driven from the public’s eye and essentially outlawed, they have
existed on the periphery of the cultural consciousness for the past six
centuries. Any surviving members of the order have been happy to indulge
in the rumors and theories attributed to the Templars. Because nothing can
be denied, nothing can be confirmed. The Templars have been able to cloak
themselves in the very rumors, secrets, and assumptions that so many
people project on to them. In doing so, their true purposes are obfuscated.

Despite this, there are links and rumors which carry a little bit more
credence than others. In the following chapters we will examine those
theories and ideas that just will not leave the Templars. For those wishing to
know the truth behind the order, the following chapters contain some of the
most important knowledge we have been able to pick apart from the lies,
allegations, and mistruths surrounding one of history’s most secret societies.
 
The Holy Grail
 
The Holy Grail is the most important relic in Christian mythology. Legend
tells us that the Grail is a receptacle – a cup, a plate, a dish, or something
similar- that is forever linked to the death of Christ. According to the
stories, the Grail is imbued with great power and those who drink from it
can receive eternal youth, everlasting contentment, and it can even heal
mortal wounds. The Grail was supposedly the very same item as the one
used by Jesus during the last supper. Following the crucifixion, Joseph of
Arimathea took the Grail and used it to collect the blood from Christ as he
hung on the cross, punctured by a Roman spear. After the death and the
resurrection, the Grail was handed down from generation to generation,
kept hidden and safe. For some people, the Templars were the order
entrusted to defend the Grail.
 
The earliest mentions we can trace of the Holy Grail come from medieval
French writings. The word ‘graal’ is used, ostensibly descended from the
Latin word ‘gradalis’ and working its way back through Greek and
Aramaic. The first descriptions seem to come from Chrétien de Troyes, who
talks about the item as though it was a dish or some type of bowl. Similarly,
Hélinand of Froidmont’s descriptions seem to talk about an item something
like a saucer. Other writers from across Europe talked about the Grail as an
item of tableware and even as a stone, but the references emerge not just
from France, but from Spain, Wales, and Germany. The Holy Grail became
a consistent figure in many romance stories of the medieval period, with the
bravest of knights either trusted with the Grail itself or charged with hunting
for it. Only the greatest and most honorable were said to be permitted to
care for this most holy of relics.

 
Needless to say, the fame and popularity of the Grail legend emerged during
the 12th and 13th centuries, the time when the Templars were rising to
power. One theory put forth is that, having discovered the Grail, the order
themselves spread the legend through Europe as they themselves
established chapter after chapter in the various states and countries. Just as
the Templars spread out from their original base atop the Temple Mount,
the stories about the Holy Grail went with them. As the Templars became a
regular fixture of contemporary medieval life, then the Grail became an
increasingly common feature in literature and folklore. Whether this stems
from the members of the order recounting tales or simply rumors spread by
those who wished to know more about the Templars, all we know is that the
stories of the Holy Grail have become inextricably linked to the tales of the
Knights Templar.
 
Just as the Templars shot to fame suddenly, however, they became wanted
just as quickly. If they did indeed possess the Grail, not only would it give
both the Catholic Church and powerful aristocrats a reason to covet their
power beyond their political influence, but it would suggest that the
protection of the Grail soon became the Templars’ chief mission. Though
they had been founded in order to protect the Holy Land and to ensure the
safe passages of pilgrims who wanted to visit Christianity’s most sacred
sites, they found themselves in possession of an item of far greater religious
worth. Just as their attentions moved further and further away from the
Holy Land, their focus turned elsewhere. With the Grail in hand, they would
have had a far greater mission and one of the world’s foremost links to the
divine.
 
But as the Templars fled from the port in La Rochelle, the mission to keep
the Grail safe took on new significance. While they had previously been a
decentralized, militaristic order with special privileges from the Pope, they
were now wanted men. In order to protect the Grail properly, they would
need to go into hiding. For all the discussion about the size and importance
of the Knights Templar at the time of their persecution, the relative speed
with which they vanished from the face of the Earth was impressive. Should
they have had something to hide – such as the holiest of relics – then they

would have had good reason for taking their order underground and fleeing
from the watching gazes of those who might seek to take the Grail from
them.
 
But what exactly happened to the Holy Grail once the Templars realized
that they would need to take it into hiding? We turn, once again, to our main
source on the matter, ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail,’ in which the authors
discuss the likeliest destinations following the turning of political opinion
against the order. The authors suggest that the Grail’s protection was the
chief concern of the Templars. In order to best protect their treasure, the
Templars took it to one of two places. It is either buried beneath a small
church in Scotland named the Roslyn Chapel, or it was scurried away to be
hidden in Northern Spain and the current location is not known. All
attempts to dig beneath the Scottish chapel have been rebuffed and,
following the emergence of the Templar and Grail theory, it has become a
popular tourist spot among those looking for clues as to the final resting
place of the Holy Grail.
 
But the authors of ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail’ do not suggest that the theory
behind the Templar involvement with the Grail is so simple. Instead, they
put forward a far more complex and twisted suggestion. Rather than being
an order of knights who discovered the Grail by chance, the authors trace
the existence of the Templars back even further. To truly understand their
theory, we must travel back to the time of Jesus.
 
As discussed in ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail,’ Jesus was a married man. He
took a wife. Though it is not discussed in the accounts that would
eventually form the Bible, one of Jesus’s companions – the woman named
Mary Magdalene – could in fact trace her lineage back to the ancient Jewish
King David. Jesus and Mary were married, and they had children. While the
biblical figure of Jesus Christ may have died at the age of 33 and left behind
only his followers, the authors point to gospels not included in the Bible
(known as the Apocrypha) as being evidence for the existence of a
bountiful marriage between Jesus and Mary Magdalene.
 

From Jesus and Mary Magdalene, the descendants of the marriage
continued to survive throughout the rise of Christianity. These descendants
became known as scions. Though few records exist that can trace the
lineage directly, it is said that hundreds of years of survival lead to the
scions forming the foundation for the great French house, the Merovingian
family. This group controlled the kingdom of the Franks from as early as
457 (when our records of their lineage begin) until 751, when they were
overthrown. But by this time, their presence among the aristocracy of
Europe was enough that their activities, births, deaths, and descendants
were monitored by those who remained aware of their true identity as the
scions of Christ. In order to protect them, a secret society was formed.
Rather than the Knights Templar, this society was known by the name the
Priory of Sion.
 
The Priory were sworn to secrecy and took it upon themselves to recruit
only the most intelligent and trustworthy members. But as the importance
of their task grew and grew, it became clear that they would need a more
functional organization in order to better provide protection for the
Merovingian family and their descendants. This is where the Knights
Templar came in. Formed as the Priory’s military and financial branch, they
were charged with creating the infrastructure and military capabilities that
might be needed in order to battle against anyone who might seek to destroy
the scions.
 
But who would want to wish harm on the descendants of Jesus Christ?
According to the book, one of the chief ill-wishers of the scions is the
Catholic Church. Following the efforts of Saint Paul to establish the first
Church and to spread the word of God around the world via Catholicism,
the institution had become one of the most powerful in the world and, more
importantly, the line of Popes became the chief religious authority among
men. Should the real identity of the scions ever be revealed, they would
pose a threat to the power wielded by the papacy. Similarly, the
Merovingian family still retained a certain amount of aristocratic respect
and influence among the French population and nobility. At a time when a
war of succession could see dynasties rise and fall, the ruling French kings
were not entirely pleased that the traditional rulers of the country might be

lurking around in the shadows, especially if they had a supposedly divine
right to rule. It was a combination of these two bodies – King Philip and the
Pope – who broke apart the Priory’s most visible wing, the Knights
Templar.
 
In response to this attack, the Templars reverted to the behavior of the more
secretive Priory of Sion. They went into hiding. Their members simply
stepped back from public view and those most in control of the true
intentions of the order were able to operate far from the prying eyes of their
prosecutors. The Priory went on to include very famous men as members.
Among the most notable were Leonardo da Vinci and Isaac Newton, who at
various times throughout the Renaissance and Enlightenment headed up the
Priory in the position of Grand Master (the same title as the head of the
Templars.) They operated under the very noses of the Church and the
aristocratic families who might seek to damage, attack, or otherwise harm
the descendants of Jesus.
 
But what evidence exists for the idea that the Holy Grail was in fact a royal
lineage, rather than a special cup? One of the most pressing discussed by
the authors of ‘Holy Blood, Holy Grail’ is the one theory which gives the
book its title. When looking through the early literary interpretations of the
Holy Grail – those which did the most work to define the modern
conception of the Grail as a cup – we must look to the old French sources.
Here, we find a possible error, confusion, or intentional mistranslation. The
name in Old French for the Holy Grail is ‘san graal’ or ‘san gréal.’ But if
one letter in these words were to move, the meaning changes entirely. Move
the letter ‘g’ and change the phrase from ‘san greal’ to ‘sang real’ and the
translation is altered significantly. ‘Sang real’ translates to ‘royal blood,’
and with that alteration comes the idea that the Templars were not trying to
protect a holy item, but the royal blood line itself. What the Templars found
buried beneath the Temple of Solomon might have been the lineage of the
scions, tracing the history of the Jewish prophet Jesus Christ into the
medieval period and the truth about the descendants of Christ. This would
then bolster the proof the Priory had of the history of the scions, as well as
provide a huge amount of powerful documents that the Templars would
need to rush away to a hiding place as soon as they were placed under

arrest. When fleeing, it could well have been these ancient family trees that
the Templars were taking with them, hiding the existence of the scions
away from the marauding forces of the French King and the Catholic
Church.
 
The idea of the Grail being a bloodline is not as farfetched as you might
think. It is not uncommon for the royal families of Europe to be able to
trace their lineage back hundreds and even thousands of years. In the case
of the Merovingian dynasty, they were one of the most powerful families
around, and were supposedly descended from a clan of Israelites or people
of Middle Eastern origin. In combining this history with the speculative, it
is not impossible that they are able to trace their history back over many
hundreds of years before they rose to power in the 8th century.
 
The theory does not even preclude a religious element. The historicity of
Jesus Christ has been debated for many years. Aside from the divine aspect
of his legend, whether he was an actual historical figure – a real man – is
less questioned. If we are to believe biblical historians such as Robin Fox,
Richard Carrier, and John Dickson, then the fact that a man named Jesus
existed around the time of 2BC to 30BC is agreed upon with a “near
universal consensus.” The accuracy of the biblical accounts, the gospels, the
teachings of the Catholic Church, and the belief of individuals in situations
such as these is almost irrelevant. Instead, our information comes from
apocryphal texts from the time, primary sources that were not created with
any specific religious intent (as might be found in the bible.) Roman
sources such as Tacitus and Jewish sources such as Josephus give us a non-
Christian perspective on the man. But they are in agreement: Jesus of
Nazareth was a real man.
 
If we are to accept this thesis – that there lived a Jewish man named Jesus
during the early years of the 1st millennium who built up a cult following
before being executed – then we can speculate on the likelihood of his
having fathered children. It was extremely common, practically expected,
that a man would be married before the time he reached thirty. In fact, were
it not the case during this time period, then this fact would have been
commented on by the people who wrote about Jesus’s life. That his family

is rarely mentioned either means that there was no family (something very
irregular for the time period) or that it was mundane enough not to draw
notice. Following this trail of thought, the idea that he might have birthed a
dynasty is not irreconcilable. From there, the idea of the Templars
safeguarding the very records of this bloodline accounts for their sudden
rise to power, their considerable influence, the anger which they elicited in
some of the most powerful people, and their willingness to vanish back into
the shadows.
 
While it might seem the more outlandish of the two suggestions, the idea
that the Holy Grail is a dynasty rather than a magic cup is actually a far
more reasonable suggestion. One does not even need to presume that Jesus
of Nazareth was anything more than a preacher in the Holy Land who
happened to be killed by the Romans in a particularly gruesome fashion.
The divinity of the man does not dictate the possibility that he left behind a
family. That he became so important following his death simply deepened
the possibility that people would feel the need to document his descendants.
The Templars, should this theory be true, form a small part of a wider
picture. If you would like to dig deeper into the history of the Priory of Sion
and the influence they have had on the world, there is a further reading
section at the end of this book. For now though, we will move on to other
theories put forward which threaten to shed light on the dark past of the
Knights Templar.


De Molay’s Curse
 
As fascinating as the rise and fall of the Knights Templar can be, one of the
most important moments came right on the precipice between the moment
when they were most powerful and the moment when they became outlaws.
At this time, the brutality and bloodlust enjoyed by their enemies was
almost unmatched in its prejudice. Not until the Protestant Reformation
would Christian Europe encounter such a violent schism. Amid the
executions, one man unleashed a curse upon his oppressors. It is only with
hindsight that we can witness the scale and the scope of the curse of
Jacques de Molay. But who was he, and why did his death cause such
violent resonations?
 
We know little of Jacques’ early years. It is reasonable to assume that he
was born into a well-to-do family in the region of Burgundy, in modern day
France. At the time, it was under the control of the Holy Roman Empire and
ruled by Otto III. We know that he was born sometime between 1240 and
1250, though the exact year eludes us. As with many men who would
eventually rise high in the ranks of the Templars, he was part of the nobility.
This afforded him the chance to train as a knight and, when he was close to
twenty years old, this training was rewarded with an invitation to join the
order of the Knights Templar. Over the ensuing decades, he did work on
behalf of the Templars, moving between France and the Holy Land.
 
In 1291, the Templar base in Acre fell to the invasion of the Mamluks from
Egypt. De Molay was part of the forces who managed to escape with much
of their wealth to set up their headquarters on the island of Cyprus. Here,
Jacques de Molay was stationed with the most important man in the order,
Thibaud Gaudin, the twenty-second Grand Master. In 1292, Gaudin died
and the order was left with little in the way of legitimate contenders to take
over the role. De Molay, despite his relative lack of experience, put himself
forward. He made it his mission to rekindle interest in taking the Holy Land
back in the name of Christendom and used this pretext to tour around the
capitals of Europe, seemingly to raise support. He found it tough to secure

any firm promises of forces from the ruling classes, with few wanting to
commit to a new Crusade. He was faced with papal requests that he merge
the order with the Knights Hospitaller. Faced with the threat of the Egyptian
Mamluks attacking Cyprus, he even tried to forge an alliance with a
Mongol army in the East to sweep through Syria and remove the Islamic
rulers in the region. This proposed alliance with the Mongols would have
caught the Holy Land in a pincer movement between the Templars and the
Mongols. But the Mongols never arrived. Despite the promise of helping
the Crusaders and Templars in 1300, 1301, and 1302, the promised army
never showed. De Molay watched on as the Crusaders lost their last
footholds in the Holy Land and saw the Mamluks take over the island of
Cyprus.
 
Jacques de Molay and his Knights Templar retreated to Europe. As we have
discussed earlier in the book, Pope Clement V and King Philip IV began to
place the order under increased amounts of pressure. King Philip’s
influence over the Catholic Church at this point was certainly dubious.
Recognizing the French king’s intentions, Pope Boniface VIII (one of
Clement’s predecessors) had attempted to have Philip excommunicated.
Instead, Boniface was kidnapped and charged with committing heresy. The
ordeal caused the elderly Pope to die of shock. He was followed by Pope
Benedict XI, who died less than a year after taking charge in Rome.
According to Helen Nicholson, it is quite likely that one of Philip’s close
friends, Guillaume de Nogaret, poisoned the Pope. Finally, when Clement
took charge of the Church, he immediately recognized Philip’s power, even
moving the headquarters of Catholicism to Poitiers, in France. This was
where Jacques de Molay arrived, unaware of the undue influence the King
of France had over the papacy, and hoping to save his order from
persecution.
 
As we know, he failed. Charges of heresy were lodged against the Knights
Templar and orders issued for their arrest. Jacques de Molay was in Paris on
the 12th of October, having attended the funeral of Catherine of Courtenay,
the sister-in-law of the French King. He had carried her coffin from the
church to the grave, a very great honor and one for which he had been
specifically requested. The very next day, at dawn, he and his Templars

were arrested by the King’s men. The allegations were remarkably similar
to those pressed against Pope Boniface VIII when Philip had accused him
of heresy. In the political game of cat and mouse, King Philip had cornered
the Grand Master of the Knights Templar.
 
Jacques de Molay was taken to the University of Paris. Over the course of
two days (the 24th and 25th of October,) he was repeatedly tortured by
Philip’s guardsmen. After 48 hours of torture, he was ready to admit that the
Templars had, among other things, denied Jesus Christ and stamped on the
cross. He signed a letter admitting to such actions and this letter was used
by the King to force Pope Clement V to issue an arrest for the Knights
Templar in every Christian nation.
 
But Clement was still not satisfied. He was unsure of the legitimacy of the
confession and – behind Philip’s back – he sent a pair of his trusted
cardinals to talk to De Molay. They arrived in December and began to talk
to the Grand Master, who took back everything he had confessed. For the
next six months, the Pope stood up to Philip as they argued over how best to
handle the Templar situation. It was agreed that the Knights Templar would
be investigated by two bodies, one who would judge the individual
members and one who would judge the order in its entirety.
 
Jacques de Molay, Grand Master of the Knights Templar, remained under
lock and key. As the King of France and the Pope struggled for control of
the persecution of the Knights Templar, he was occasionally wheeled out
from his cell to appear before various courts. Sometimes he admitted to the
crimes he was accused of, while other times he recanted his confessions.
Appearing bedraggled, in pain, but still defiant, De Molay refused to go
gently into the night. This infuriated King Philip so much that he simply
decided, one day, to use the forced confessions as the one piece of evidence
he needed. Despite the findings of various courts, despite the fact that the
confessions had been withdrawn, and despite the hideous torture which the
men had been placed under, King Philip sentenced De Molay and 53 other
members of the Knights Templar to be burned at the stake.
 

Our best account of the morning of the death of Jacques de Molay comes
from Henry Charles Lea, who was present. As he tells us, a scaffold
platform was erected outside of the famous Notre Dame Cathedral. Jacques
de Molay was wheeled out before the crowds. As the Grand Master, he was
one of the more recognizable Templars, but many other high-ranking order
members were there as well. It had been nearly seven years since the group
had been arrested, and they had languished in a jail cell for the entire time.
Members of the clergy were brought out to add authority to the judgement
that was about to pass.
 
Because the Templars had been accused of such sordid crimes, they were
facing a gruesome death. But before they could be executed, both Jacques
de Molay and Geoffroi de Charney stood to address the crowd. Speaking in
public for the first time in years, the men insisted upon their innocence.
Their real crime was their lack of loyalty to the order of the Knights
Templar and they were indeed guilty of betraying their vows, rather than the
heresy with which they were charged. The charges, they insisted, were
false, as were the confessions. The members of the clergy were perturbed
by this turn of events and didn’t know what to do. When King Philip
discovered the executions had been delayed, he was apoplectic. He ruled
that, regardless of their words, the Templars were heretics and were to be
burned at the stake. The men were taken to the Ile des Juifs, an island on the
Siene which is close to the grounds of the palace. Here, the Templars were
burned alive. They died slowly but refused any help that was offered to
them. Henry Charles Lea commends the dignity and composure with which
the Templars died and notes that their martyr status was confirmed by the
people in attendance, who collected the ashes from the fire and claimed
them as relics.
 
But the death was not quite so simple. As he stood in the fires, the flames
licking up around his bare flesh and blistering his skin, Jacques de Molay
lashed out with his tongue. As he died his slow and painful death, with the
nerves endings in his skin roasting one by one, De Molay screamed out a
curse on his persecutors. Philip IV and Clement V, he bellowed, would soon
join him. Before the end of the year, they too would be standing in front of
God to answer for what they had done. As the smoke and the flames rose

higher and higher, those in attendance heard the curse, but could not know
just how unerringly accurate it would become.
 
King Philip’s death was entirely unexpected. At the age of 46, several
months after the executions of the Templars, he took to one of his beloved
hunting trips. Though he was a relatively healthy man and surrounded by
attendants, they could do nothing to prevent their King being struck down
by a stroke. After the initial attacks, Philip spent the next few weeks
attempting to recover from this accident and surviving in great pain. He
died shortly after.
 
Pope Clement’s death was even stranger. Despite his age, his death was
equally unexpected. After being discovered dead, his body was laid in state
as is tradition. Over the church, however, a huge thunderstorm began to
brew. In the deepest darkness of the night, a lightning bolt struck the church
where his body was kept and set it ablaze. The church burned so fiercely
and the flames were so hot that, despite the rain and people’s attempts to
quell the fire, the building was destroyed. With it, Clement’s body was
damaged beyond all recognition. After less than a year, Jacques de Molay’s
curse had been fulfilled.
 
Our account of the curse comes from a man who was present at the burning
of the Templars. Geoffrey of Paris was the man who recorded the curse,
which was discovered by Malcolm Barber. The stories of the curse have
also been passed down elsewhere, however, and ancient rituals involving
the Freemasons (whom we will cover in the next chapter) have demanded
that those welcomed into the order trample on a papal tiara and a French
crown, enacting vengeance on behalf of De Molay. The scars of his death
have been remembered by this organization with close ties to the Templars.
 
The final chapter in the history of the curse of De Molay comes during
another turbulent time in France’s history. During the French Revolution,
King Louis XVI of France was executed. He was taken to the guillotine and
beheaded in public in 1793. Legend says that nearly five hundred years
after a French King had publically executed the Grand Master of the
Templars, a man ran from the crowd in the square before the guillotine.

According to whomever you choose to believe, he either thrust his hand
into the pool of royal blood or lifted the severed head up to the crowd. As
he did so, he screamed to the watching people, “Jacques de Molay, you
have been avenged!”


The Freemasons
 
Any discussion of a secret society will eventually come round to the
Freemasons. The Knights Templar are no different and – over the course of
the last 800 years – people have tried to link the monastic order to
Freemasonry on many occasions. While the Freemasons are a dark and
mysterious institution in their own right, their links to the Templars are built
on far more solid foundations than you might expect.
 
As with many theories about the Templars, the chief area of interest with
regards to Freemasonry only begins once the Templars were forced into
hiding. The fleet of Templar vessels that departed from La Rochelle is again
the origin of the theory, with people choosing to accept the standard theory
that the Templars relocated to Scotland in order to freely go about their
business. The ties to the Freemasons begin once the Templars land in
Scotland.
 
Thanks to our knowledge of some of the secret rituals of the Freemasons,
we know that references to the Templars exist within their bylaws. The
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite contains degrees such as the Knight of
Rose-Croix (the Rose Cross) and the Knight of Saint Andrew, both of
which contain bylaw references to the Templars. In fact, the Freemason’s
32nd Degree in Consistory makes a direct reference to the Masonic Knights
Templar, but some have tried to dismiss these references as being purely
ceremonial, rather than historical.
 
Others, such as John Robinson, have suggested that the bond runs much
deeper than mere mentions in rule books. In his book, ‘Born in Blood,’
Robinson delves into the secrets he has uncovered about freemasonry. He
agrees with the theory that the Templars fled to Scotland in the 1300s in
order to escape the wrath of the French king and the Catholic Church. The
members of the order beseeched the locals for sanctuary. They finally found
refuge with a lodge run by the local Scottish masons who specialized in
stonework. Staying with the lodge, the Templars began to impart their

chivalric values and religious beliefs. In order to teach the stonemasons
about these qualities, they made use of the tools and items they found
around the lodge, using them as metaphors for their lessons, establishing
what would become the discourse of Freemasonry.
 
In no time, the lodge and the Templars expanded their group to include
outsiders and people from the surrounding areas. These were called
‘speculative masons’ and their presence was seen by the Templars as a
means of continuing their teachings in the less-than-ideal political climate.
If the Knights Templar were to be driven into the ground, then this new
group would be able to stand for many of the same values they had once
embodied. This practice laid the foundations for a clandestine society who
continued to remain in the shadows for the next several centuries,
eventually revealing themselves in 1717 and taking on the name, ‘The
United Grand Lodge of England.’
 
One of their greatest treasures has already been mentioned in this text. The
Rosslyn Chapel, found in Scotland, is unique in its architecture. Anyone
who walks into the church will immediately notice the idiosyncratic
decorations. Rather than conventional Christian imagery, the church is
covered in symbols, logos, designs, and characters from across the world. It
is not limited to Christianity, but also includes Islamic, Hindi, Nordic,
Celtic, Pagan, and many, many other cultural artifacts. The Earls of
Rosslyn, who ordered the construction of the chapel, have long held ties to
Freemasonry and are believed to have been directly involved in the creation
of the church. Despite the fact that the chapel was created 100 years after
the initial purge of the Templars, it not only encapsulates the teaching of
both the Freemasons and the Templars, but is a physical manifestation of
the close ideological links between the two organizations. This point is also
made by Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh in their book, ‘The Temple
and the Lodge.’
 
Even if the links between the Knights Templar and the Freemasons are hard
to prove, why does it matter? Beyond the general conspiracy theories
involving the Freemasons and their influence on world culture, the idea that
one of the world’s foremost secret societies could so heavily influence

another is fascinating. Perhaps more interestingly, the Freemasons have
managed to achieve a level of cultural acceptance that the Templars never
managed. Aside from fringe criticism, Masonic presence is noted in almost
every major city in the world and, typically, this passes without comment or
concern. Unlike the Templars, whose presence and influence was unnerving
for many major political powers, the Freemasons have managed to position
themselves within society where they are essentially accepted.
 
With this in mind, the idea of the Templars directly influencing the birth of
the Freemasons means that they were able to preserve many of their ideals
and principals. In essence, the Templar influence on a second secret society
allowed them to reinvent their order as something more socially accepted.
In the 14th century, with the Crusades long over and no need for a
militaristic presence in the Holy Land, as well as a growing list of enemies,
the Knights Templar were in trouble. When this reached a head and they
were forced to flee France, the Templars came up with a new solution. They
reinvented themselves. Allying with a different society altogether, they
were able to create a new order in an image better suited to contemporary
society. They were able to use everything they had learned and impart
everything they held dear, passing it on to the nascent Freemasons. Rather
than a fighting religious order, this new society was a profession-oriented
secret group. On the surface, they may have differed from the Freemasons,
but deep down, the Templars were able to preserve their qualities and
ensure they survived for generations to come.
 
The further removed we get from the initial contact between the Templars
and the Freemasons, the more difficult it becomes to gather concrete
information about their shared practices. While the Templars have fallen
away into rumor, myth, and legend, the Freemasons have thrived. The
handing of the baton between these secret societies could well have
contained far more than simply codes of honor and chivalric practices.
Instead, the secrets of the Templars may have been buried deep inside the
core foundations of the Freemasons. Whether that relates to the truth about
the Holy Grail, lingering prejudices involving the curse of Jacques de
Molay, or just an incredible amount of wealth and treasure, we can only
speculate.


Legacy
 
Having existed for close to nine hundred years, the Knights Templar have
left a series of marks on our cultural landscape. Their presence and
influence can be noticed in everything from their widespread logo — the
red cross emblazoned across the white background — right down to the
structure of the modern banking systems around the world. But there are
many, many ways in which the Templars have left their mark, and some
which you might never have imagined.
 
One popular legend connects the Knights Templar to the superstition
surrounding the date Friday the 13th. In many Western cultures, this
occasional arrangement of the date is considered to an unfortunate day, with
bad experiences and poor luck often attributed to the day itself. It’s held in
the superstitions in much the same way as people might treat a black cat
crossing their path or walking beneath a ladder. The legend goes back to
Friday, October the 13th, 1307, the day on which the order for the arrest of
every Templar knight was carried out. With these knights and order
members then tortured and executed on the order of King Philip, the date
became closely associated with the death of the Templars. Over the coming
centuries, the times when the 13th of the month coincided with a Friday
became engrained in superstition and the demise of the Templars.
 
Another commonly overlooked legacy of the Templars is the architectural
treasures they left behind. With this presence stretching from the Holy Land
to the furthest tips of Europe, they developed a reputation as master
builders. Among the fortifications they left behind are:
 
Sidon Sea Castle in Lebanon
Commandry of Coulommiers, France
Chastel Blanc, Syria
Château Pèlerin, Israel
San Bevignate church, Italy
Castle of Almourol, Portugal

Tourbillon Castle, Sion, Switzerland
Tempelhof, Berlin, Germany
The Temple and Temple Church, London
 
The order’s history as a military and religious organization meant that many
of these buildings blended the need for strong defense with the need for
religious reverence. They remain among the most striking and stunning
examples of medieval construction in the world.
 
The legacy of the Knights Templar has also been felt in the world of
literature. One of the best loved books from the last century, Umberto Eco’s
‘Foucault’s Pendulum’ deals with the Templars as a central tenet of the
storyline. Throughout the text, Eco blends his own research with invented
conspiracy theories.
 
While it may not be based on fact, it does show the extent to which people
are still willing to buy into stories about the Templars, and it reiterates that
their fame and legacy has long outlived their organization. Just as books
such as this one are still being written about the Knights Templar, people
are still desperate to know more about such a dark, twisted, and secretive
organization.


Conclusion
 
There are few organizations in the history of the world who have had as big
an impact, relative to their size, as the Knights Templar. Not only did they
establish a name and organization that is still recognized today, but they
rose to become one of the key forces on the geopolitical scale. Their
influence was felt on a national level and the banking system they helped
invent became so successful that it ultimately led to their downfall.
 
With an organization such as this, it is to be expected that we should see so
many theories and secrets put forward. Because the order themselves
reveled in the secrecy and the clandestine nature of their society, it should
come as no surprise to see that people have attempted to fill the void with
rational explanations.
 
But beyond the intrigue, it is important to note the violence that followed
the Templars. They were forged in the cradle of the Crusades, one of
Christendom’s most bloodthirsty, violent, and shameful moments. They
came to embody the fight for the Holy Land and eventually met their
demise in an equally sinister, twisted manner. Even when we’re trying to
discover more about the organization, the amount of people who died at
their hands, or because of an association with the order should not be
forgotten.
 
If you would like to discover more, there is a further reading section at the
end of this book. For those who are seeking the full truth behind the
Knights Templar, we may never know exactly what they had to hide. Until
such time as we might know the entire truth, we will have to exist – much
like the Templars themselves – in a world of myth, rumors, and lies.


Further Readings
 
Baigent, M. and Leigh, R. (1998).  The Temple and the Lodge. London:
Arrow.
Baigent, M., Leigh, R. and Lincoln, H. (2006).  The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail. London: Arrow.
Carroll, R. and Prickett, S. (2008). The Bible. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chaumeil, J. (2010). The Priory of Sion. London: Avalonia.
Christopher, P. (n.d.). Lost City of the Templars.
Eco, U. (2001). Foucault's Pendulum. London: Vintage.
Haag, M. (2009). The Templars. London: Profile.
Hancock, G. (2001). The Sign and the Seal. London: Arrow.
Hodge, S. (n.d.). Secrets of the Knights Templar.
Howells, R. (2011). Inside the Priory of Sion. London: Watkins Pub.
Martin, S. (n.d.). The Knights Templar.
Nicholson, H. (2010). The Knights Templar. Philadelphia: Running Press.
Robinson, J. (1989). Born in Blood. New York: M. Evans & Co.
Smith, U. (n.d.).  Daniel and the Revelation. Nashville, TN: Southern
Publishing Assoc.


Volume 2
 





Contents
 
Introduction
The Rise and Fall of the Order
The Meaning of Being a Knights Templar
Physical Strength
Courage and Honor
Loyalty to the Templar Order
Spirit of Sacrifice
The Knights Templar Legacy
Relics of the Knights Templar
The Holy Grail
The Shroud of Turin
The Ark of the Covenant
The Lost Account Logs
Banking System of the Knights Templar
Working Around Church Rules
Rapid Expansion of Wealth
Rapid Expansion of Property and Power
Account Logs Lost
Knights Templar Treasures: Legend or Reality?
Disappearing Knights
Lost Account Logs
Scholarly Interpretation?
Some of the Most Common Theories
Possible Treasure Location: Nova Scotia, Canada
Other Possible Treasure Locations
Legend or Reality?
On the Trail of The Knights Templar Treasure Today
Nova Scotia
Scotland
France
Northern Africa
Middle East
Spain

Portugal
England
Ireland
Croatia
Elsewhere in Europe?
United States
In Pop Culture?
Where Would You Search?
References
Books
Videos

Introduction
 
We're all familiar with the Knights Templar in some form or fashion,
whether via pop culture references (The Da Vinci Code, National Treasure,
Monty Python and the Holy Grail, etc.), a passing familiarity with history
(as they made a name for themselves during the Crusades), or even via
myths and legends of hidden treasure (which we'll discuss more throughout
this book). What you may not know is that even among scholars, the
Knights Templar – or Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of
Solomon, as they were also named – questions far outweigh answers.
 
It's our hope that this book will help answer some of your questions,
particularly as the lost treasure is concerned. What questions it doesn't
answer – and we're certain you'll still have plenty of questions when you
finish this book – we'll help you find the resources to search out your own
answers, via the included reference section at the book's end.
 
Before we begin, though, we want to give you some idea what to expect
from this book.
 
First, we want you to know that this book was painstakingly researched.
Where appropriate, we've included footnotes so you can see where the
information came from in a larger context, or so you can further explore on
your own. However, not all information will include footnotes if it seems
there are enough source materials that you could easily find the information
again on your own without looking too hard.
 
Second, we want to offer a brief overview of what's ahead. We've broken
this book into seven chapters, plus this introduction and a reference section
at the end.
 
We'll begin by looking at the rise and fall of the order and providing some
historical background. We'll keep this brief, just enough to help you get an
idea of the context in which the Templars operated. If a larger history is

what you're looking for, we recommend checking out the first volume of the
series The Knights Templar, The hidden History of the Knights Templar.
Click here to go the book.
 
We'll look at how the Templars operated, focusing primarily on their code
of honor. Understanding how the Templar organization worked is one of the
keys to understanding what treasures they might have controlled, as well as
what might have informed their decision making as to how and where to
hide their treasures.
 
Next, we'll examine the legacy the Templars have left behind, and how they
are portrayed today. The wide range of portrayals speaks to the power the
Templars had – and the power they still have – over our imaginations.
 
We'll then look at some of the pieces of treasure we're most certain were
once in Templar possession – the holy relics such as the Holy Grail, the
Shroud of Turin, and the Ark of the Covenant. Coming to understand how
the Templars interacted with such priceless, holy relics can help us better
understand how they approached treasures in general.
 
We will also look at the Templar banking system, as it was a key piece in
how the Templars built power and wealth, and laid the foundation for many
banking principles still in practice today.
 
Finally we will discuss the Knights Templar treasure. Is the treasure real or
just another legend? Operating on the assumption that the Templar treasure
is still out there, somewhere, waiting for to be found, we will investigate
some of the most common theories and speculation as to where that treasure
might be, before letting you decide and maybe start searching.
 
Lastly, we'll leave you with the references that were instrumental in
building this guide, so you can start your search with everything you need
before you.


The Rise and Fall of the Order
 
 
The Knights Templar, originally known as the “Poor Knights of Christ and
the Temple of Solomon” (or the “Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and the
Temple of Solomon”) began in 1120 with only nine members. Suggested
first by a French knight named Hughes de Payens, this group was formed
and dedicated to the protection of Christians traveling from Jaffa to the

interior sites of the Holy Lands. King Baldwin II provided their original
headquarters in one of the wings of the royal palace on Templar Mount.
Previously part of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the grounds were believed to be the
original site of King Solomon's temple, as well as one of the bloodiest
locations of the invasion of Jerusalem in the First Crusade.
 
Of the original nine members, eight are known: Hughes de Payens, Godfrey
de Saint-Omer, and Andre de Montbard are widely held as the original
founders, to which Payne de Monteverdi, Geoffrey Bison, and
Archaumbaud de St. Agnan, as well as two other knights – known only as
Gondamer and Rossal – were added. The name of the ninth knight has
never been confirmed. While some speculate that it may have been Count
Hugh of Champagne, he was in France at the time, and later joined the
Knights in 1125, upon his third visit to the Holy Land.
 
One thing we do know about the founding knights is that they were
originally all related, either by blood or family. This, combined with their
humble origins, helped spur them towards a life of secrecy and seclusion;
the knights always saw themselves as tight knit, and throughout their
history they have remained rather secretive.
 
Though now known for the vast riches and massive network they later
accumulated, the original Knights were by no means well off. In fact, they
had no backers at first, thus the “poor” in their original title. Similarly, their
emblem showed two knights sharing a single horse – a far cry from what
they would soon become.
 
For almost immediately, the Knights found backers, the first of whom was a
French abbot of great standing, and Knight Andre de Montbard's nephew:
Bernard of Clairvaux. Bernard's support – and the letters he wrote urging
others to support the Knights as well – meant the Templars soon became a
favored charity of the church. Not only were they gifted sums of money, but
donations to the order also included land, businesses, and the sons of noble
families across Europe. For aristocrats who wanted to support the
undertaking of the Crusades but who didn't want to fight themselves,

sending a son to serve in the Knights Templar was an alternative way to
earn the family great honor.
 
As a result of the honor and prestige service with the Knights could bring a
family, as well as their good standing within the church, both their ranks
and their coffers grew very quickly. Strangely enough, though, very little
was said about the Knights Templar in anything written at the time. This led
many to believe that they were intentionally a rather secretive group from
the very beginning.
 
For instance, we know of little that was written about the Knights Templar
before 1129 – a full nine years after they were formed. This was despite
their clear position of privilege in the church; after all, their headquarters
were at the location of one of the holiest sites (Solomon's Temple) in the
holiest of holy cities (Jerusalem), meaning they were afforded a great deal
of respect even at the start.
 
In 1129 they were officially sanctioned by the church at the Council of
Troynes. As such, they became recognized as a warrior arm of the church,
men who took up the sword to defend the innocent and protect the church.
As their patron Bernard wrote of the Knights, “[A Templar knight] is truly a
fearless knight, and secure on every side, for his soul is protected by the
armor of faith, just as his body is protected by the armor of steel. He is thus
doubly-armed, and need fear neither demons nor men.”[1]
 
Only ten years after first being recognized by the church, they were given
far more power, when in 1139 Pope Innocent II issued a papal bull[2] stating
that the Knights Templar were subject to no man but the Pope himself. This
meant they did not pay taxes, nor were they stopped at any border. As a
result, less than 20 years after their founding, the Knights Templar found
themselves with nearly unlimited power and resources.
 
The Knights were shrewd tacticians and their prowess in war was widely
noted. This is, of course, more widely discussed in our general history of
the Knights Templar [link to purchase first book here].
 

Of particular interest to us now, however, is how quickly the Knights
Templar became responsible for large tracts of land, property, and ownings
– and very quickly came to hold more value in their trusts than any of the
banks.
 
We'll discuss the Templar's banking system in greater detail later in the
book, but a brief overview here will help give a sense of how quickly they
were able to accumulate and centralize power and riches.
 
In particular, the papal bull issued by Pope Innocent II made them a charity
across the entire span of Europe. As new members took a vow of poverty
upon joining, they frequently donated their possessions and holdings to the
order at that time. Additionally, as the order oversaw these quickly growing
holdings, their business dealings netted them yet more money, property, and
power.
 
Similarly, when nobles joined the order, even the possessions and holdings
not donated to the order were most frequently placed under their protection,
meaning the Knights Templar controlled all of that land until the noble
returned from the Crusades – years later, if at all. Before long, the majority
of the Templar infrastructure was committed to running their businesses.
 
By 1150, the mission of the order itself seemed to have changed to reflect
this, as their main undertaking, instead of protecting the pilgrims traveling
to and from Jerusalem, was now guarding valuables for those pilgrims.
 
Pilgrims might, for instance, visit a Templar office in their home country
before beginning their pilgrimage, at which time they would leave their
valuables and deeds with the Knights. They would then be given a letter of
credit that described their holdings, and upon their return, would exchange
that letter once more for the return of their valuables.
 
Of course, many of those pilgrims did not return, or lost their letters of
credit; these valuables then became yet another holding of the Knights.
 

Another advantage of this system was that the Knights acted as bankers of a
sort across the major pilgrimage routes, so when pilgrims needed goods or
services, they could present their letter at another Templar house and in
such a way make a withdrawal from their original holdings. This helped
keep travelers safe, as they weren't carrying their valuables, but it also
meant that Templars could charge a small fee or percentage as rent for their
services.
 
Such was the power of the Templars that, though lending to collect interest
was officially forbidden by the church, the church looked away and allowed
them to use loopholes. As one prominent Templar researcher has noted,
“Since they weren't allowed to charge interest, they charged rent instead.”[3]
 
As their power grew, so did the complexity of their banking. While we'll
touch on this more in later in this book, it's interesting to note that Templars
may have begun using ciphers and codes based on a Maltese Cross as early
as 1150.[4]
 
Their increased power and holdings also meant that they could ask more of
new knights joining the order; from 1180 to 1260 the cost of entry for a new
noble pledging as a knight rose from 3 km² of land to 15.6 km². As a result,
their power grew exponentially – at one point they owned the entire island
of Cyprus.[5]
 
With any operation as large as the Knights Templar became, however, there
is always a fall, and the fall for the Knights Templar came suddenly and
unexpectedly. By the end of the Third Crusade, led by Richard the
Lionheart, the Templars were likely as powerful as they ever became. In
1291, shortly after the Siege of Acre, the Templars relocated their
headquarters to Cyprus, and soon Jacques de Molay took office as Grand
Master of the order.
 
After they gained further financial backing from Charles II of Naples and
Edward the I of England, as well as the same papal privileges previously
extended by Innocent II via the new Pope Boniface VIII, things looked
good for the Templars.[6]

 
But the coming years were not as kind to the Templars and the other
crusaders of the church. In in the years 1298 through 1300, fortresses began
to fall to the Muslims, and while the Templars retained their base on
Cyprus, they lost their last Holy Land fortress, at Arwad, in 1300.[7]
 
While this didn't affect many of their holdings across Europe, or their vast
financial network, it left the Order without a specific purpose, as the Holy
Lands had clearly been lost. The end was coming – and it came more
quickly than anyone might have imagined.
 
We'll mention this briefly, as it's covered in far more depth in our general
history of the Knights Templar [click here to go the book].
 
Of particular interest to us here is King Philip's IV of France’s history with
the Templars. Philip believed that the Templars wanted to form their own
state, the way Prussia was founded by the Teutons, and furthermore, he
believed that while they were currently happy with their base of operations
on Cyprus, he knew they had their eye on Languedoc, in southern France.
Knowing how the Templars had helped Amalric of Tyre overthrow King
Henry II in Cyprus in 1306, Philip had good reason to worry the Templars
might come for him. All of this was further complicated by the fact that
Philip had inherited his father's debt to the Templars, and his kingdom was
poor.
 
As a result, Philip choose to strike first. On a Friday (October 13th, 1307) as
the sun rose, his agents simultaneously raided and arrested dozens of
French Templars. Initially the Templars were tortured, and five charges[8]
(mostly of heresy and sacrilege) were brought against them:
 
1. men spitting on the cross during initiation into the Order;
2. men being stripped during their initiation, and kissed improperly by
the preceptor in the Order;
3. men of the Order indulging in unnatural lust;
4. men of the Order wearing cords of idolatry (according to the charges,
they worshiped an idol – a bearded human head)

5. priests of the Order not properly celebrating Mass, as the host wasn't
properly consecrated.
 
Through the following year, these charges grew more and more outlandish,
[9] and over the following years, more than a hundred of the accused
Templars confessed, though those confessions all came under torture.[10]
 
In response to these accusations and the scandal they caused in Paris and
elsewhere, Pope Clement V responded by issuing a papal bull that called for
the arrest of all the Templars, in addition to the seizing of all of their assets.
[11] Even if the instructed monarchs may not have believed the charges
against the Templars, the bull offered them free access to the Templar's vast
resources, and so proceedings began in several other countries against the
Templars.[12]
 
By 1312, Pope Clement V had ordered the official dissolution of the
Knights Templar – less than 200 years after their founding. Even those
kings and nobles who, up until this point, had supported the Templars did as
the Pope asked, though not all the Templars were persecuted as they'd been
in France. In England, for instance, many of the Templars were found not
guilty of the charges brought against them.
 
Across Europe, Templar holdings changed hands, much of it going to the
Knights Hospitaller, though in Portugal, the Templars simply changed their
name, becoming the Order of Christ. (And as the Order of Christ, continued
to make major contributions to society; many of the first naval discoveries
by the Portuguese were made by members of the Order.)
 
Throughout this tumultuous time, though, there's no question that many of
the Templars and their holdings simply disappeared. For instance, at one
time there had been as many as 15,000 (if not more) Templar Houses, as
well as an entire fleet of ships. Even in France, where hundreds of Templars
were detained, this was still only a small percentage of the knights that had
been in the country. Even more interesting, is that all of the Templars’
extensive financial records went missing – and were never recovered.
 

There are multiple theories as to what happened with those Templars, their
ships, and perhaps their treasures – but we'll get to that in chapters to come.


The Meaning of Being a Knights Templar
 
 
In everything the Templars did, they were expected to adhere to a strict
code of honor that would allow them to both keep up their fighting strength
and skill and reflect positively on the church and their Christian morals.
 
Because of their position as knights, the normal restrictions of monks and
other holy men would not do – they could not fast, for instance, without
losing their strength.

 
Instead, they focused on four main points that would help orient their
aristocratic military strength with the virtue of their faith:
 
1. Physical strength
2. Courage and honor
3. Loyalty to the Templar order
4. The spirit of sacrifice
 
These four points were stressed heavily, and as a result, were intended to
make the Knights Templar an organization for only the most select, as a
decided minority of those interested could combine the appropriate physical
and psychological qualities with an equally appropriate religious
commitment.
 
Some of these attributes were heavily codified in Templar regulations, and
others were more selectively enforced by the things the Templars chose to
value in their daily practice. Regardless, each of them went a long way in
helping the Templars stand out, and are part of why they are so well
regarded even today, nearly a thousand years later.
 
Physical Strength
 
While the Knights Templar were in several ways very much like other
extensions of the church, such as the Benedictine monasteries, the physical
requirements of their tasks also necessitated some major differences.
 
For instance, whereas the monks regularly fasted, Templars could ill afford
to do so, and made a very conscious effort to maintain a strong, healthy
diet. Likewise, Templars did not whip themselves, as many monks did, for
they didn't ever want to be weakened, in case they might be less ready for
battle.
 
Toward that end, some Templar houses actually required knights eat in
pairs, so a knight could not fast in secret – should any knight attempt to do

something (even if in the pursuit of holiness) that might make him a lesser
soldier for the Order, his brother knight was obligated to report him.[13]
 
Courage and Honor
 
 
One of the biggest ways the Knights Templar were different from other
orders and church organizations was their refusal to admit boys. While
some of this was practical – caring for the knights was expensive enough

without adding the expense of raising boys – it was also a matter of
discipline, courage, and honor.
 
Templars wanted to make sure that their new initiates were bound to the
same aims as the larger order, and so they much preferred their new knights
be fully mature, and fully aware of the life they were casting aside.
 
In some documents, it actually seems clear that Bernard had an ideal in
mind even as the Knights Templar were first forming: a mature widower,
such that they could leave their secular life behind and under the rule of
their first-born son, made the perfect knight candidate.
 
Courage and honor were prerequisites of the Templar knight, as they
represented the order in everything they did, and to bring shame to the order
was to fail in their duties. Even in combat, they were expected to behave a
certain way, such that even many of the Muslim chroniclers of the time
speak well of the Templars.
 
Loyalty to the Templar Order
 

 
It was expected that the knight's first priority was always the order. This
was shown in all their actions, and codified in all their regulations.
 
Each knight swore in his pledge to die for the church, and by extension, the
Templar Order, without question, and he considered it a great honor to the
have the opportunity to do so. As the regulations stated:
 
“No one must leave his position without the permission of his commander,
not even if he is wounded...And if by chance it should happen that the
Christians are defeated...no brother must leave the field of battle as long as
the banner of the Temple is still flying, and anyone in violation will be
expelled from the order.”[14]
 
Even if a Templar was the last surviving member of his regiment, he was
expected to find other Christians to fight with, and he was expected to die
with them if that is what the battle required. Not only was it demanded that
he be loyal to the order, but also to the larger body of Christians fighting.

 
This bond, and loyalty to the order, especially showed in their fighting
tactics. For their time, their organization and ability to fight cohesively was
an unusual and remarkable achievement. This was established by ensuring
in all regulations that knights put the order above themselves – they were
not allowed property, nor were they allowed to upgrade their equipment,
accept gifts, or in any way better their lot without the express permission of
their commander.
 
Spirit of Sacrifice
 
As pride was regularly an attribute – and a desired one, normally – among
knights, the Templars fought to reconcile this pride with the humility the
Church required. Fortunately, they were able to find a compromise:
Templars were expected to be humble as individuals, while maintaining
pride in the Order. Connected with the loyalty previously required, this
meant that knights of the order learned to put the order first, which required
the development of a spirit of self-sacrifice.[15]
 
This manifested in many ways. As a way of demonstrating their humility,
Templars were expected to dress simply – in direct contrast to other knights
of the era, who often dressed themselves in lavish robes. Instead, Templars
wore either black or white (or other basic monotone colors), and only very
simple fabrics. While Templars were allowed to carry a change or two of
clothing to ensure hygiene, their hair was kept short (if not shaved), again in
contrast to the style of the age, and sergeants’ clothing was kept even more
simple than knights’.
 
In accordance with this new-found simplicity, knights were expected to
donate all their clothing to the draper upon joining. Not only would the
draper then use those garments to make new garments in the style chosen
by the Templars, but if the donated wares were too lavish for the cause,
those garments were donated to the poor.
 

Templars’ living accommodations were likewise sparse, as each knight was
given a straw mattress, a solitary sheet, and a single blanket (though the
blanket was occasionally replaced with a quilt). Similarly, Templars were
prohibited from bathing without permission from their commander.
 
Perhaps it goes without saying, but it was also expected of each Templar
that they readily give their life to the cause, should it be needed. In fact,
many knights looked forward to the possibility of dying in service, as this
guaranteed them entry into heaven.
 
Similar regulations stressing simplicity included such restrictions as how
loudly they were to pray, and whether they were allowed to stand in prayer.
Notes one writer of their precepts:
 
“You are all to sit during the antiphon and the hymn, whether you are
healthy or sick, so as not to give cause for scandal...[likewise] you
pray observing the just measure in body and spirit, that is, sitting and
standing when provided and with simplicity, in utmost reverence and
without shouting, so that each does not disturb the other.”[16]
 
Other regulations were similar – all to the effect that the Templars would
not embrace fanaticism, which could distract or otherwise cause problems
for the whole order. Instead, each knight was to do all things in moderation.
 
That same sensibility led to their regulations regarding their sins. For
instance, while Templars were prohibited from sleeping with prostitutes,
they were nonetheless commanded that if they did so, it should be in such a
way that no other knight might observe them sinning, so their weakness
wouldn’t cause their peers to falter.
 
While the first regulations regarding these four main points of the Templars
Code of Honor were codified in 1129 (at which time there were roughly
seventy formal regulations, originally written in Latin), it seems quite clear
that even before properly codified, the Templars prided themselves on their
honor, and their adherence to the ethics and conduct of their order.
 

This code, both simple in its use of only four main cardinal virtues, and
pragmatic in its regular adherence to moderation and simplicity, stood out
when compared to other orders and brotherhoods of the age, and may be
part of why it has remained in our consciousness as it has.
 
Many suspect, for instance, that the Freemasons got their start if not directly
from the Knights Templar, then at least indirectly, and were heavily
influenced, at that. Many Illuminati-type conspiracy theories can be traced
back to ideas related to the Knights Templar – who perhaps because of their
code of honor and the intrigue that surrounds their stories – remain in the
forefront of pseudo-historical mythology and stories.
 
We'll examine this relationship in more detail in the chapters to come.


The Knights Templar Legacy
 
Almourol castle in Ribatejo, Portugal
 
There is perhaps no organization so well encapsulated in myth and legend
as the Templars – even some things you may at first not be aware of, but are
no less indebted to the Templars for their origin stories.
 
In particular, Templar treasure lives on in myth and legend Templars are
still considered the forebears of many other secret (or even less secret)
societies today, and we'll look into those claims. Lastly, we'll look a little at
how Templars are currently portrayed in pop culture, both in historical
fiction and in mystery pieces.
 
First, though, let's briefly consider those relics connected to the Templars,
which for many form the basis for the idea of the Templars as keepers of
long-lost treasures.

 
There are several relics in particular that have been connected to the
Templars. Those most notable relics are as follows:
 
The Holy Grail
The Ark of the Covenant
The Shroud of Turin
 
We'll discuss each in more detail in the next chapter, but for now we bring
them to the forefront only to show how the Templars are clearly a part of
popular culture, even today. Each of those three main relics features
prominently in a wide number of myths, and historical fiction and mysteries
we all know. And more come out every year.
 
Part of this is likely the result of the many claims to Templar heritage other
organizations make – either on their own behalf, or in the shadowy corners
of imagination and the internet, where others may theorize connections.
Let's spend a little bit of time examining some of the many organizations
that have been connected, to varying degrees, to the historical thread of the
Knights Templar.
 
We especially want to look at least briefly at two historical arms that now
serve to support much of the legacy of the Knights Templar. First, the
Freemasons, and the many Masonic organizations whose tradition derives at
least in part from the Templars, and second, the many groups which have
taken at least part of their name or legacy from the Templars, even if they
are not historically connected.
 
We'll begin by looking at the Freemasons. While officially the Freemasons
say that no single Masonic organization can claim a direct lineage from the
Knights Templar, it's also immediately obvious that some of the Masonic
orders are patterned after the Templars. Consider this a short introduction to
some of those connections:
 
The Order of DeMolay, an American Masonic youth organization, is
named for the last Grand Master Templar, Jacques de Molay.

The Royal Order of Scotland observes ceremonies and rites to this
day that many consider evidence of a historical Templar-Masonic
lineage. Some reading will soon demonstrate that how far you want to
take this parallel depends on how many inferences you wish to draw.
Edinburgh's Rosslyn Chapel is among the many churches across
Europe whose architecture points both to the Templars and the
Freemasons, though some scholars dispute this.[17] (One piece of
evidence for this is the connection of the Earls of Rosslyn with
Scottish Freemasonry.)
Some legends posit that the excommunicated Scottish king Robert the
Bruce was aided by the Knights in his escape, and this story is part of
the basis for the Royal Order of Scotland, a Masonic organization.
 
If this is an area that interests you, please note that this is only a small
survey of the many ways in which the Freemasons and Templars have been
connected. Entire books have been devoted to the connection, and you
could easily spend years exploring the combination of history and
mythology that make it such a fascinating link.
 
That brings us to the second type of legacy organization – the many groups
that take their name or some of their traditions or rituals from the Templars,
even if they cannot be historically linked. Among the groups that are
connected to the Templars in this way are organizations such as the
following:
 
The Order of the Solar Temple[18]
The Ordo Templi Orientis[19]
The Sovereign Military Order of the Temple of Jerusalem[20]
The Militi Templi Scotia[21]
 
There are many other organizations that likewise try to connect themselves
to the Templars, but the four above are the most prominent, either by these
names or other similar names for the same organizations.
 
That brings us to the biggest piece of the Templar legacy today: how they're
currently portrayed in pop culture.

It's certainly true that many depictions of the Templars in pop culture are
not historically accurate – but that does not mean that these depictions don't
still keep the Knights Templar at the forefront of our collective
consciousness.
In many instances, the Templars are depicted as a secret society still living
somehow in the shadows. Both The DaVinci Code[22] and National
Treasure[23], for instance, made references to the Templars as a shadowy
arm of the Freemasons, obscuring hidden treasures and dark secrets. It's not
uncommon to see them portrayed as an evil secret society.[24]
We can see this pretty clearly if we look at more of the recent books and
movies in which the Knights Templar have been portrayed. For the sake of
brevity, a few ground rules in making this list:
 
1.     We're only including books or movies, as they're by far the most
common mediums for the Templars in current popular culture.
2.     We're only looking at relatively recent releases – this means within the
last 15 years. While there are older references (Monty Python and the
Holy Grail, or the original Indiana Jones movies, for instance),
popular culture tends to move quickly.
 
Even within those restraints, the lists are quite lengthy – and these are only
books or movies that sold relatively well, and does not include all of the
web traffic that references the Templars in some way. In chronological
order, below are some of the best-selling Templar pop culture works
includes amongst other:
 
Crusade of Fire, Katherine Kurtz (2002). Kurtz has also written many
other books with characters and themes in the Templar tradition.
The Da Vinci Code, Dan Brown (2003) and adapted into film (2006)
was an international bestseller, and may have prompted at least in part
the following rush of Templar-related works.
National Treasure (2004) starred Nicolas Cage in his search for the
long-lost Templar treasure.
The Last Templar, Raymond Khoury (2005), and adapted into film in
2009. Again, the lost secrets of the Templar treasure feature
prominently.

Kingdom of Heaven (2005) posits a fictionalized past in which the last
King of Jerusalem was a Templar.
Revenge of the Shadow King, Derek Benz and JS Lewis (2006) offers
one of the more popular theories of the day: That the Templars still
exist today as a shadow organization.
The Templar Legacy, Steve Berry (2006) posits that the Templar
treasure may be close to discovery. We'll come back to this question
in later chapters.
The Wheel of Time series, Robert Jordan writes one of the best-selling
fantasy series of all time, at least in part because of the starring
Children of the Light – who might well be recognized as a
fictionalized version of the Templar Knights.
Knightfall is a current and ongoing History Channel drama which
features the Knights Templar prominently. The History Channel has
also run multiple specials in recent years on the possibilities of the
Templar treasure.
Dragon's Age is an extremely popular game, and features an
organization called Templars, which feature multiple connections to
the Catholic church.
Assassin's Creed, one of the best-selling games of all time, similarly
features the Templars as antagonists to the Assassins. A key point
here is the number of Illuminati conspiracy theories built into the
game.
 
Outside of more recent works looking at the Knights Templar, these are a
few of the older, historic works that are significant because of their place in
popular culture, in chronological order.
 
Ivanhoe, Sir Walter Scott (1820). The villian of the story is a Templar
Knight named Sir Brian de Bois-Gilbert.
The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids, Herman
Melville (1855). Melville, with his wry sense of humor, refers to the
Templars ironically in this short story.
Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975), even if entirely tongue-in-
cheek comedy, was one of the first blockbuster cult classics to really

address the idea of the Holy Grail in more modern pop culture, and as
such, offered a bit of foundation for future works.
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail (1982) seems to be the foundation
for the thought that they Templars discovered the Holy Grail and took
it with them to Scotland. We'll return to this thought later.
Foucault's Pendulum, Umberto Eco (1988) was one of the first major
works to feature the Knights Templar mythology, particularly in
reference to their history as the keepers and defenders of the Holy
Grail.
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989) likewise focuses on a
fictionalized version of the Knights Templar as defenders of the Holy
Grail.
 
Again, though, this is a very short list, and serves only as an overview to
reinforce the point that Templars remain at the center of many popular
historical fictions and conspiracy theories. The popularity of programs and
works examining the long-lost and uncertain Templar treasure are also a
testament to their place in popular culture.
 
We'll address the possibility of treasure more fully in the chapters ahead,
beginning with our next chapter, as it focuses on the Knights Templar relics.


Relics of the Knights Templar
 
This brings us to the many relics of the Knights Templar, each of which
have its place both in history and folklore or mythology, and each of which
has been connected in various ways to the idea of much larger treasures.
 
We're particularly interested in a handful of relics:
 
The Holy Grail
The Shroud of Turin
The Ark of the Covenant
 
We'll explore the mythology of the Templar's lost account logs, as well as
how they may be connected to the idea of hidden Templar treasure.
 
The Holy Grail
 

 
Ideas as to what, precisely, the Holy Grail is vary a bit, but there are two
main ideas:
 
The Grail is a cup or chalice, dating back to King Arthur's court.
The Grail is an idea, and may represent the womb, particularly
combined with the theory that Jesus fathered children with Mary
Magdalene.
 
Some pieces of mythos combine both ideas, but in general, stories of The
Holy Grail point to one idea or the other.
 
The more common idea is that The Holy Grail was, in fact, an actual
chalice, and the Templars found it. From there, theories diverge. Some
theorists say that the Holy Grail went with a group of Templars to Scotland
in 1307[25]; others argue that it went to Spain; others yet argue the Templars
found it, and it remains hidden with a greater yet undiscovered treasure.[26]

 
We'll return to these claims when we look more deeply at the idea of a lost
treasure later on.
 
Lastly, a final theory suggests that the story of the Grail, rather than the
Grail itself, is of importance, as the story may offer a coded description of
the Ark of the Covenant.[27] We'll discuss the Ark of the Covenant in more
depth shortly.
 
The Shroud of Turin
 
 
That brings us to the Shroud of Turin. Interestingly, at least one theory
posits that the term ‘Holy Grail’ actually refers to the Shroud of Turin[28],
but that is clearly a minority opinion.
 
As to what the Shroud of Turin itself is, however, there is much less
controversy, as everyone seems to agree. While culturally it is presented as

the burial shroud of Jesus, most various dating methods place its origin in
the middle ages.[29]
 
While experts can disagree with whether or not the cloth is, in fact, the
burial shroud of Jesus of Nazareth, its place in folklore and church history
is less up for debate. Multiple popes, in fact, have offered a blessing of the
Shroud as a holy item and as “a reflection of the Gospel.”[30]
 
The Shroud of Turin is perhaps more substantially connected to the
Templars than the Holy Grail, in that there is more significant historic
evidence that it was in their possession.
 
For instance, it is known that the shroud's first public display was in 1357,
in Geoffrey of Charney's window[31]. Geoffrey of Charney was the nephew
of Templar Geoffroi de Charney, who was burned at the stake with the last
Grand Master Templar, Jacques De Molay.[32]
 
Templar historian Barbara Frale has also argued that the shroud was in the
Templar's possession as early as 1204.[33]
 
Similarly, Templar paintings such as the Templecombe painting,[34] have
been shown to be a copy of the Turin Shroud, and consequently can serve
as evidence that the shroud was in Templar hands at the time of the
Templecombe painting.[35] The painting has been dated to 1280, offering
further evidence that the shroud may be older than currently accepted dating
gives it credit.[36]
 
The Ark of the Covenant
 

 
That brings us to the final of the big three relics, the Ark of the Covenant.
 
Originally described in the biblical account of Exodus, the Ark of the
Covenant is the large wooden box in which the Ten Commandments were
kept during the Israelite flight from Egypt. Numerous theories exist as to
what may have happened to the AArk, but several of them include the
Templars, and we'll examine those theories briefly here, as each has
relevance to the idea of hidden Templar treasure.
 
A wide array of potential locations for the Ark of the Covenant have been
discussed (including Mount Nebo, in Israel; Ethiopia; Southern Africa;
quite a few places across Europe; the United States; even Egypt), but here
we'll discuss a few theories that involve the Templar's involvement with the
Ark of the Covenant.
 
One theory maintains that the Templars knew where the Ark was, at a
location in Ethiopia. Graham Hancock, in his book The Sign and the Seal,
for instance, proposes that the Templars uncovered secrets of the Masons
when they were occupying Solomon's temple, and that knowledge led them
to the Ark.[37] To bolster this theory, in June 2009 the Orthodox Church of

Ethiopia announced that they had the Ark and were going to reveal it.
Sadly, the Ark was never shown, so it's hard to draw too much from this.[38]
 
Of course, Hancock's book also mentions another possible location for the
Ark of the Covenant, again courtesy of the Templars: Chartes Cathedral, in
France. Author Louis Charpentier particularly favors this theory – that the
Templars found the Ark and moved it to the cathedral.[39]
 
Similar theories involving the Templars abound, and  a brief overview will
suffice here. Author Karen Ralls, for instance, believed the Templars took
the Ark from Jerusalem to France, and it has since been moved from France
to the United States.[40] Other prominent historical authors believe that the
Templars had a hand in moving the Ark from Jerusalem to either Rome
(where it may have burned)[41] or even to England.[42]
 
The Lost Account Logs
 
That brings us to the lost account logs, how they relate to Templar banking
and accounting, and how they may relate to the relics and other lost
treasures. You’ll recall that central to many of the theories of lost Templar
treasure is the notion that all the Templar accounting went missing when the
Templars were shut down and the Knights rounded up.
 
The Templars had an extraordinary banking and accounting system in their
heyday, which we'll cover in more detail in the next chapter, and had the
account logs been found, they might well have told a fascinating story about
all of the properties and prize possessions under Templar control throughout
the Middle Ages. Moreover, they might well have contained clues to where
these treasures and items of tremendous value were stored, and how.
 
Alas, the account logs were never found.


Banking System of the Knights Templar
 
Wondering about the lost account logs serves as a wonderful introduction to
the intricate and well-developed banking system the Knights quickly
developed in their 200-year reign. In fact, it's not an understatement to say
that without their successfully developed banking system, there's no way
they could have risen to prominence the way they did.
 
In particular, their banking system gave them several advantages and
additional prestige over other orders of knights and helped them stand out.
First, it helped them get around church rules on wealth and interest that
other orders had not yet been able to sidestep, and they culled favor with the
church to a degree that others did not achieve. Second, their banking system
contributed directly to their rapid expansion and development of wealth, as
they immediately stood out as a much safer option for wealthy benefactors
and joining knights. Third, this rapid expansion of wealth and improved
standing also allowed them to rapidly expand their power and their
property, such that France's King Philip IV had very good reason to believe
that they could end his reign, should they so choose, which likely
contributed to his proactive attack on them.
 
Working Around Church Rules
 
At the time of the Templars, the Church prohibited the issuing of credit, but
the Templars found an innovative way around this. They charged rent
instead – which, though the same in practice, was different in language. As
Marzuni put it, “Since they weren't allowed to charge interest, they charged
rent instead.”[43]
 
In practice, this meant pilgrims would deposit valuables such as deeds,
gold, or other prized possessions with the Templar house nearest them
before they began on their journey. In return, they were given a letter
describing the holdings they had placed in trust, which they then carried
with them on the pilgrimage. As they traveled, they would then stop at other

Templar houses along the route, where they could withdraw from their
account, so to speak, based on what was written in the original letter. This,
in turn, meant the pilgrims didn't have to carry their valuables, and as a
result were a bit safer, and in exchange, the Templars were able to charge a
holding fee, allowing them to increase their power.
 
As more and more pilgrims took advantage of this Templar system, it also
helped insulate the Order from church regulations, which – as we noted
previously – forbade such lending practices. Quite quickly, however, the
Templars became so big and so useful that the Church looked the other way
and ignored such financial transgressions.
 
This innovation and creativity may have helped endear them to
philanthropic nobles, who in turn gave large gifts. Other nobles (once they
had a male heir to their estate) joined the Templars themselves in the cause
of the Crusades.
 
Rapid Expansion of Wealth
 
The Templars gained additional wealth from new members. As new knights
joined the Templars, they were forced to take an oath of poverty. At that
time, they often (especially if they were wealthy) donated large amounts of
their original holdings, or if they had no male heir, they sometimes donated
everything they had.
 
The Templars also gained additional finances because nobles who were not
joining the Templars nonetheless trusted the Order and the wealth and
power they already represented, and so if such a noble were making a
pilgrimage to the Holy Land, they frequently entrusted their holdings to the
Templars – who in turn, as previously mentioned, worked around Church
rules to charge a little bit of “rent,” meaning that even if all of the holdings
were returned to the noble upon their return from their journey, the
Templars still profited from the deal.
 

And if the noble didn't return? Frequently those holdings were bequeathed
to the Order. Before long, the majority of the Knights Templar operation
was devoted not to battle, but to controlling their economic interests. Again,
they were too large for the Church to chastise, and so the Templar empire
and influence continued to expand.
 
Rapid Expansion of Property and Power
 
 

In fact, by 1150 – only thirty years in – the mission of the Order itself had
changed from one of protecting and guarding those on their pilgrimage, to
one of protecting those pilgrims' possessions.
 
Through the letters of credit issued to pilgrims and the generosity of nobles
– both those joining the Order and those going on their pilgrimages – the
Templars continued to gain, not only gold and other valuables, but also
property and in influence. As noted earlier, they quickly became too large
for the Church to take too close an interest in their financial status, as the
Church needed their services too, and they had the additional advantage of
being the most respected of the Orders of the day, meaning nobles wishing
to do something pious were most likely to donate to the Templars.
 
Consider that by the time they began to falter, they already owned the entire
island of Cyprus, and you have some idea just how powerful the Templars
became.[44] All of the historical evidence, including the Knights’ role in the
coup on Cyprus that resulted in King Henry II abdicating the throne, and
the debt to the Templars that King Philip inherited upon taking the throne
from his father in France, show that by the time the Templars fell, Kings
across Europe had good reason to fear them.[45]
 
Account Logs Lost
 
Of course, when the Templars fell, much of the information that might have
told us more about their holdings, power, and wealth was lost – including
their famed account logs. Without the account logs, it's impossible to know
exactly what riches and titles the Templars held at the time of their
disbanding, and given that when Philip and others began rounding up the
Templars on charges of heresy, the vast majority of the Knights
disappeared, it's impossible to know what treasures and valuables were lost,
or where.
 
What we do know is still substantial. For instance, we know they supported
up to 4,000 horses at a time, they owned huge swathes of land (both in the
Middle East and in Europe), they built castles and churches, they ran

vineyards and farms, they had extensive import/export and manufacturing
arms, they ran an extensive fleet of ships, and they were for all intents and
purposes Europe's largest standing army at several points – but that doesn't
mean there isn’t more information, including quite relevant specifics, that
was lost with the account logs.
 
Even without the account logs, there are plenty of things we still know
about how the Templar banking system worked – but with the account logs,
we could say definitely what treasures the Templars held, and were they
were kept, when their empire fell.
 
Of course, the absence of that information has led to many theories, which
is a tremendous part of the mystique surrounding the Templars.
 
Without the account logs, we can only theorize as to whether or not the
Templars held the Holy Grail at the time of their dissolution, or the Ark of
the Covenant at the time of their dissolution. Without records, we can only
guess whether or not the Templars held vast hidden treasures, gold, and
other priceless artifacts. And without the account logs, it's even more
difficult to speculate as to what treasures might have gone with whom – and
where – when Philip and others came for the Knights Templar.
 
All of this complicates the hunt for their lost treasures, and we'll look at that
in more detail in the coming two chapters.


Knights Templar Treasures: Legend or Reality?
 
That brings us back to the possibility of Templar treasures, still hidden
away. This may well be the biggest reason the Templars have remained so
popular in our current mythology, and it not only offers an array of fun
mysteries, but also a countless number of avenues for further investigation.
Let's investigate further and see what more we can uncover.
 
We'll begin by looking again and a little more closely at the circumstances
surrounding the fall of the Templar empire, and consider just how many
Knights may have fled and or otherwise disappeared at that time, taking
their secrets with them. Second, we'll take a closer look at those account
logs, and some theories about what sorts of information may have been
included in them, as well as a few ideas as to where the account logs may
have gone.
 
Third, we'll look at some of the scholarly interpretations of the historical
likelihood for lost treasures, to help put some of the puzzle pieces in
perspective. Fourth, having taken an overview of some of the scholarly
positions, we'll begin cataloging some of the more common current theories
as to where and how treasure may have disappeared.
 
We'll look briefly at one of the most common theoretical landing spots for a
Templar treasure: Nova Scotia. We'll also apply the same questions we ask
about Nova Scotia in determining the likelihood of a treasure being located
(or ever found) in a few other potential treasure locations.
 
Lastly, then, we'll return to our original question: Is the Templar treasure a
legend, or a reality?
 
Disappearing Knights
 
As we've noted previously, when Philip began rounding up the Templar
Knights in France, and as they were arraigned on similar charges of heresy

in other locations, only a small percentage of the Knights were captured and
tried. Instead, the vast majority seem to have disappeared. Let's look a little
bit at some of the numbers.
 
At the time of Philip's attack on the Templars, there were at least 3,000
Knights in France alone. Up to 150 of them were tried, and this only
accounted for somewhere in the neighborhood of 5% of the Knights in
France. At that time, the Templars controlled 15,000 Templar houses across
Europe and the Middle East, as well as a fleet of ships, and numbered in the
tens of thousands of men. Even the official dissolution of the Knights
Templar via the papal bull cannot have accounted for what happened to all
these men.
 
We have stories for some; in Portugal, for instance, they changed their name
to the Order of Christ and continued to do business. In Iberia, they were
officially swallowed by the Order of Montessa, and elsewhere in Europe
their assets were officially ordered over to the Knights Hospitaller. But how
many Knights, and what treasures, might have fallen through the cracks,
either by choice or by accident?
 
So where might all of those Knights who are unaccounted for have
disappeared to? It's likely that some of them simply remained at home, and
somehow weren't swept up in the mania, whether through courtesy, their
connections, or dumb luck. But it seems likely that others would have left
their homes and fled to places where they were less likely to be recognized
as a Templar – and consequently less likely to be arrested and tried for
heresy.
 
There are a few theories as to where those Knights may have gone, and
we'll address them each when we start looking more deeply at theories as to
where treasure might have gone.
 
The following are some of the most highly considered theoretical locations
of a Knights Templar treasure:
 
Nova Scotia, via the Templars

Scotland, via the Templars or the Freemasons
France, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Portugal, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Spain, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Germany, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Elsewhere in Europe, via the Templars or the Freemasons
United States, via the Freemasons
Egypt, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Elsewhere in Northern Africa, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Israel, via the Templars or the Freemasons
Elsewhere in the Middle East, via the Templars or the Freemasons
 
 
While a few have theorized other potential resting places for Templar
treasures, those locations in the list above are by far the most commonly
posited locations, and likewise seem most plausible.
 
Lost Account Logs
 
That brings us back to the lost account logs, then – and what information
researchers have theorized was in the logs, as well as speculation as to
where the logs might have gone.

 
First, it stands to reason that the account logs suffered the same fate as the
Knights who were responsible for them. If the logs were overseen by
Knights who were captured, tried, and executed, for instance, it seems
likely that the account logs were simply destroyed. That said, however,
we've already established that the number of Knights tried and executed
was a very small percentage of the total Knights, so it seems unlikely that
the account logs were lost in that way.
 
As a result, it seems more likely that whichever Knights were responsible
for the account logs likely took them with them when they disappeared,
which brings us to the conclusion that the account logs likely went to one of
the locations in which the runaway Knights resettled – so we're left in a
remarkable conundrum. These are important records, and those in charge of
them would have known that. The account logs are likely needed to know
exactly what treasures the Templars controlled at the time – and yet the
records may well have gone into hiding with the treasures they describe.
 
As a result, the account logs are a source of rich and varied conjecture.
Some scholars have suggested that they were taken on by the Freemasons,
who had begun to form in the later years of the Templars. Others have
suggested they were destroyed – to protect Templar secrets. It's our
suspicion, however, that they were taken with the hidden treasures that
remain to this day undiscovered – but this is a matter of theory and
conjecture. Before we begin chasing down that lead, let's first consider what
information might have been in the logs.
 
To begin with, we know the logs contained a list of valuable possessions,
and it seems likely they also contained information about where the items
were stored, who the benefactor was, and possibly a description of the item
or holding. In essence, the account logs were at the very least an inventory
of all the riches held by the Templars, and so whoever held the account logs
likely had a fair claim to whatever treasures were listed in the logs,
especially after the Templars fell.
 

And so finding the account logs would be a tremendous first step in finding
whatever treasures may still exist, as it would help provide a historical
context – a starting point, so to speak – for those treasures. Hopefully the
logs have not been buried away with the treasures themselves.
 
Scholarly Interpretation?
 
 

But as to those treasures – do scholars even agree on their existence, or is
this merely a pipe dream of conspiracy addicts and treasure hounds? As rich
as the Templars once were, does a Templar treasure even still exist?
 
On that point, scholars seem pretty divided. Some argue that vast riches and
wealth once controlled by the Templars have yet to be found. Others argue
that everything once controlled by Templars has since been divided and
subdivided, time and time again, so it is all in the hands of private
individuals. Most scholars argue that the truth is somewhere in between,
that some of the Templar treasure fell into private hands, but some of it may
still be missing, unaccounted for – and waiting for someone to unearth it
from its hiding place.
 
We can begin by considering the rich legends and stories of the Templar
treasure, as discussed previously. Clearly, there are lots of researchers,
scholars, investigators, and authors who believe that the Templar treasure is
still missing, or at the very least, the possibility of such makes a great story..
 
As you can see, especially if you do more digging (and we highly
encourage you to make use of the reference section to address other
questions you may still have) regardless of your position, you can likely
find at least a few scholars who will support a version of your interpretation
of history. The treasure could very well exist – or not
 
Some of the Most Common Theories
 
Keeping that in mind, let's look at some of the most common theories:
 
The Templar treasure never existed.
The Templar treasure existed, but fell into private hands when the
Knights fell from power.
The Templar treasure existed, and some fell into private hands, but
some remained in the hands of a shadow Templar organization.
Parts of the Templar treasure were ferreted away to different locations
as the Knights went into hiding with the account logs.

The entirety of the Templar treasure remained in shadow Templar
hands, and remained in one location.
 
Let's look at each of those theories in turn, and then we can better evaluate
how likely each might seem; we'll rank each on a scale of 1-9 (in honor of
the nine original Knights), with 1 being least likely and 9 most likely.
 
1. The Templar treasure never existed. This theory posits that by the time
Philip came for the Knights, what remained of the Templar treasures had
already been spent or otherwise worked its way into private hands, and was
no longer under the control of the organization. Very few people believe in
this theory, however, because of how suddenly the Templars were forced to
disband and disappear with such haste. The Templars did not have years
and years of slow decline, which might have made such a possibility more
likely. [Likelihood: 1 Knight, as it wasn't as if the Templars fell over time,
or had the opportunity to squander their wealth before being disbanded.]
 
2. The Templar treasure existed, but fell into private hands when the
Knights fell from power. This theory suggests that when Philip came for the
Knights, he (or other powerful people) knew where the Templar treasure
was held, and at the time of the mass arrests, the treasure was seized. This,
too, is a theory taken by few, as it seems likely that if the treasure fell into
private hands, at some point in the hundreds of years since we would have
heard of it.  Philip wasn't exactly modest, and such a haul would have been
something almost anyone would think worth bragging about. [Likelihood: 2
Knights, especially given the small percentage of Templars who were
rounded up. The likelihood that Philip (or anyone else) could have gotten
their hands on the treasure seems slim.]
 
3. The Templar treasure existed, and some fell into private hands, but some
of the treasure remained hidden, courtesy of a shadow Templar
organization. This theory makes more sense to most scholars and historians
familiar with the period, as, while many Templars were arrested, most were
not. It’s reasonable to think that in the chaos, some of the treasures were
likely lost and/or fell into private hands, but it also seems likely that some
remained hidden with those who escaped. Additionally, some of the

Templars arrested, tried, and executed were elder Templars, making it more
likely that at least some had access to the account logs and information
about various treasures, which they may have tried to barter for their
freedom. [Likelihood: 7 Knights, especially as Even if the vast majority of
the Templars were brave, strong men, even one Knight with knowledge of
the treasures and desire to preserve his own life would have been enough
for this scenario to have taken place.]
 
4. Parts of the Templar treasure were ferreted away to different locations as
the Knights went into hiding with the account logs. This theory, too, has its
fair share of fans, as again, the vast majority of the Order were not arrested,
and it’s likely that many of the most powerful Templars – those who would
know the locations of treasures, escaped with what treasure they were able
to take with them. Indeed, smaller treasures would have been more easily
transported and hidden. [Likelihood: 8 Knights. While theory #3 almost
certainly also took place, the sheer quantity of Knights – and the extent of
their powers and treasures – makes it almost certain that Templar treasure
was ferreted away during the raids.]
 
5. The entirety of the Templar treasure remained in shadowy Templar hands,
all in one location. While there are certainly proponents of this theory,
when we consider just how much treasure the Templars would have been
responsible for at the time of their official disbanding, it is unlikely that it
could have been kept together unless a) very few people knew about it, b)
none of those people were captured, and c) the treasure didn't need to be
moved at any time when the Order was under great scrutiny, as moving
what must have been such a large treasure would never have escaped
attention. [Likelihood: 1 Knight. As noted above, the number of things that
would have had to occur for this to take place simply seem too great –
though it's certainly the basis for some pieces of fiction.]
 
As you can see, arguments can be made for each theory, though some are
certainly stronger than others. For instance, theory #1, which posits that the
Templars had no treasure left by the time they were disbanded, seems
incredibly unlikely, given that an organization as large as the Templars
would require significantly more time to erode all of its resources. When

the Templars fell, their organization was still rather strong. Their strength at
the time, after all, was part of why Philip feared them. Similarly, theory #5,
which suggests that the entirety of the treasure remained together under the
control of a shadowy Templar organization, likewise seems improbable,
given the upheaval when Philip had arrested what Knights he could. It’s
unlikely that amidst that chaos, such large-scale organization was still
possible.
 
Possible Treasure Location: Nova Scotia, Canada
 
One frequently suggested location for a Templar treasure is in Nova Scotia,
on Oak Island. As the theory goes, a group of Templars escaped France
with 18 boats just as Philip issued the order for the Knights Templar's
capture and questioning. While many scholars suggest the boats headed to
Scotland, others say they made the journey across the Atlantic to Nova
Scotia.[46]
 
This theory is also mentioned in the film National Treasure (2004), which
has kept it at the forefront of popular culture ever since[47], and is a theory
we'll address in more depth in the following chapter – when we'll look
especially at whether or not Nova Scotia is a plausible location for the
Templar treasure, and if so, where and how might it be hidden.
 
Other Possible Treasure Locations
 
Let's return briefly to our previous list, so we can consider the theory
behind each potential location.
 
3.     Nova Scotia, via the Templars
4.     Scotland, via the Templars or the Freemasons
5.     France, via the Templars or the Freemasons
6.     Portugal, via the Templars or the Freemasons
7.     Spain, via the Templars or the Freemasons
8.     Germany, via the Templars or the Freemasons
9.     Elsewhere in Europe, via the Templars or the Freemasons

10. United States, via the Freemasons
11. Egypt, via the Templars or the Freemasons
12. Elsewhere in Northern Africa, via the Templars or the Freemasons
13. Israel, via the Templars or the Freemasons
14. Elsewhere in the Middle East, via the Templars or the Freemasons
 
Let’s look next at Scotland. As mentioned previously, the idea is that a
group of Templars escaped just before Philip's order in France, and with a
group of 18 boats escaped to Scotland.[48] From there, there are several
locations that are potential Templar treasure locations, which we'll also
address a little more in the next chapter.
 
There are likewise rumors that Templar treasure might still be hidden in
France. After all, as we noted previously, in France only a small number of
the Knights were actually arrested, questioned, and charged; and the vast
majority of the Knights may have been able to simply lay low if they chose.
As a result, more than one researcher has speculated that some of the
Templar treasure may have remained hidden in plain sight.
 
Similarly, as the Templars simply changed their name in Portugal,
becoming known as the Knights of the Christ, rather than completely
disbanding. Thus, Portugal has been another proposed location for Templar
treasure. In Spain/Iberia, too, they did not completely disband, but rather
were swallowed by the Order of Montessa. Isn't it possible that some of
their treasure was likewise obscured with the name changes?
 
In Germany, less is known of what became of the Templars, but there's a
rich tradition of hidden treasures in what became Prussia and then
Germany, especially given the number of medieval castles and the rich
history of the Black Forest region. More than a few scholars and researchers
have hinted that some of the treasures of lore in the region may be in some
way traced back to the Templars.
 
Other locations have also been put forth as potential treasure locations
across Europe, but there seems to be less to go on in each case, so we are
not including them here. If this is something that interests you, however,

there are plenty of resources available, and with some good close reading,
other places may strike you as potential treasure locations.
 
Of course, other theories have suggested that the Templar treasure, or at
least part of it, may not have remained in Nova Scotia or Europe at all, but
rather, courtesy of the Freemasons, ended up in America. While these
theories have been hinted at in numerous bits of pop culture, no clear theory
seems to have won out. Instead, multiple theories (involving the
Freemasons, the Illuminati, and other secret organizations ­– with competing
claims involving the founders of America) seem to have their own
followings. Where good theory devolves into conspiracy theory, however, is
less clear, so if this something you choose to investigate further, tread
carefully.
 
Other creative theories as to what may have happened with the Templar
treasures also persist. For instance, given the influence the Templars once
had in the Middle East, and the number of houses they once ran, more than
one scholar has theorized that Templar treasures may have fallen into
Muslim hands, either intentionally or accidentally, and as a result, ended up
in northern Africa. Most commonly, these theories have the treasures
ending up in Egypt, with other collections of holy treasures, but some
scholars do imagine the Templar treasure in other locations across northern
Africa.
 
Similarly, some scholars and researchers have suggested that Templar
treasure may have remained in Israel or elsewhere in the Middle East, either
as Templar influence retreated in the later Crusades, or after their
dissolution, taken there by Knights still well connected in the area. They
may be in Muslim hands. This, too, fits with many other theories
surrounding some of the holy treasures and relics that were at one time in
the Templar treasure
 
We know that, officially, the Knights Templar who were not charged and
executed were ordered to hand over property of the Templars to either the
Hospitallers (via the papal bull) or King Philip (by Philip's orders). But the
Templars had long been a secretive organization, and were well-organized.

Given that they had no history with the Hospitallers, and that their history
with Philip was less than amicable, it’s entirely possible that some treasure
was secreted away, stashed, and hid.
 
Legend or Reality?
 
 
As we noted, scholars cannot seem to agree on what may have happened to
the Templar treasures. We don’t have proof of much, and yet common sense
does give us a few starting points. It seems clear, for instance, that the
Templars still held treasure at the time of their dissolution, and we know
that only a small percentage of the Knights were captured, tried, and

executed. Consequently, it’s likely that at least some of the treasures
disappeared with the Knights that went into hiding or fled their homelands.
 
As a result, it seems likely that the Templar treasure is part legend and part
reality – and this makes it a tantalizing mystery. It could be real. It could be
found.


On the Trail of The Knights Templar Treasure
Today
 
Since we’ve shown that it’s likely that some of the treasure was saved, we
will proceed under the following assumptions:
 
The Templar treasure is real, rather than a legend, and still exists
today; and
The Templar treasure is hidden, and still waiting to be found.
 
Let’s look at potential locations, and consider where such a treasure might
be hidden.
 
Nova Scotia
 

Oak Island, Nova Scotia, Canada - By Richard McCully -
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=25260436
 
Let's start with Oak Island, Nova Scotia, as this is one of the potential
treasure locations that has most excited treasure hunters for years.
 
One of the most popular Templar theories suggests that a group of Knights
were somehow given advance warning of Philip's raids in France in 1307.
They were able to load up a group of 18 galley boats in La Rochelle, and
sail out of trouble. This theory was first posited by The Holy Blood and The
Holy Grail, but has been furthered by numerous scholars since.[49]
 
Scholars disagree on where those boats went, but the two main theories
suggest that they either sailed to Scotland – or to the new world, landing in
Oak Island, Nova Scotia.
 
Strange as it may be to imagine Templars sailing across the unknown
Atlantic in the early 14th century and landing in Nova Scotia, there's
actually quite a bit of evidence to suggest that's exactly where the Templar
treasure may have landed.
 
Oak Island has long been a source of mystery and speculation, rumored to
hold numerous treasures – and the Templars are a commonly presumed
source of that treasure. Let's look at Oak Island a little more closely.
 
Treasure hunters know Oak Island well – particularly a location on the
small island called the Money Pit, which has been excavated numerous
times and yet still seems to hold secrets.[50] In fact, books describing
theories of treasure on Oak Island go back as far as 1863 – with somewhere
in the neighborhood of 60-80 books now containing at least references to
the place.[51] Even the History Channel has addressed the idea of treasure on
Oak Island, having run several different mini-series related to the topic in
recent years.
 
Author Steven Sora and others have theorized that the Money Pit was
originally dug by the Knights Templar, and that the 90-foot coded stone

found there was part of an elaborate system of ciphers and codes detailing
how to unearth the treasure.[52] As their theory goes, Oak Island may have
been the final Templar resting place for the Holy Grail, the Ark of the
Covenant, or more. Dennis King makes a similar argument, except he
suggests that rather than the Templars bringing the treasure to Oak Island,
their descendant Freemasons did.[53]
 
In any case, the arguments for treasure on Oak Island are many. Stories
surrounding the Money Pit, especially, date back as far as the late 1790's,
when a settler named McGinnis found a softer spot of ground and small
depression and, with the help of a few others, began digging. As a result of
local superstitions, however, this first trio abandoned the dig after only 30
feet of excavation.[54]
 
Through the years that followed, other groups took up the excavation, each
making slightly more progress and adding to the lore with their explorations
and findings. Following the McGinnis dig, the next efforts were by the
Onslow Company, who managed to dig to a depth of 90 feet, during which
time they found other signs – such as log layers, coconut fibers, charcoal,
and putty – of work that didn't make sense on the island unless something
had been buried there by outsiders. Somewhere around 80 or 90 feet down,
they also found a large stone full of coded symbols.[55] Unfortunately, while
they were in the process of excavating, the pit flooded. 
 
The Truro Company tried next. While they were able to supplement the
Onslow Company findings – reportedly even finding a spruce layer
somewhere near 100 feet deep, followed by oak, some metal, more spruce,
and then 7 feet of clay – they too had issues with flooding.
 
An interesting discovery by the Truro Company was the existence of five
“finger drains” – a section of beach nearby had been excavated and a series
of layers, as well as these five drains, were discovered. It's not clear what
else they may have found, as little record of their expedition seems to have
survived, but a tunnel is also mentioned.[56]
 

In 1861, the Money Pit claimed its first known fatalities, as a group known
as the Oak Island Association had troubles with equipment. An unidentified
individual died when a boiler exploded. During the course of their work, the
original chamber also seems to have collapsed – a potential booby trap
protecting the treasure beneath.[57] Following explorations seemed only
minimally more fruitful – though one group found a piece of parchment
containing either “vi” or “wi” on it, as well as what might have been three
exit tunnels.[58] Further excavations of course continued, but with little to
show for them except occasional worker deaths.[59]
 
Numerous excavations and explorations have been made in the years since,
but nothing new has been found – though if the original treasure chamber
did indeed collapse because of a booby trap, this also makes some sense.
 
Instead, scholars have mostly focused on what is already known about the
Money Pit. First, several researchers have suggested that the original
chamber may have been booby trapped to flood and collapse, making it
nearly impossible to determine what may have been stashed away. The
coconut fibers, in particular, are interesting, as coconut palms do not grow
in Canada – suggesting that coconuts were brought to the island somehow.
[60] Similarly, while numerous experts have looked at the stone retrieved
from the pit, no one has been able to decipher it, and so whatever secrets it
may have offered remain unknown.[61] Complicating matters, the location of
the stone is no longer known.[62]
 
As with any treasure theory, there are also plenty of experts willing to say
that there may be natural explanations for the cavern, the Money Pit, and
the salt water flooding, meaning these indications may be intriguing, but not
as indicative of a potential treasure location as many believe.
 
Let's look more closely at the possibility that the cavern, the Money Pit, and
the salt water flooding were all naturally caused. We should begin with the
accounts of the cavern that were never substantiated: neither the five finger
drains nor the early claimed tunnel have ever been proven to exist by later
explorers, including multiple geologists.[63] Similarly, tests run by more
recent explorers, including a scientific study conducted by the Woods Hole

Oceanographic Institution, seem to support the idea that any flooding in the
cavern was not the result of booby traps, as early expeditions suspected, but
rather natural tidal pressures interacting with the island's freshwater tables.
Dye tests run in 1995 seemed to confirm this, and the five finger drains
have likewise been argued not to be representative of a booby trap, but
instead the remnants of salt works on the island from years prior.[64]
Similarly, the ease with which the limestone bedrock of the island erodes
would explain the frequent cave-ins and other issues excavators and other
explorers had. Geologic expeditions in more recent years have shown that
the island itself is littered with underground caverns and caves, making it
more likely that the Money Pit was a natural land feature – the result of a
sinkhole.
 
Furthermore, if the Money Pit is simply an old sinkhole, the softer materials
that filled the sinkhole back in would make it appear as though it had been
recently dug, as some early expeditions claimed. Accordingly, the wood and
other things found in the pit may well have blown there via various storms,
and then decomposed at different rates, resulting in the appearance of
wooden layers. Similar sinkhole structures have been found in the area,
leading many to suspect that the Money Pit is a natural feature. Of course,
this still doesn't explain the coconut palm fibers.[65]
 
There are many who believe that Nova Scotia may have been a resting
place for the Templar treasure, including such priceless treasures as the Ark
of the Covenant and the Holy Grail.[66] Still, plenty of researchers have
serious doubts.
 
That brings us to other problem with Nova Scotia as a theoretical resting
place for the Templars: not everyone believes Nova Scotia is a plausible
destination for the eighteen galleys. As noted historian Helen Nicholson
argues,
 
“The Templars did have ships to carry personnel, pilgrims and
supplies across the Mediterranean between the West and East and
back, but if the Hospital after 1312 is any guide they did not have
more than four galleys (warships) and few other ships, and if they

needed more they hired them. They certainly could not spare ships to
indulge in world exploration ... [T]he records of the port of La
Rochelle show that the Templars were exporting wine by ship. This
was not a fleet in any modern sense: again, those would have been
transport vessels rather than warships, and the Templars probably
hired them as they needed them, rather than buying their own. ... The
ships would have been very small by modern standards, too shallow
in draught and sailing too low in the water to be able to withstand the
heavy waves and winds of the open Atlantic, and suited for use only
in the relatively shallow waters of the continental shelf. What was
more, they could not carry enough water to be at sea for long
periods.”[67]
 
She's not alone in that assessment, either. Numerous other scholars and
historians have argued, instead, that the eighteen galleys were much better
equipped to sail to Scotland – which is where we'll search next.
 
Scotland
 

Rosslyn chapel, Scotland
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=554387
 

Many scholars and researchers believe that if the Templars did sail to
Scotland, and their treasure remained there, then the most likely place for it
would be Rosslyn Chapel. Though Rosslyn wasn't built until 1446,
designed by Sir William Sinclair (or St Clair, depending on the source), it
was built in a way that incorporated a great deal of Freemasonry
architecture. As the Freemasons are believed to have descended from the
Templar tradition[68] many believe the Freemasons – or at least a portion of
the Freemasons – kept the Templar secrets.
 
Of additional relevance to Rosslyn's connection with the Templars is that
Sir William Sinclair came from a family connected to the Templars, and
Rosslyn is supposedly designed or at least in part based on the designs of
Solomon's Temple – which, as we know, was the Templars' first base.
 
Similarly, the chapel is also well known for two other major pieces of
theory. First, Rosslyn is unusual in the number of pre-Christian carvings,
many of which seemingly connect to a more pagan history. Some scholars
suspect this may suggest the Templars, in that the Templars were sometimes
seen as a body on the fringe of Church organization and doctrine. Secondly,
scholars also believe that Rosslyn was originally designed as a much larger
building, and what was finally built was initially intended only as a choral
nave.
 
Some scholars believe that the Templars were most interested in the
mysteries of Solomon's Temple – and treasure – and not their stated original
aim of protecting Christian pilgrims. These people believe that at the very
least portions, if not all of the treasures, were moved to Scotland (or
elsewhere) after the arrests in France. This supposition is supported by bits
of evidence that the previously mentioned eighteen galleys were real, and
they may well have been loaded with treasure, and they may well have
landed in Scotland. In particular, it's believed that Gerard of Villiers led the
expedition – though from there, theories vary a little. Eighteenth century
author George Frederick Johnson, for instance, claimed he had evidence of
the Templars in Scotland,[69] but one of his men claimed the Scottish landing
of the Templars took place on the Isle of Mull. No one seems to quite agree

on how the Templar treasure might have ended up at Rosslyn – only that it
seems like a likely site if it did end up in Scotland, which seems probable.
 
Other scholars have suggested Robert the Bruce was involved in the
Templar landing in Scotland. As the theory goes, the exiled Templars may
have helped the Scots fight the English at Bannockburn, as various oral
histories of that battle have agreed that the Scots were aided by a force of
unknown fighters. It seems possible that those unknown fighters were
Templars.
 
Of course, even if we don't buy the Bannockburn tale, as some don't, it is
clear that the Templars had a presence in Scotland even before they
officially fell, as Midlothian was a Templar house from early on.
Furthermore, Midlothian is relatively close to Rosslyn[70] – another point
that many researchers say suggests the likelihood that Templars may have
hid treasure there.
 
Even more interesting, one of the designer Sinclair's ancestors, Prince
Henry Sinclair, is believed by some to have possibly been one of the first to
sail to the New World, evidence of which is available in both the Zeno
Narrative (a map depicting the travels of a Prince Zichmi, believed to be
Prince Henry by some scholars) and in some of the plants depicted at
Rosslyn – plants from the New World that weren't yet known in Europe
when Rosslyn was built. Of course, not all scholars agree with that
interpretation of Sinclair's past – but enough do to make it a compelling and
interesting possibility.
 
Additionally, quite a few of the carvings in the Rosslyn chapel point to
Templar lore, in addition to what seem to be Templar graves in and around
the chapel. Some scholars even suggest that carvings around the church are
a coded Templar message, but again, other scholars disagree.
 
In any case, many treasure hunters and lore lovers agree with at least some
of the speculation – enough that thousands and thousands of people visit
Rosslyn each year. If you choose to examine the lore of Rosslyn further,
there are certainly plenty of resources available.

 
France
 
A stone cross and village of Couvertoirade, France
 
If not Nova Scotia or Scotland, another good possible location for the
Templar treasure is actually, surprisingly, France – where many of the
Templars were when Philip ordered their capture.
 

Quite a few scholars agree that one of the reason Philip felt threatened by
the Templars was because he knew of their interest in acquiring more power
and land – and creating their own nation state, similar to what they had in
Cyprus (which was now lost) – in the south of France. They were looking at
the possibility of creating their own state, similar to what the Teutons had
done in Prussia, or the Hospitallers in Rhodes.[71]
 
As Jean Markdale and others have discussed, there are quite a few scholars
and researchers who suggest that as a result, most of the Templar treasure
was in France when the Templars officially fell. And while it's possible that
treasure made it out on the eighteen galleys, it's just as likely that it
remained in France, hidden. This is supported at least in part by the idea
that most of the Templars who were captured and confessed were older
Templars, and may have chosen to plead guilty to heresy partly to protect
their brothers in the Order who were still in France, in hiding, with the
treasures.[72]
 
Markdale and others make a pretty compelling case that the Templar
treasure may have been hidden at Gisors (a town connected to the origins of
the Templars) at least at one point, if not still. Whether or not the treasure
remains buried in the castle chambers there is a point of controversy, even
among those who agree that it may have been there once.[73]
 
There are also quite a few other Templar locations in France that may work
as potential treasure locations, but the argument made for Gisors is likely
the most compelling of those sites.[74]The castle of Gisors was under the
Knights Templar control between 1158 and 1160. Thereafter, Gisors would
be Grand Master Jacques de Molay last prison.
 
Again, if this is a theory that interests you, there are many resources
available for further research.
 
Northern Africa
 

Church of Saint George in Lalibela, Ethiopia
 
Some scholars believe that parts of the Templar treasure may have ended up
in Northern Africa. Several have speculated that the Ark of the Covenant
was moved to Ethiopia, this based partly on symbols found at the Chartres
Cathedral, and partly on the history of Solomon's Temple, Herod's Temple,
and other Holy Land sites.
 

In particular, the Church of Saint George, built in Lalibela, Ethiopia, is of
interest to some of these scholars.  Also known as Bet Giorgis, this church
is just one of eleven large temples carved from rock in the area, but it's the
one best connected with the Templars. One theory suggests that the Ark of
the Covenant was partially responsible for the construction of the temple,
because of a tool referred to as the Shamir Stone that is believed to have
been placed in it. The Shamir stone is said to have magical powers to cut
through rock without any noise. According to the theory, the temple was
carved in the late 12th century and early 13th century (1187 to 1225) using
the Shamir. It was when the Templars were at their strongest, and when the
Holy Wars were raging, meaning that their construction may well have gone
unnoticed at the time in Europe.
 
The extraordinary wonder of the Lalibela temples has led many to suspect
that magic or divine intervention was partly responsible for their
construction. Indeed, there are several mysteries. None of the rock or dirt
that must have been excavated at the time anywhere is to be found near
Lalibela, and there's also the simple reality that archaeological experts don't
have any idea what sort of tools of the time would have made such fine
work possible.
 
Given the Templars’ many connections to divine relics, and their instinct for
secrecy and mystery, some researchers have consequently picked the many
mysteries of Lalibela and connected them to the secrets of the lost treasure,
suspecting that if the Church of Saint George and other rock-carved temples
of the area had a reputation for requiring magic or divine intervention in
their construction, then the Templars may rightly have treasured such a site
as a holy location – and a fitting one for at least some of their treasures.
 
As Graham Hancock notes:
 
On the arch of the ceiling of the rock-hewn church of Saint
Mary's...can be seen a stylized croix contained within a Star of David
- a most unusual symbol in a Christian place of worship, but one to
which it is known that the Knights Templar were particularly
attached. Behind the arch...[is]a cloth-wrapped column said by the

priests to have been engraved by King Lalibela himself with the
secrets of how the rock-hewn churches were made... Another croix
pattÄe is carved on a boulder on the outskirts of Axum, and several
more can be found "in the ruins of King Kaleb's palace - a structure
that could well have been still standing and inhabited in the thirteenth
century."[75]
 
Other locations in Northern Africa have been discussed, including ancient
Egyptian sites, such as the Pyramids, the Sphinx, and other sacred locations.
Most of these theories go back to the Templars’ descendants, the
Freemasons, and suggest that either the Freemasons or Illuminati moved the
treasure from the Middle East to other sacred or otherwise special sites in
Northern Africa.
 
Several sacred sites have been suggested in Egypt, as according to some
theories central Egypt is at the center of Earth's landmass.[76] As this
explanation goes, the Templars had a connection to the Moroccan Moors,
because of the Moors’ involvement in the Holy Wars, and as a result, the
Templars acquired sacred sites both in Egypt and Morocco.[77]
 
Some of these sites were lost from Templar control as the Holy Wars shifted
away from Christian control, but not all were necessarily lost, even if the
Templars may not have had the same control they once held in the region.
 
Some researchers suggest that Templar treasure may be located in locations
across Africa as diverse as the Sphinx, many of the Pyramids, even in the
vestiges of lost Nile gardens – or elsewhere in Egypt, Morocco, or Ethiopia,
each of which saw Templar activity.[78] Much of these theories depend on
what may have been hidden in the account logs, however, and so references
to them are far more common in fictional accounts – where authors are
permitted to guess and make suppositions about what connections might
have been made in those logs. In scholarly research we see less discussion,
because so much information from that time, when the Templars controlled
vast swathes of the Middle East and even parts of Northern Africa, has been
lost.
 

Middle East
 
Underground citadel and prison in Akko, Israel
 
Of course, it's also entirely possible that the treasures of the Holy Lands
never actually left the Middle East. Numerous locations have been
suggested as potential treasure sites, both historically sacred sites (such as
Mt. Arafat, the Temple Mount, and other sites around Jerusalem) and sites
that were used by the Templars, and there are far more references to
Templar sites in the Middle East preserved in historical documents than
references to Northern Africa holdings.
 
For instance, some scholars believe that the Templars left clues at Temple
Mount and during their long stay at Solomon's Temple[79]. History has not
always been kind to Jerusalem, and many of the sites that the Templars once
held are now destroyed or heavily damaged. This means a wide array of
clues may have been lost through the years, but the combination of the sites
remaining and the availability of historical documents cataloging what

many of those sites once looked like gives us a much better idea of how the
Templars worked when they controlled parts of Jerusalem and the Holy
Lands.
 
For instance, Mt. Ararat is seen as a promising location because this is
where the Ark of the Covenant originated. Given that the Templars found
their first home in Solomon's Temple, the Ark was an important piece of
tradition. Returning it to the sacred site from which it was born would have
been natural – if it could be done in a way that would keep the Ark and
other treasures safe.[80]
 
Mt. Ararat is a holy site in Christian tradition, but is also important in
Islamic lore, and there is some suspicion among scholars that while the
Templars fought against Islamic forces during the Crusades, they were not
opposed to working with Muslims if it meant good business. A collection of
suspected joint business ventures has been proposed by numerous scholars,
even if it has not yet been definitively proven.
 
It is under the assumption that there was some collaboration that scholars
look at Ararat. There are legends of caves in the area, and while many
scholars, researchers, and treasure seekers have scoured the area previously
(it's been connected with both Noah's Ark and the Ark of the Covenant, and
as such has long appealed to adventurers seeking Judeo-Christian relics and
artifacts), there's also evidence that Ararat has shifted in some ways over
the millennia, meaning that some caves that once existed – or other
passageways into the mountain – might have since been buried and lost.
 
The idea that there may have been collaboration between the Templars and
Muslims on at least some level surrounds many of the theories of treasure
still hidden on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem – otherwise, the Templars
would have had no reason to leave the treasure behind when they left the
Holy Lands. A few scholars theorize that the Templars may have needed to
leave Jerusalem quickly when the Holy War was lost, and that treasures
may have been accidentally or unintentionally left behind. However, in that
case it seems unlikely that they would not have discovered by the Muslims
retaking control of the city, in which case the Muslims probably would have

moved the valuables to a safer location. This, too, is frequently used as an
argument for the likelihood of at least some Templar treasures being stored
in Northern Africa, as it was a stronghold for Islamic forces at various
points during the Holy Wars.
 
If this a thread you're interested in unraveling further, the following
Templar sites are also worthy of investigation, though each requires a little
more conjecture than some of the other sites proposed:
 
Israel: Knights Hall; Chateau Pelerin[81]
Syria: Chastel Blanc; Ruad; Tortosa[82]
 
It is known that the Templars made heavy use of Knights Hall during the
Holy Wars. There and in Acre, long Templar tunnels have been found –
without apparent use or reason. Was treasure buried there? Is treasure still
buried there? Again, there does not seem to be any consensus, either among
scholars, researchers, or treasure-seekers. Nor does there seem to be much
information available about either tunnel.
 
Chateau Pelerin is likewise a mystery in many ways. Though we know it
was once the Templars’ strongest and largest castle, easily holding up to
4,000 Knights at a time, it fell in 1291.[83] Still, it remains standing, and so
while it is unlikely that treasure remains there, it does offer many clues into
the Templars that are not found elsewhere, as it's one of the best-preserved
Templar castles.
 
Similarly, in Syria the number of sites surrounded by questions vastly
outweigh the number of answers available to us. As Syria has only
sporadically seen peace in the centuries since the Templars were officially
disbanded, many historic sites are in ruins or worse, so reaching any sort of
consensus or concrete conclusion on how the Templars used each site is
nearly impossible.
 
Instead, we're left once more with conjecture, and the directions in which
scholars and treasure-seekers have taken the few scraps of solid information

we do have makes it difficult, if not impossible, to differentiate between the
static and the noise, so to speak.
 
There are other sites around the Middle East that have been connected with
the Templars, but the sites above have some of the greatest history and seem
to be the most likely potential treasure sites.
 
Of course, the problems we have in differentiating between static and noise
are hardly limited to the Middle East. It's a worldwide problem when we
consider the Templars, as their scope was so vast, their power so
impressive, while their secrets were just as numerous, and the number of
concrete, trustworthy documents, so few.
 
Templar sites once stretched across Europe and the Middle East, and as the
men scattered after Philip's order, they were spread even farther across the
globe, both as underground Templars and as Freemason descendants,
meaning the range of potential treasure locations is nearly limitless. This is
both a blessing and a curse for those seeking answers to the many mysteries
of Templar treasures.
 
Below is a short list of other countries where some scholars and Templar
researchers believe it is possible Templars may have established themselves
in some fashion, even after the fall of the Order:
 
1. Spain
2. Portugal
3. England
4. Ireland
5. Croatia
6. Elsewhere in Europe
7. United States
 
We'll examine each possibility in passing in the pages to come.
 
Spain

 
Old castle of the Knights Templar in Alcala de Xivert, Spain
 
In Spain, the following are locations that have been connected to the
Templars:[84]
 
Iglesia Veracruz (Segovia)[85]
Castillo de los Templarios (Ponferrada)[86]
Peniscola Castle[87]
Castellote Castle[88]
Miravet Castle[89]
Gardeny Castle (Lerida)[90]
Xivert Castle (Valencia)[91]
 
There are also other Spanish locations that have been connected to the
Templars, but the above locations seem the most credible.
 

In particular, Spanish locations are interesting to Templar treasure seekers
for two main reasons. First, the Templar history in Spain leading up to their
official disbanding via papal bull in 1312 was slightly different than in other
countries. King Alfonso I (once King of Aragon) was indebted to the
Templars in more ways than many other European kings, and he was
responsible for a great deal of Templar treasure and holdings even outside
their involvement in the Crusades.
 
Second, the Templars were never prosecuted in Spain the way they were in
other European countries. Instead, they were found not guilty, and under the
protection of King James II, they were absorbed into the Order of
Montessa, which was much less hostile than their absorption into the
Hospitallers in other countries.
 
As a result, more than a few scholars, researchers, and treasure-seekers
have suggested that Spain would have been a much safer place to
consolidate and store hidden treasure than most other places in Europe at
the time. The difficulty, of course, comes in determining where they might
have chosen to hide their treasures.
 
Holy locations in Toledo, for instance, are frequently considered, as Toledo
had a long history as a stronghold of the Islamic empire before the
Crusades, and the libraries there were among the best in the world at that
time. An argument can certainly be made for the Templars making use of
what had once been Islamic treasure storage sites to hide their treasure,
which means that the castles of Montalban, Villalba, and San Servando are
all considerations for some scholars, as is the Templar House in Toledo.
That said, each of these sites has been searched thoroughly in the past, so if
there was Templar treasure there, it has either since been moved or is
tremendously well hidden.
 
The Castle of Peniscola is another frequently suggested site, because of
how heavily fortified it was – implying that it was meant to protect
something, and would have been a good site to keep valuables – and it is
also a location that has known a wide range of secrets. It was an important
site to the Carthaginians[92], for instance, and it also holds mystery, in that

there are several sea caverns of some importance. However, as Pope
Benedict XIII later made it his home, it seems that if Templar treasure was
ever there, it has either since been moved or is very well concealed.
 
And that's the problem with all of the best possible locations in Spain: while
it seems quite likely that the Templars may have hidden treasures there,
possibly even in several different locations, all the best candidates have
since seen such heavy traffic that it seems impossible that anything could
still be hidden there. This is a common problem with Templar sites, of
course, and Portugal is not much better.
 
Portugal
 

The Convent of the Knights of Christ in Tomar, Portugal
 
In Portugal, the following are locations that have been connected to the
Templars:
 
Almourol Castle[93]
Idanha Castle[94]
Monsanto Castle[95]
Pombal Castle[96]

Soure Castle[97]
Tomar Castle[98]
 
There are others, but these are the most commonly discussed.
 
Portugal has an interesting history with the Templars, in that even after they
were officially disbanded by the pope, Templars held important positions in
Portugal, especially in exploration and navigation. Of course, this also
opens up the possibility that Portuguese Templar navigators and ocean-
going expeditions could have taken treasure just about anywhere in the
world Portuguese exploration went in the years ahead...but that's another
rabbit hole we don't need to consider just yet.
 
Palace of the Knights Templar in Tomar, Portugal
 
Portugal, like Spain, offered Templars protection, though this was done in a
slightly different way. In Portugal, the king at the time, King Dinis, offered
Templars protection under an exemption from the Pope. Then, in 1317, ten
years after the Templars were first persecuted in France, Dinis applied to

the Pope to reform the Templars in Portugal, under the new name the Order
of Christ. Two years later, he was given Papal permission, and the Order of
Christ was officially recognized by the Church. In other words, for twelve
years the Templars in Portugal were kept safe, until they could be rebuilt
under a different name, and this is further complicated by the way in which
the newly introduced Order of Christ and the already existing Order of Aviz
dovetailed into each other, often sharing Grandmasters.
 
One last little bit of history to provide context here: the Order of Christ and
the Order of Aviz in turn became the two backbones of the Portuguese
national flag when it was designed in 1910 – such is the impact each had in
the country. Therefore, if any European nation state is still helping hide
Templar secrets and treasures, Portugal has to be the likeliest candidate.
 
It is in that context that we must look at the locations listed above, as each
has played a prominent role in Templar history – but also in the history of
either the Order of Christ, the Order of Aviz, or both.
 
As for outside Portugal, a compelling argument can be made that in the
decades and centuries after being officially disbanded, the Templars in
Portugal pretty successfully morphed into the key positions of the Order of
Aviz and Order of Christ, allowing them to control some of the most
important parts of Portuguese exploration.[99] If we consider the following
key discoveries and lands claimed for Portugal in the 15th century, for
instance, it becomes immediately apparent how, if the Templars chose to
move their treasures by Portuguese ships, the treasures could be nearly
anywhere.
 
1415: Ceuta conquered, brought under Portuguese reign
1418: Madeira Island discovered, added to the Portuguese empire
1427: Azores discovered, added to the Portuguese empire
1444: Cape Verde discovered, added to the Portuguese empire
1488: Bartolomeu Dias sails around the Cape of Hope – the southern
tip of Africa – meaning the whole African continent has been opened
to Portuguese explorations

1492: Columbus discovers the West Indies, opening up the New
World to Portuguese (and European) exploration
1500: Pedro Alvares Cabral discovers Brazil, which is added to the
Portuguese empire
 
In that context, searching for the Templar treasure can sometimes seem
hopeless. Knowing that Portugal is one of the places in which the Templars
were safest at the time they were officially disbanded, it seems quite likely
that whatever treasure ended up there – and not in Scotland, or Nova Scotia,
or elsewhere – may well have been in Portugal only until explorers and
navigators in the Templar tradition found somewhere safer to stash their
secrets, including in Africa, India, or even the Americas.[100]
 
The Templar treasure – if we're willing to accept that it may have been in
Portugal in the early 14th century – could be anywhere by now.
 
England
 

Temple Church, Bristol, England
 
Of course, our perspective shifts when we consider England, as the
Templars were, for the most part, pretty well sheltered in England as well.
Given the large number of temples in England which are still connected to
the Templars, the number of potential hiding locations sometimes seems a
bit staggering. Names alone can tell a fair story in this country – nearly any
site in England containing “Temple” in the name can be connected to the
Templar tradition, so pervasive was their land and power once, and so
staggering was their architecture.
 
In England, the following are locations that have been best connected to the
rich Templar tradition, and as such, seem like the best candidates for
treasure, or for clues to the Templar treasure:
 
1.    Bristol: Temple Church[101]
2.    Cambridgeshire: Denny Abbey[102]
3.    Cornwall: St Michael's Mount[103]
4.    Cumbria: Temple Sowerby[104]
5.    Essex: Cressing Temple; Little Maplestead[105]
6.    Herefordshire: Garway Church[106]
7.    Hertfordshire: Church of St Mary the Virgin; Royston Cave; Temple
Dinsey[107]
8.    Kent: The Manor of Temple Ewell[108]
9.    Leicestershire: Rothley Temple[109]
10.  Lincolnshire: Temple Bruer[110]
11.  London: Temple Church; Temple Mills[111]
12.  North Yorkshire: Westerdale; Temple Cowley[112]
13.  Oxfordshire: Temple Cowley; Templars Square[113]
14.  Somerset: Camelay; Temple Cloud; Templecombe[114]
15.  Staffordshire: Keele[115]
16.  Wiltshire: Temple Farm[116]
17.  Warwickshire: Temple Balsall[117]
18.  West Sussex: Shipley Church[118]
19.  West Yorkshire: Temple Newsam[119]
 

There are also other locations in England that have been connected to the
Templars, but the above locations seem best-sourced, best-preserved, and
seem clearly Templar built, rather than just Templar influenced. It is also by
no means a complete list of all the Templar holdings in England, only those
that seem like they could still be important today. A few are more
promising than the rest.
 
Royston Cave, for instance, is promising because of its location at an
ancient crossroads – connecting Icknield Way and Ermine Street, in
Royston. Icknield Way is believed to be one of the oldest routes in England,
and held special significance for some among the Templars as it could
connect to both the pagan traditions in England and to the early English
Christians.[120] At various points the Templars were also responsible for
improving and protecting the route. Ermine Street was likewise important,
dating back to Roman control of the English Isles, and the Templars were
likewise responsible for it at different times.[121] Royston Cave was a central
command post, and Templar knowledge of both routes has led some to
suspect that there may be clues in the area that are yet undiscovered.
 
Likewise, Denny Abbey seems as though it may contain secrets, as it was
once a preceptory for the Knights Templar, and the way in which it was
handled as the Templars were disbanded has led some to believe it may yet
hold clues. In particular, Edward II seized the abbey from the Templars in
1308 and gave it to the Hospitallers, but they chose to leave it vacant, which
is how it sat until 1324, when the King retook possession. What happened
there in the 16 years between, however, is not known. Did it just sit entirely
vacant? Or might some Templars still have made use of the Abbey?
 
Similar stories – including gaps of time in the histories of these important
buildings – can be told for many of the Templar holdings in the list above.
What great clues have been lost as a result? Without doing a great deal of
further digging into English history – and perhaps even then – it's truly
difficult to say.
 
Ireland

 
The Clontarf Castle, Dublin today - By Phillip Perry, CC BY-SA 2.0,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=13586614
 
In Ireland, the following are locations that have been connected to the
Templars:
 
Dublin: Clontarf Castle; Baldungan Church[122]
Sligo: Temple House[123]
Wexford: Templetown[124]
 
As with the other countries we’ve looked at, there are other locations in
Ireland that have also been connected to the Templars.
 
Treasure seekers have long speculated about the Temple House of Sligo,
which has been destroyed several times over.[125] While a castle does indeed
stand on the property now, it isn't the original Templar castle (which was

destroyed in the 17th century) but rather a rebuilt Gothic mansion, which has
also seen damage on several occasions.[126] It is that damage to the grounds
that is particularly concerning to treasure seekers, as they wonder what
potential clues have been removed from the grounds as a result.
 
After all, the original castle was one of the first Templar holdings in Ireland,
and was once a great Templar house. Given how many suspect a great
number of Templar treasures were ferreted away to Scotland, isn't it
possible that some of those secrets may have been hidden in the center of
Templar power in Ireland?
 
Again, though, so much history has been lost that much of this is
speculation, as it must be, with so little historical documentation to go on.
 
Croatia
 
Fortress of Klis, Croatia
 

In Croatia, the following are some of the locations that have been connected
to the Templars[127]:
 
Brckovljani
Fortress of Klis
Hrvatska Dubica
Nasice
Nova Ves
Senj
Vrana
 
Croatia is another place where the history of the Templars is not particularly
well documented, but there are bits and pieces we can stitch together to get
at least a few ideas about where the Templars operated there, and where in
the country they might have been most likely to hide treasure.
 
For instance, there are numerous sources that point to the myth of a hidden
Templar treasure in Vrana, but is it a myth? Unfortunately, when it comes to
source materials, none of them seem to be in English – so if this is
something you want to look into further, consider the potential need for
translation beyond just Google Translator. In any case, the once great
Templar fortress of Vrana now lies in ruins, so careful excavating would
likely be necessary to find anything that may have been hidden there.
 
Templar fortresses in Ljuba and Sibenik have likewise been destroyed.
While some scholars say this was because the Templars weren't very good
rulers while in the area, others say it was to keep them from falling into
Turkish hands, and others yet say it was to protect secrets contained in the
fortress architecture.[128] Whatever the cause, it's likely secrets were lost
with the destruction of the castles themselves.
 
Elsewhere in Europe?
 

The church of San Bevignate in Perugia. - By Perugia City
ttps://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=9914814
 
In other parts of Europe, the following are some locations that have been
connected to the Templars:
 
Church of San Bevignate, Italy[129]
Templstejn, Czech Republic[130]
Chwarszczany, Poland[131]
 
There are also numerous theories that suggest that the Templars may have
had connections to Switzerland, which in many ways seems plausible, as
France borders Switzerland and would have made an easy escape route.
And the theories hold some weight, too, in the number of Swiss cantons that
display Templar insignia in their official flags, the strong Swiss banking
connections and tendency toward secrecy, and so forth. The only problem in
assuming that the Templars may have fled to Switzerland with their treasure
is that there aren't any particularly appealing good starting points for a
search. That is, even if many of the Templars had fled there, there are no
clear signs of Templar bases in Switzerland that we could use in developing
further clues, so if the Templars did go there, and did hide treasure there,
they did a good job of remaining under the historical radar.

 
United States
 
There are also plenty of Templar and Freemason scholars who believe that
some of the treasure may be hidden in the United States, a theory which the
movie National Treasure had a great deal of fun with. That said, none of the
scholars have been able to narrow the search down much beyond theory, so
if this is something you're interested in exploring, you'll need to do more
digging.
 
As in the case of Switzerland, it's easy to make the case that the Templars
may have – via their descendant Freemasons or via their Portuguese
explorer descendants – moved their treasure to the New World, and even to
the United States specifically, but it's much more difficult to make
particularly strong cases for any set location, which is why it's far more
common in fictional works (such as National Treasure) than in non-fiction.
 
In Pop Culture?
 
And, lastly, let's review how the treasures of the Knights Templar are
depicted in pop culture. While we looked briefly at more modern works
addressing the Knights Templar in fiction, movies, and games before, we
haven't really looked at how those works look at the Templar treasure.
 
From the very beginning, legends have connected them to treasure, because
of their first headquarters at Solomon's Temple on the Temple Mount in
Jerusalem, an area obviously rich in history and lore. Because of their
original location, numerous legends begin with the idea of the Templars
making a discovery that may have rocked the Church if made public –
though what that discovery was, exactly, varied from story to story.[132]
 
Sometimes the story was related to something about Jesus' relationship with
Mary Magdalene. Sometimes the story centered around Jesus' death, or a
relic, or hidden church secrets. Regardless of what the story was, it
frequently ended up being connected to priceless treasures, and the idea that

the Templars controlled such treasures is as much a part of their origin story
as any other.
 
This, according to some interpretations of the history of the time, may have
even been one of the reasons Philip was so eager to get out from under his
debt to the Templars and put them out of commission – he, too, was looking
for treasures.
 
As a result, stories of what happened to the treasure after the Templars were
officially disbanded vary tremendously.[133] Of course, scholars, historians,
and researchers might point to legends and various bits of evidence that
could point to treasure having ended up in any of the locations mentioned
earlier. One argument has even been made that part of the reason the
Templars were labeled heretics may have been that they found the Copper
Scroll of the Dead Sea Scrolls, and kept its list of treasure locations to
themselves, away from the Church.[134]
 
As you can imagine from the wide array of sites previously noted, stories of
what the Templars did with any treasure they may have had at the time of
their officially disbanding vary greatly, which is why we suggest picking a
location that may interest you, and then digging in further, as the number of
resources now available for eager sleuths is truly mind-blowing. Partly the
result of popular culture references in movies such as The Da Vinci Code
and National Treasure, and partly the result of the ability of the internet to
explode an idea, the amount of research available to those interested in the
Knights Templar and their potential treasures is quite expansive – to the
point where one interested in diving deep could easily spend the rest of their
life investigating the Templars, their treasure, and the myths and legends
that surround them.
 
Where Would You Search?
 
So, having looked at all the evidence of a lost Templar treasure, where
would you begin your search? Would you return to the Holy Lands, where
the Templars once were? Would you scour Northern Africa, in pursuit of

treasures that made their way there from the Middle East? Would you
follow the eighteen lost boats – and if you did, would you follow them to
Scotland, or to Nova Scotia? Would you search for clues across France, or
elsewhere in Europe? Or would you follow the byzantine world of the
Freemasons and the Illuminati across the sea to America?
 
The truth is, there are any number of places you could begin your own
search, and nearly anywhere you might choose to begin would offer plenty
of evidence in support of your investigation.
 
When it comes to the Knights Templar and their lost treasures, what we're
most certain of is not the answers, but rather the many, many questions left
by their rapid dissolution at the start of the 14th century. Even now, more
than 700 years later, we have far more questions than answers.
 
Fortunately, that's part of the fun of researching and investigating the
Templars. Because there is so little of which we can be 100% certain,
there's far more room for speculation, for curiosity, for postulating ideas.
 
The Knights Templar are one of the last great mysteries available to us, and
the search for their lost treasures is a chase unlike any other. Should you
choose to take up the search, we hope this was a great starting guide.


References
 
The following is an incomplete list, of course, when it comes to the many
resources available to those researching the Knights Templar and their lost
treasure, but it should be a good starting point for anyone interesting in
diving deeper.
 
Books
 
Addison, Charles G. (1842). The History of The Knights Templar, the
Temple Church, and The Temple.
 
Atienza, Juan García. (2006). The Knights Templar in the Golden Age of
Spain: Their Hidden History on the Iberian Peninsula. Destiny Books.
 
Baigent, Michael; Leigh, Richard; Lincoln, Henry. (1983). Holy Blood,
Holy Grail. New York: Dell.
 
Baigent, Michael. (1991) The Temple and the Lodge
 
Baigent, M. & Prebble, S. (2007). The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail (1st
ed.). Ulverscroft.
 
Barber, Malcolm. (1978) The Trial of the Knights Templar.
 
Barber, Malcolm. (2006) The Trial of the Templars, 2nd edn
 
Birch, Debra J. (1998). Pilgrimage to Rome in the Middle Ages: Continuity
and Change. Boydell Press.
 
Charpentier, Louis (1972). The Mysteries of Chartres Cathedral.
 
Coppens, Philip. (2002) The Stone Puzzle of Rosslyn Chapel. Frontier
Publishing/Adventures Unlimited Press.

 
Frale, Barbara (2009). The Templars: The Secret History Revealed.
 
Gunon, Ren (2005). Studies in Freemasonry and Compagnonnage.
Translated by Henry D. Fohr. Sophia Perennis.
 
Hancock, Graham. (1992). The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost
Ark of the Covenant. New York: Crown.
 
Haughton, Brian (2008). Haunted Spaces, Sacred Places: A Field Guide to
Stone Circles, Crop Circles, Ancient Tombs, and Supernatural Landscapes.
Career Press.
 
Kahn, David (1996). The Codebreakers. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-83130-
5.
 
Khatri, Vikas (2012). World Famous Treasures Lost and Found.
 
Lachman, Gary (2008) Politics and the Occult: The Left, the Right, and the
Radically Unseen. Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0857-2
 
Markale, J. (2003). The Templar treasure at Gisors (1st ed.). Rochester, Vt.:
Inner Traditions.
 
Martin, Sean. (2005). The Knights Templar: The History & Myths of the
Legendary Military Order.
 
McIntee, David (2016). Fortune and Glory: A Treasure Hunter's Handbook.
 
Morris, S. Brent (2006). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry.
Penguin.
 
Napier, Gordon (2011). A to Z of the Knights Templar: A Guide to their
History and Legacy. The History Press.
 
Nicholson, Helen (2001). The Knights Templar: A New History.

 
Nicholson, Helen J. (2004). The Crusades. Greenwood Publishing Group.
 
Ralls, Karen (2003). The Templars and The Grail: Knights of The Quest.
Quest Books.
 
Ralls, Karen. (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide
to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the Order of the Temple. New
Page Books.
 
Read, Piers Paul. (2014). The Templars (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's
Press.
 
Robinson, John J. (1989) Born in Blood: The Lost Secrets of Freemasonry
 
Rollins, James (2010). "What's True, What's Not." The Skeleton Key.
 
Sora, Steven. (1999). The Lost Treasures of the Knights Templar. Inner
Traditions / Disney.
 
Wallace-Murphy, Tim (2004). Templars in America. Weiser Books.
 
Wilson, Ian (1978). The Turin Shroud.
 
Videos
 
Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, November 7, 2005, video
documentary on The History Channel
 
Lost Worlds: Knights Templar, July 10, 2006, video documentary on The
History Channel
 
Legend Hunters - Ark of the Covenant (FactualTV - Knights Templar
Documentary)


Volume 3
 



Contents
 
Introduction
In the Beginning
The Knights Templar
The Peasants’ Revolt
The Shadow Organization
Scottish Roots
Fugitives
The Birth of the Freemasons
Conclusion
Further Readings


Introduction
 
Who really rules the world? According to some, there is a shadowy sect of
hidden men directing governments all around the world from behind the
scenes. These invisible puppet masters are tied into conspiracy theories
across the globe, taking in everything from the assassination of John F.
Kennedy to the attack on New York and beyond on September the 11th,
2001. Typically, if you trace the origin of these conspiracies back far
enough, you will come across one name. The Freemasons.
 
But who exactly are the Freemasons? Believe in the conspiracies and you
might well assume that they are responsible for every major geopolitical
decision and event that takes place throughout the world. But to others, they
are simply a sort of gentlemen’s club, a social group that does a lot of good
service work in the community. In this book, we take a different approach.
 
Where did the Freemasons come from? Here, we will examine links
between the Freemasons and another of history’s most famous
organizations, the Knights Templar. Could the Templars have laid the
foundation of the Freemasons? Did they set up the secret society to extract
revenge for their demise? Did they inspire an English rebellion simply to
destroy their enemies? Looking over the course of many centuries, we will
seek and reveal the evidence—should it exist—that demonstrates the links
between these two organizations.
 
Simply because they are so very secretive, people are liable to project their
beliefs onto the hidden group. But, in this book, we will try and focus only
on the facts. Sometimes, these facts can be far more shocking than the
theories or speculation. Read on and discover the secret truths of the ancient
Freemasons.


In the Beginning
 
One of the biggest mysteries surrounding the Freemasons is their origin.
For centuries now, people have argued back and forth about precisely when
the order was founded and by whom. There have been several competing
theories, many disproved notions, and some outright forgeries. The question
of origin is huge. While today we might have a current incarnation of the
Freemasons capable of operating entirely independently from the actions of
a secret society formed many centuries ago; some people believe that it is
the founding members of the order who provided the ideological foundation
—and thus the direction and objectives—of the Freemasons. If we want to
understand the Freemasons, we have to understand where they came from.
 
But that is not to say that we have to select a single theory and stick with it.
On the contrary, the origin stories of the Freemasons can be incredibly
helpful in our attempt to understand just why opinion about this order is so
fractured and controversial. The differences between the versions of origin
stories that people choose to believe will often reflect their inherent biases
and opinions. For example, those who believe that the Freemasons are a
continuation of the Knights Templar, might be more willing to believe that
the order still guards ancient secrets. On the other hand, those who believe
that the order was a gentleman’s club formed in the Eighteenth Century,
seem far less inclined toward the more controversial opinions of the
Masonic Order. Thus, by learning about all of the different origin stories,
we can begin to understand and get a grip on just why and how opinions
about the Freemasons can differ so widely.
 
So, by learning the history of the Freemasons, we can gather a unique
insight into how they function in the world today. That is to say, while not
every account of the historic order of the Freemasons is true, the fact that
these stories have formed part of public opinion of the order gives us some
measure of insight. By understanding those stories which are not true—as
well as those that are—we can form our own opinions and have a better,
more cohesive understanding. As ever, the truth invariably lies in the

middle ground; and the story of the Freemasons is often a shadowy,
clandestine narrative written in shades of grey. Without definitive heroes
and villains, some people can struggle to understand the reality of the
situation. Therefore, we must attempt to discover more about every single
aspect of the Masonic history, rather than just the highlights.
 
That is why it helps to start at the very beginning, however, when even the
age of the Order of the Freemasons is debated, telling the full and complete
story can be difficult. In cases such as this, it can help to take a
chronological approach. While the early history of the Masons often
involves entirely different groups of people, including those who will never
have heard of the name ‘Freemasons,’ learning about this background will
give us a greater understanding when the key players start to move into
place. Freemasonry did not emerge into the world fully formed. Instead,
establishment of the order (whenever this happened to be) was the result of
multiple forces and motions. World events conspired to lead to the founding
of the Freemasons and so—if we want to truly understand where the order
came from—we should try and understand this background in greater detail.
This means we will need to travel back hundreds of years, to a world much
changed from our modern society.
 
The story of Freemasonry is one of legends. For many years—centuries,
even—the Freemasons simply existed. Though many people knew that they
existed, there was little knowledge of where they had come from or what
had prompted their formation. That changed toward the end of the
Seventeenth Century, however. Masons at that time began to question their
own origin and began to investigate where they had come from. Over the
years, this historical inquiry began to include outsiders and those who were
either not involved or were suspicious of Masonry. As such, a more
complete, more rigorous, and historical profile of the group started to
emerge. But the details are still hotly contested. For the oldest verifiable
origins, we will have to go back to medieval times.
 
If you spend more than ten minutes researching the Masons on the internet,
you will come across one name over and over again—the Knights Templar.
As it happens, they are tightly wound into the story of the Masons.

However, this involvement is often disputed. What we do know, is that the
Knights Templar are credited with involvement in the formation of the
Freemasons. And whether it is true or not, since that theory is so
widespread, we should spend time learning about the Knights Templar, so
that we may better understand what it is about this group that makes people
so willing to tie them to the Masons and their history. The story of the
Knights Templar is complicated and disputed in its own right, but the
history is fascinating, nevertheless.


The Knights Templar
 
There have been hundreds, if not thousands of books written on the subject
of the Knights Templar. They captivate the imagination of the masses in a
way that few other organizations have, except perhaps the Freemasons.
Given that the two organizations are among the most famous and intriguing
of their type, it seems only natural that they should be linked. Furthermore,
the blending of the histories of the two organizations means that our story
will begin much further back in time. To discover the verifiable roots of the
Knights Templar, we must travel back to the turn of the previous
millennium.
 
The story begins with the Crusades. A Holy War fought between the
Catholic Church and the early iteration of Islam, the disagreement emerged
over the nature of the territory itself. To put it briefly (and to do a disservice
to the rich cultural heritage of the city), Jerusalem became a key
geopolitical issue. With both major religions laying claim to the area as
being sacred (as well as Judaism, another religion, doing the same), there
were frequent disagreements over who would control the city. For hundreds
of years, power had ebbed and flowed in the region. At the time when we
join the story, in 1095, Jerusalem was under the control of the Muslim
rulers.
 
Like many historical events, the situation was complicated. We won’t have
time with the scope of this book to go into the various political quarrels and
disagreements. For example, the original precept for the invasion of the
Holy Lands by the westerners was concerned with aiding the Byzantine
Emperor in repelling an attack by Seljuk Turks. Gradually, as the Papacy
and other key Western states became involved, that fight grew into a wider
campaign to retake Jerusalem and the surrounding areas, which had been
under Muslim control since the 7th Century. Added to this, various power
struggles within the Western royal houses meant that certain rulers were
keen to launch military campaigns, others wished to endear themselves to

the church, and there were those who were convinced to join for other
political reasons or obligations.
 
Essentially, however, the Holy Lands—sometimes referred to as the Levant
—became a target for a newly formed Christian army. These Crusaders, as
they became known, made their way from Britain, France, Germany, and
Italy (as well as other states) via the land. Along the way, there were various
incidents, including one notable and savage attack on a Jewish community
in the Rhineland. The violence along the route would set the tone for the
eventual arrival in Jerusalem.
 
The First Crusade (there would be more to come) was handled like a true
military campaign. As the Crusaders made their way from city to city, from
places like Antioch and Nicaea, they lay siege to and captured key towns,
cities, and castles. The process took years and many lives were lost, but
eventually they made it to the city of Jerusalem.
 
Laying siege to the Holy City in 1099, the Crusaders found themselves in
difficult terrain. Outside of the city, the countryside was an arid wasteland.
There was little in the way of water or food and, so far away from home,
they were struggling for sustenance. Running out of time, out of supplies,
and out of manpower, they were unable to fully surround the city and
prevent supplies from getting in. Though they had begun their campaign
with tens of thousands of men, many of them on horseback, they were now
down to 12,000, with only 1,500 of these being cavalrymen. These men
were all that remained, taken from various countries and backgrounds.
Making camp now, their morale was at an all-time low.
 
An initial attack on the walls was repulsed. Next, they attempted to march
around the walls, chanting at the tops of their lungs after a three day fast. It
was hoped that the walls would fall just like the biblical story of Jericho. It
failed. After receiving news of a backup Muslim army setting off from
Egypt to repel the Crusaders, one final assault on Jerusalem was required.
On the 15th of July, a double pronged attack on the city caused the defenders
to flee the walls. The crusaders were inside.
 

What followed was a massacre. The Crusaders had marched for years,
covering thousands of miles and losing many friends along the way, all with
the goal of retaking Jerusalem. The bloodbath has passed into legend for its
barbarism and brutality. Most notable—at least, in terms of the story we are
telling—were the activities on Temple Mount. Many defenders were said to
have retreated to the spot, one of the most holy places in the world. Temple
Mount was vital to the three major Abrahamic religions, home to the al-
Aqsa Mosque, the Dome of the Rock and the Dome of the Chain. Legend
has it that the biblical figure Solomon built his temple on this spot, a temple
which was destroyed and rebuilt a number of times. For Muslims, it is the
third most holy site in the world, the place from which Muhammad
ascended to heaven. As the Crusaders attacked, it seemed a natural place to
seek sanctuary.
 
The Crusaders pursued and cut down anyone they found. Eventually a
pause was called by the leader, allowing those who were sheltering in the
Al-Aqsa mosque to be saved. They would last a day, the Crusader
commanders waiting until the streets of Jerusalem ran red with blood before
entering the mosque and killing the sheltering foes. As the Crusaders took
over the city and began to erect the nascent Kingdom of Jerusalem, the city
was coming to terms with bloodshed on an unprecedented scale. Thousands
were dead, many more injured. Half a world away from home, the
Crusaders set about the business of ruling the Holy Land.
 
This was the world into which the Knights Templar was born. Following
the violent conquering of Jerusalem, Christianity now had control of one of
the religion’s most holy sites. Pilgrimage to the spot became important, for
people demonstrating their devotion to Jesus Christ. In a time when the only
way to travel for example, from France to Jerusalem, was on foot for those
who were poor), by horse for the rich, or by boat for those both rich and
lucky. By any measure, such a journey was long and treacherous.
Furthermore, the violence left behind in the wake of the Crusade hardly
endeared Christians to the local communities they passed through in the
Levant region. While Jerusalem might have been under the control of the
Christians, the surrounding area was not quite so safe.
 

Plagued by bandits, thieves, and those bearing a grudge for the violence
waged against the Muslim communities by the Crusader’s, it was not
uncommon for Christian pilgrims to be attacked and sometimes even killed
during their trip. At the worst, highwaymen were killing travelling parties
of hundreds of people. Over the course of the ensuing decades, this violence
got worse and worse. Eventually, someone decided to do something,
offering protection to the pilgrims making their journey. That man was
Hugues de Payens, a French knight who, in 1119, petitioned the rulers of
Jerusalem for the permission to creation a new society. De Payens’s vision
was of a religious, monastic order, a disciplined band of knights who would
swear to provide protection to the pilgrims. By 1120, the request was
granted, and the new band, known as the Knights Templar, was formed.
 
The name came from their base of operations. The new order was awarded
a wing of the royal palace, the building situated atop Temple Mount, located
within the captured mosque where the city defenders had hidden before
being killed. To some, it seemed strange to award such a young group with
such a privileged piece of real estate. It would be the first of many
mysteries surrounding the Knights Templar.
 
At first, the organization filled one of the most important needs for the new
Christian government in the Holy Land. Along with other Monastic orders,
the Templars became a kind of makeshift standing army. Despite coming
from different backgrounds and nationalities, the rulers of Jerusalem were
finally able to project an organized professional military power. It was no
surprise that their number grew rapidly, their importance recognized almost
immediately.
 
But along with the growth in numbers, the Templars experienced a growth
in wealth and political power. At the beginning, the order had been
composed of nine knights, with scant finances and a dependence on
donations from powerful Christian rulers. Indeed, the full title of their
organization was ‘Poor Knights of Christ and the Temple of Solomon.’ To
further press this image of poverty upon the world, they had taken as their
symbol two knights riding a single horse, an iconographic representation of
the Templar’s poverty. But this poverty was not long-lasting.

 
The Knights Templar had friends in powerful places. Thanks to these
friends, they quickly moved ahead in the pecking order of monastic knights
in the Holy Land. High ranking members of the church took it upon
themselves to sing their praises, a move which eventually led to an official,
formal endorsement from the Vatican. As such, the Knights Templar
became far more than a simple, localized military order. They gained a
reputation and a favored status across the Christian world. Soon, people
were encouraged to assist the Templars. From across Europe, people began
to donate land, money, business, and even family members to the Knights
Templar. More than one powerful aristocratic family dispatched a young
male member to the Holy Lands with the intent that he would join the
Templars. As the group’s wealth swelled, they received a further boon when
a papal decree known as Omne Datum Optimum made them exempt from
the local laws of the nations. The Templars—and the Templars alone, it
seemed—could pass across any border, would not be subject to any local
taxes, and were not beholden to any authority, other than the pope and God.
Within the space of two decades, the knights from atop Temple Mount had
become one of the most powerful and wealthiest groups in the world.
 
Over the course of the years to follow, the Templars became more and more
essential to the balance of power in the Near East. Fighting against the
legendary Saladin, they used military expertise and training to wage a
continued campaign for control of the Holy Land. But while the military
victories might have been essential to those in the immediate vicinity of
Jerusalem, it was the burgeoning wealth of the order which would be more
keenly felt in Europe. Following the papal endorsements, the coffers of the
Knights Templar were overflowing. One of the biggest revenue streams
came when aristocrats and nobles placed their assets into the care of the
Templars. When a nobleman decided that he would ‘do his duty’ and take
part in the Crusades, he could sign over his lands and businesses to the
Templars, who would run it in his absence. They would take a cut for doing
so, and the nobleman would be assured that his assets would receive care
and attention in his absence, and be returned to him when he left the Holy
Land. With a variety of revenue streams, the Templars were able to

establish one of the most important institutions in the medieval age. The
bank of the Knights Templar.
 
In the decades following the Templars’ growth, the vast majority of new
recruits were assigned not to military roles, but to administrative positions.
The reason was simple. There was a huge trend for many people to travel
through the Holy Lands. Often, these were rich aristocrats who did not want
to carry their wealth with them because the countryside was often laden
with bandits. Now, they could travel with a minimal amount of money,
relying on the Templars to aid them. The Templars had branches in every
major city. A deposit of money made in one of these would equip a person
with a signed letter, detailing the nature of the wealth that had been
provided. Once the person reached Jerusalem, they could visit another
branch of the Templars office and make a withdrawal. It was, in many
ways, the precursor to the modern banking system, the arrival of what has
often been considered the first real international conglomerate.
 
In hardly any time at all, the Knights Templar had grown from a band of
nine poor knights to one of the most powerful groups in the world. They
had wealth in many forms. They took the donations they received and the
money they made and bought land across Europe and the Middle East. They
built farms and vineyards, establishing businesses that made them even
more money. They built castles, cathedrals, and fortifications all over
Europe, as far outside their original territories as possible, with Templar
forts being found as far west as Portugal. They imported, exported,
manufactured, farmed, banked, and owned their own fleet of ships that
crisscrossed the Mediterranean. At one point, they even owned the entire
island of Cyprus.
 
As the Knights Templar grew ever more powerful, other countries began to
sit up and take notice. The original Templars had been a dedicated group of
knights, sworn to protect the poor pilgrims moving across the Holy Land.
By the end of the 12th Century, however, they had become one of the most
powerful organizations on the planet. They were not beholden to local laws,
even in countries such as France, Britain, and Germany. Answering only to

the pope, those countries which held a grudge against the Vatican began to
view the Templars with suspicion.
 
It is not uncommon for many of the theories regarding the Freemasons’
power to relate to the international banking community. People have
labelled the existence of the big banks as an international cabal and as being
responsible for a number of (seemingly unconnected) global events. In this
respect, it’s easy to draw parallels between these conceptions of the
Freemasons, and the banking traditions of the Knights Templar. While
many people use the (often tenuous) relationship between the Freemasons
and the global banking community as an accusatory measure, it echoes
medieval suspicions of the Templars.
 
In the history books, it’s not uncommon for people to label the Knights
Templar of the late 12th Century as arrogant. It’s easy to see why they might
have been. In less than a century, they had risen from purposefully humble
origins to become a major international player. The original military
commanders of the organization had long passed away, some in battle,
some of natural causes. The man who had taken charge, Grand Master de
Ridfort, was not loved by heads of state and powerful nobles. They viewed
him and his organization as arrogant.
 
Added to this, the balance of power in the Holy Land was beginning to tip.
While the Crusaders had captured Jerusalem decades earlier, their grip the
surrounding area was beginning to loosen. Saladin was a prodigal
commander, succeeding in wresting control of many essential sites across
the Levant. The Templars, once an essential projection of Christian military
power, were tainted by association with the new failings. As Saladin’s army
enjoyed success, people began to resent the Templars for their failure to
maintain control of the Holy Land. When Saladin re-conquered Jerusalem
in 1187, it became an easy stick with which to beat the Templars. That the
remaining land held by Christians in the area—a thin strip of territory along
the coast—was owned by the Templars, seemed to be a further issue, people
accusing the Templars of protecting their own interests, rather than those of
Christianity.
 

Over the course of the next hundred years, power really shifted in the
region. By 1296, the Holy Land was considered completely lost. Muslim
rulers in Egypt had swept in from the south and helped to completely drive
Christian influence from the area. The Templars reacted by shifting their
base of operations away from the Levant, instead operating out of their
holdings on Cyprus. Across Europe, rumblings of another Crusade emerged
and the Templars began to focus on their business empire instead.
 
But their enemies did not forget. One of the most important of the
Templars’ foes was the king of France, Philip IV. Philip had a variety of
reasons for hating the order. Not only did he resent their influence and their
immunity to local laws, but he was himself hugely in debt to the Templars.
Wanting to continue his expensive wars against Edward I of England (rather
than fighting a Crusade), he envied the wealth of the Knights Templar and
wished to make it his own. Elsewhere in Europe, he was fighting against the
Holy Roman Empire (in modern day Germany) and had a somewhat
corrosive relationship with the Vatican. Philip was in a difficult place and
the wealth of the Templars seemed to be an obvious target.
 
Philip’s fortunes changed after two key events. First, the King of England
died. His replacement was Edward II, a weaker and less formidable foe.
Furthermore, a change in pope saw the previous Holy See replaced by
someone more prone to treat Philip with kindness, the Frenchman Pope
Clement V.
 
Early rumors suggested that the new pope meant a new Crusade. It was not
uncommon for potential pope’s to voice their ambitions to retake Jerusalem
and, when Pope Clement V ascended the Throne of Peter, the Knights
Templar wondered whether a new crusade might mean a chance to return to
the Holy Lands and retake their positions of wealth and influence, both of
which had been waning since leaving the Levant. Keen to listen to the ideas
of the new pope, the Templars dispatched their grandmaster to France,
where Clement was staying.
 
The Grandmaster of the Templars, Jacques de Molay, was an aging man. He
arrived in France armed with a collection of plans and schemes that the

Templars had developed in order to retake Jerusalem. He was received with
apparent good intentions, humored and welcomed. But it was not to last.
Together, Philp and Clement had been plotting the downfall of the Knights
Templar. On the 13th of October, 1307, the authorities launched an assault
on the Templars, placing every member in France under arrest. According
to legend, this fateful day was Friday the 13th, the original reasoning as to
why such a date might be considered unlucky.
 
The arrests were not just significant in and of themselves. The Templars
who were arrested were subjected to torture and punishment. In the French
cells, the authorities extracted confessions and admissions. Apparently, the
Templars had become an unholy institution, beset by the worship of false
idols, unchristian practices, and considerable amounts of sin. These
dubiously obtained confessions were held aloft as proof of the Templars’
guilt and were used as a precept for dismantling the international
organization of the Knights Templar.
 
The campaign against the Templars in France was vicious and quick. But it
was not global. Even though the pope had issued a papal decree to outlaw
the Knights Templar, other rules were not so quick to act. In England, for
example, the new King Edward II refrained from acting. Instead of arresting
all the Templars he could find, he wrote to the Vatican to petition for the
order’s innocence. When the pope responded with an official decree
reiterating the decision, Edward had no choice but to act and, in January of
1308, he too issued an arrest order for the Templars in England. In the three
months between the two actions, however, the local members of the order
had plenty of time to make themselves scarce. With them went much of
their treasure, not only the jewels and precious metals, but their detailed
records as well.
 
As such, the institution of the Knights Templar was deemed illegal
overnight. As the French King moved through the Templar estates and
holdings, seizing their wealth for himself, the group’s international
conglomerate was forcibly dismantled. With members now officially
labelled as devil worshipping heathens, it was no longer profitable to
visibly be a member of the organization. Those Templars that were not

caught, tortured, and killed were forced to go into hiding. Thanks to the
political maneuvering, the group was forced to become a secret society.
 
But now that the Knights Templar had been driven underground, where
could they go? One of the few places they had left available was Scotland.
Scotland, like a number of other countries around Europe, was in a perilous
political position. At odds with England, they were somewhat excluded
from the international community. Pressure from the English crown
distanced the Scottish monarchy from the rest of Europe and the authority
of the pope. While the rest of Europe was busy hounding down the
Templars, the Scottish did not even issue an order for their arrest. Taking
care to conceal themselves in these tumultuous times, it is believed that
many members of the Knights Templar took what they could of their
incredible wealth and travelled north to Scotland.
 
For some people, this is where the theories about the Knights Templar
really begin to splinter. It is at this point that there is a real divergence
between the provable histories of the organization and those possibilities
which veer much further off the beaten trail. Though we don’t have enough
space here to go into the true depth of the stranger side of the Templars, the
sheer variety of the possibilities should provide the foundation of
understanding that will help with our knowledge of the Freemasons.
 
A great deal of the attention paid to this particular moment in time has
focused on the very nature of the Templars’ wealth. While certain people
are content to understand this wealth in purely financial terms, others have
suggested that there was something far more interesting being hidden by the
Templars. How, they suggest, did such a small band of poor knights rise to
power so quickly? How did they gain such legislative immunity from the
church? The answer to this, it is suggested, goes all the way back to Temple
Mount. It has been suggested that the Templars first home in Jerusalem was
far more than just an administrative branch. When awarded the offices in
the buildings on the holy spot, the Templars began digging. While
excavating the site, they found… something. The exact nature of what they
may have found remains just as contested as the idea of whether or not they
found anything at all. This find has been proposed as everything from a

statue of Baphomet imbued with dark magical powers, to the Ark of the
Covenant (in which was stored the original tablets bearing the Ten
Commandments), or even the Holy Grail. Even the nature of the latter is
contended, from being a simple cup used at the Last Supper, to being the
extensive documentation of the mortal lineage of Jesus Christ, the family he
had on earth and the descendants through to the modern day. Any one of
these items has been held aloft as being the key to the Templars power and
the reason why they might had been able to ascend to such an important
position so quickly.
 
Trying to figure out not only what happened to the Knights Templar, but
what secrets they guarded, has taken up the life of many a historian. But
how exactly does it relate to the Freemasons? In order to understand that,
we will have to take what we have learned about the Knights Templar and
look ahead a few years to the state of England in the 14th Century.


The Peasants’ Revolt
 
After Edward II came Edward III. The formers reign was considered
something of a disaster. Continued disagreements between many high
ranking barons and other noblemen plagued his time as king. In particular,
his relationship with a man named Piers Gaveston caused uproar throughout
the kingdom. It is unknown exactly what about this relationship caused
controversy, but it was enough to cause legislative chaos and a constant
struggle for power. Eventually, Gaveston was caught and executed by the
barons. This caused an extended period of conflict, with the barons basing
themselves in Scotland. Edward II fought against them, trying to quell
problems in his own kingdom and a long-standing dispute with Scotland
itself. To further complicate matters, Gaveston had also managed to
provoke France’s ire, meaning that his relationship with the King had
caused issues on two important fronts. Eventually, the barons’ fight with
Edward led to the English King being defeated in battle by a Scot named
Robert the Bruce in 1314. The defeat left a lasting impact, the aftershocks
being felt in the form of famine and strife in much of England. Criticism of
the King abounded.
 
Edward II seemed unable to satiate his critics. After a protracted
disagreement—involving betrayals, legislation, and executions—with the
Scottish, he was forced into signing a peace treaty with Robert the Bruce. A
similarly embarrassing problem was emerging in his dealings with France
when—in 1325 —Edward had dispatched his wife Isabella to France to
negotiate a peace. It was thought Isabella would be the perfect candidate.
After all, she was a daughter of the French King, a woman whom Edward
had married specifically to make peace. When she was sent to France,
however, she refused to return, and also refused to negotiate a peace with
her homeland. Instead, she sought out an ally and mounted an invasion of
her adopted homeland. In 1326, with an army at her back, Isabella and her
alliance succeeded in waging war on Edward II. The King, fearing for his
life, caught between belligerents to the south and to the north, fled to the
west. He took refuge in Wales but was captured a few months later. He was

forced to give up his crown, resulting in his unpopular reign coming to an
end in January 1327, passing the crown on to Edward III, his fourteen year
old son. Barely a year later, the former king died under mysterious
circumstances, likely murdered on the instruction of the new rulers.
 
Despite his young age, Edward III’s reign was much more successful.
Though he took the crown in 1327, he ruled until 1377. For fifty years,
Edward III fought to assert England as a key player in European politics.
Though the former ruler had marginalized the country’s influence, the new
king increased the power of England’s military. He fought long and hard
against France, beginning the so-called Hundred Years War and seeing great
victories for his country. At home, however, not everything was quite as
successful. The emergence of the Black Death, a plague which swept
through the country, left many thousands dead, and entire towns and
villages suddenly decimated. In his later years, his health would similarly
suffer. By the later 14th Century, his ability to govern was hampered by ill
health and, in 1377, he died from a stroke. The crown was passed to
Richard II, the king’s ten year old grandson, whose own father had died the
year before.
 


So why are we going through all of this in a book about the Freemasons?
The turmoil of England in the 14th Century serves to distract the eye from
the strangeness of the disappearance of the Knights Templar. By the time
Richard II took the throne, it seemed that the Templars were long forgotten.
With a new young king on the throne, with England now a major political
power, and with France and Scotland seemingly quelled to the point of no
longer being an existential threat, it seemed England might be set up to
enjoy a prolonged period of success. But it was not to be.
 
In a pre-Reformation age, the Catholic Church was one of the world’s only
true international organizations and held some degree of power in almost
every community across Europe. This was true of England and the Church
was not innocent of the corruption and greed which prompted the peasants’
anger. This inherent conflict–between being a force for good and being
prone to corruption–reflected a similar contradiction which would have
been held by the exiled Knights Templar. The Templars had originally been
a Catholic militant organization, a projection of the church’s own military
power. But then they had been condemned and convicted by the very
organization they had sworn to protect. In the opinion of some scholars, it
was this decree from the Vatican that broke the bonds of allegiance between
the church and the Templars. Following their exile, the Templars found
themselves without a master. They were free to take whichever side they
wanted.
 
But the Church itself was divided. In 1377, the temporary home of the pope
in Avignon was abandoned. Pope Gregory XI returned the home of the
Church to Rome, to the consternation of many of his cardinals. Since
moving to France and drawing closer to the same French monarchy which
had outlawed the Knights Templar, the Catholic Church had taken on a
French flavor. The move back to Italy was unpopular among the French
contingent. When Gregory died and a new pope was elected, riots in the
streets of Rome influenced the decision to place an Italian on the highest
seat in Christendom. Even though Pope Urban VI promised to keep the base
of the church in the Vatican, the French priests disagreed. What followed
was–at that point–the greatest schism in the church’s history. Known as the

Great Schism, the church split into two separate camps in 1378. Alongside
the Vatican’s Pope Urban VI in Rome, the French Cardinals elected their
own Pope, Clement VII, to rule from Avignon. Along with the support of
the various cardinals, countries began to take sides. With Clement VII went
France, Scotland, Portugal, Spain, and various German principalities. With
Urban VI went England, Poland, Hungary, most of Holy Roman Empire,
and those who would be considered enemies of France, perhaps the most
powerful country in Europe at the time. Each camp ex-communicated the
priests of the other and proclaimed itself the one true church.
 
So France and England were fighting a conventional war. They were
simultaneously taking opposite sides on a spiritual conflict. They needed
funds and needed them quickly. In England, this meant the poll tax of 1377.
 
In 1381, the introduction of a poll tax caused uproar. The peasantry was
furious. The common people had been at odds with the powerful land
owners for years, their position changed by the ravages of the Black Death.
The power of the barons had increased under previous kings, but the
destructive nature of the Black Death had drastically reduced the work
force. As many as a third of the population had died. The resulting famines
took even more. As such, the peasants found their skills in greater demand
and their negotiating position greatly improved. While the peasants sought
to take advantage of this morbid situation, the increases in their wages came
at the expense of those who owned the land. Since these landowners were
now in possession of a greater amount of power, they conspired to pass
laws which would limit the amount they paid to peasants. Wages were
driven back down to the levels they had been before the plague.
Furthermore, details of peasants’ lineages were taken and an effort made to
bind people permanently to a particular lord. Serfdom was being further
made into law. Tensions began to boil over.
 
Inherent grievances came to a head in the late spring of 1381 when
rebellion broke out in Kent and Essex. It would eventually come to be
known as the Peasants Revolt. Led by Wat Tyler and others, the peasants
began to gather in massive groups. They demonstrated, going so far as to
burn down Savoy Palace and kill members of the King’s court. They

wanted the abolition of serfdom, the feudal means of governance which saw
the poor workers beholden to the whims of whatever person happened to
own the land on which they lived. The King and his court would retreat to
the Tower of London and quickly realize that they did not have the strength
to fight thousands of peasants. They would have to negotiate.
 
The King’s position was weak. Not only was he just fourteen years old and
dependent on the advice of his inner circle, but his kingdom was not as
financially secure as he might have hoped. The wars of his grandfather,
while succeeding in establishing England as a military power, had been
costly. Funds had been drained. To make matters worse, the emergence of
such a young king seemed to have encouraged corruption among the court.
In response, the crown had decreed a number of new and insidious taxes,
levelled again against the peasants. It was one of these–the poll tax–which
had been one of the catalysts of the rebellion. Just as much as the barons
and landowners, the king and his lack of funds were at fault. Desperate for
money, facing strife on every side, England had erupted into rebellion. To
complicate matters, it seemed as though there had been some degree of
planning behind it.
 
It’s often been suggested that the Peasants’ Revolt was far from
spontaneous. The various whisperings of rebellion and revolt were
encouraged throughout the country, as the different strands of consternation
facing the authorities began to come together at once. Men like John Ball,
the leader of a band of priests who sided with the poor and the helpless,
fanned the flames of revolt throughout the country. As the different
communities across the country were told to rise up, as many as 100,000
peasants gathered to show their dissatisfaction with the crown.
 
Some of the first signs of such revolt came when tax gatherers were beaten
up as they went about their duties. When a local lord attempted to forcibly
collect his taxes and attempted to have a crowd of a hundred defying
peasants arrested, the officers were attacked and the lord was lucky to
escape away to London. When the government responded by sending an
even bigger force to quell the issue, the gathering masses attacked with a
renewed vigor. Prosecutors were not only captured, but beheaded. First

taking place in Essex, similar events happened in Kent and the areas
surrounding London. The mob began to swell in numbers, with people
coming from villages and towns across the country to march against the
king.
 
Among this mob of thousands, one man seemed to emerge as the leader.
Without much provocation, many quickly began to turn to a man named
Walter (or Wat) Tyler for instruction. The revolt even took his name, with
many people knowing the movement as Wat Tyler’s Revolt. But very little
is known of the man, of where he came from or what his specific grievance
had been. Why had so many thousands of men suddenly accepted him as
their leader? It is difficult to say, though some have taken this to be a signal
of a greater level of background understanding than is perhaps clear in this
day and age.
 
As Wat Tyler and his men moved through Canterbury, beheading “traitors”
along their way, similar civic upheaval in Essex followed. On the same day
that Tyler and his men were attending a huge mass in Canterbury Cathedral,
the men of Essex were burning down an important building belonging to
the Knights Hospitallers. The building was significant. It had originally
belonged to the Knights Templar, given to them in 1138 by a royal decree.
During the time when the Templars were outlawed and chased from
Christendom, it had fallen into the possession of the Hospitallers. Indeed,
the Hospitallers were one of the chief beneficiaries of the move to prosecute
the Templars, taking on many of their holdings and assets, and assuming a
large portion of their wealth. Over the coming days, many of the
Hospitallers most important buildings and dwellings would be attacked by
the rebels, seemingly as part of a wider social upheaval, though
proportionally far more than any other group. Could it be a coincidence that
the guiding hand of the rebels was so keen to attack the sworn enemy of the
Knights Templar? It is here that we start to see the linking of the threads,
the narratives moving that had been in place since the Crusades centuries
before.
 
On the 11th of June, both bands of rebels decided to turn and march on the
capital. By this time, their combined numbers totaled more than 100,000.

Despite being far apart and a seemingly untrained bunch, historians were
impressed by the resolve and discipline demonstrated by the rioters. It was a
seventy mile journey and it took just two days, with both groups arriving
generally at the same time. It is easy to see why so many people have
suggested that this movement was pre-planned, rather than the product of
random happenstance.
 
It was at this point that the teenage king retreated into the Tower of London.
He took with him his most trusted advisors, those men who he could rely
upon to assist him in making judgements. Among their number were the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the king’s treasurer, who happened to be a
member of the Hospitallers. In addition, there was a man named Henry
Bolingbroke, who would eventually become famous as the future King of
England. With them were earls, barons, and other assorted members of the
aristocracy, all of whom had something to fear from the suddenly malignant
peasants.
 
By the 12th of June, the rebels were massing in what is now East London.
They marched across the river, moving through Southwark. From across
London, more and more people began to join them. As rebellious groups
formed in different parts of the city, they took it upon themselves to sack
and burn palaces, with particular attention paid to the records kept by the
aristocracy, records of lineage and genealogy which were used to bind
peasants to serfdom. The prisons were attacked and all inside turned loose.
 
From inside the Tower of London, the young king could see the smoke
rising up from his city. In response, he sent out messengers to the rebels,
asking what they wanted. The response he received informed him that the
rebels sought, in fact, to save the king. They wanted to free him from the
band of traitors who had surrounded him and dedicated themselves to
destroying the country. The king asked for a meeting, pleading with the
rebels to halt their sacking of the city so as he might be able to hear their
complaints in full.
 
The rebels agreed. They moved to the river, the men from Kent stationed on
the south side and the men from Essex on the north side. The king set off

from the Tower of London on his royal barge, slowing drifting down the
river to meet with the rebels. It was halfway through his journey that his
advisors were finally able to persuade him to stop. As it became apparent
that the king had halted, the rebels sent out their demands directly to the
barge. Firstly, there was a list of men who must be executed. Many of the
men on the list were on the royal barge at that very moment, including the
prior of the Hospitallers and the Archbishop of Canterbury. As might be
expected, the king’s council advised against such a move. From the shore,
the rebels could see the king’s barge turn around and head back towards the
Tower.
 


The rebels entered the city proper. By some mysterious stroke of fortune,
neither gate they moved to happened to be guarded. Unhindered, they
walked straight through. Refraining from sacking and destroying everything
in their path, they instead marched straight to Fleet Street, an important part
of London which happened to contain a prison. They attacked, freeing all
the men inside.
 
Nearby were two forges, places which had once belonged to the Knights
Templar. They were now being run by the Hospitallers. Just as before, the
rebels turned their ire on the forges and destroyed both of them. As they
then marched through the city to the Savoy Palace, the mob only stopped to
attack any building which they were able to certify as belonging to the
Hospitallers. They destroyed many buildings, but few suffered the wrath of
the mob quite so much as the Savoy Palace. Art works, furniture, tapestries,
and many other valuable items were destroyed beyond repair. After they
were finished, the rebels set fire to the palace, aiding the process by
ensuring a number of gunpowder kegs were first moved inside.
 
Once Savoy Palace was destroyed, the band of rebels again seemed to turn
their attentions to buildings which might be owned and operated by the
Knights Hospitaller. Any such property between the Thames and Fleet
Street was vandalized and then burned. Records were set afire and any
lawyers who might try to stop the crowd were killed. The one Hospitaller
property which seemed to escape much of the destruction was a small
church. However, the rebels still went inside and fetched any records they
could find. These were burned in the street. It was perhaps no coincidence
that this church had also previously been the property of the Knights
Templar. It was one of the only targeted buildings not completely destroyed.
When compared to the Hospitaller headquarters in Clerkenwell, a building
which was damaged beyond all repair, it seems something of a miracle that
the Templars’ former church should escape so lightly.
 
The rebels continued their campaign. They moved across the city, freeing
prisoners and burning records, paying special attention to Hospitaller
properties. One group, after trying to petition the Tower of London for an

audience with the king, found themselves denied. In response, they lay
siege to the Tower. That it was perhaps the most defensible building
anywhere in England did not seem to concern them.
 
Throughout the city, it was announced that being a member of the
Exchequer or the Chancery (two of the country’s tax collecting authorities)
was enough to condemn a man to death. When seeking evidence of such a
crime, the presence of ink on a man’s fingers was proof enough of his guilt.
Seeing as the vast majority of literate men had received their education
from the church, it was no coincidence that a large portion of the dead were
members of the clergy.
 
The king seemed to be shocked. So far, he had no response to the uprising.
Lacking an army to combat such a massive rebel gathering, the money to
pay off the crowds, or the preparation time required to deal with such a
well-ordered rebellion, the king was at a loss as to how to respond. Rather
than a show of force or strength, he would have to rely on tricking his
enemies. On the 14th of June, it was announced that the king would agree to
meet with the rebel leaders, with a view to giving in to all of their demands.
The message was given to town criers across the city and proclaimed for all
to hear.
 
As a meeting place, the king and his advisors selected Mile End, a place
with open fields which just happened to be outside the walls of the city. The
aim was to draw the rebels out of the city first and foremost. This was
mostly achieved, with a large number of the forces following the king out
beyond the city walls. But not everyone went. Wat Tyler and a few hundred
men hung around in the city, armed with a plan of their own.
 
Even on the morning of the planned meeting, all was not right in the king’s
camp. Before they had set off to meet the rebels, the Archbishop of
Canterbury had been caught attempting to take a boat and escape down to
the Thames. People along the banks recognized him and the resulting
outcry and abuse from the river banks forced the oarsmen to turn around
and retreat to the Tower.
 

The king set off for the meeting, taking along his trusted advisors. While
the records make sure to list the people who accompanied him, they are
silent on those members of the court who did not. In particular, Sir Simon
Sudbury and Sir Robert Hales are not mentioned. That is to say, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the prior of the Knights Hospitaller. Whether
they chose to stay in the Tower or were ordered to do so is not clear. Neither
is there any mention of who took on the role of leader in the rebel camp that
day, while the most notorious leaders—men such as Wat Tyler and John
Ball–remained in the city with some secret agenda.
 
At first, it seemed as though the meeting in Mile End would go well. There
were two demands from the rebels. First, that they should be permitted to
hunt down and kill anyone they deemed to be a traitor to the king and the
people. The second request was that the system of serfdom be abandoned,
with every Englishman being a ‘free man.’ The king’s response seemed
reasonable. To the first request, he agreed that ‘traitors’ should be executed,
but only provided they were judged to be guilty in a court of law. To the
second request, he turned to a crowd of thirty clerks who had come with
him, especially designed to draft legislature in quick measure.
 
But while the meeting between the rebels and the king seemed to be going
well, events inside the city played out regardless. The rebel leaders struck.
Wat Tyler and his men had planned to attack and hold the Tower of London
itself. An ambitious goal in the best of times, let alone with only a few
hundred scantily armed rebels. Already the most fortified building in the
country, the Tower was being guarded by hundreds of professional soldiers.
There was a drawbridge, a portcullis, and a heavy gate, not to mention the
sheer range of weapons possessed by those inside. Furthermore, the troops
in the Tower had Robert Hales, prior of the Knights Hospitaller and a
proven battle commander, to instruct them.
 
Nevertheless, Tyler and his men attacked. As it happened, it seemed as
though the rebels had a man on the inside. When the rebels arrived, they
discovered that the drawbridge was already down. The portcullis had been
lifted. The gate was open. The rebels strode into the Tower of London and
the historians struggle to note so much as an angry word as they did so.

 
Now having gained entry to the Tower, the rebels moved to capture their
foes. The Archbishop of Canterbury was their first target and they found
him in the chapel. Dragging him out into the open air, they beat him and
threw him to the floor. At the same time, another group arrived with the
similarly disarmed Hospitaller. The two men were held in place while the
rebels searched the tower for other men on their list; tax collectors, lords,
and the like. Once the rebels had everyone they wanted, they dragged the
men to Tower Hill. In front of a baying public, they sliced off the head of
each of the men. The severed heads were taken and placed on poles over
London Bridge for all to see. In deference to the former Archbishop of
Canterbury’s station, they took his distinctive mitre and nailed it to his
head.
 
After the executions, the rebels spread out across the city. They searched for
others on their list, the men who had caused them strife. In all, they found
around 160 victims, all of whom they killed. Among the dead were the
corrupt and the traitorous (as deemed by the rebels), as well as anyone who
spoke out against them or praised the recently deceased.
 
Furthermore, a special dispatch was organized by Tyler. He gathered
together a small group of rebels and sent them out of London, towards
Highbury, with the aim of destroying a very specific building. It also
belonged to the Hospitallers, having recently been renovated by the order
and being deemed as one of the most ostentatious and lavish houses around.
 
It didn’t take long for word of this attack to reach the king and the men in
Mile End. The meeting was abandoned and the king fled back to his home
in Castle Baynard, clearly not wanting to return to the Tower of London.
All the while, the collection of clerks who had been tasked with writing up
legislature carried on about their task. Before the king departed, many of
the rebels had snatched up pages from the clerks, riding back to their
hometowns to brandish this new royal decree.
 
What happened next is hazy and ill-recorded in the history books. It seems
that the king agreed to meet the rebels once again, this time at Smithfield.

The meeting was arranged for the next day, the 15th of June. Before the
meeting, the king attended mass at Westminster Abbey. He had been
followed to the service by a number of the rebels, curious to see what was
happening. When they were there, they spotted a particularly loathsome tax
collector hiding in one of the chapels. Despite the man’s pleas for mercy, he
was dragged out into the open air and beheaded in front of a crowd. The
king finished hearing mass and departed for Smithfield.
 
Many rebels were already waiting for him. They had lined up along one
side, while the king and his men lined up along the other. Exactly what
happened next is hotly disputed in the history books. It is said that Wat
Tyler was among the rebel leaders and that his fierce insults levied against
the king caused much consternation, or that his behavior was deemed to be
insulting to the crown in some fashion. In all likelihood, this probably just
gave the king and his men the excuse they needed, allowing them to follow
through with what had been the plan all the long. It happened as follows.
 
Standing on opposite sides of the field, the king requested the presence of
the leader of the rebels. This meant Wat Tyler. To issue this request, he sent
the Mayor of London himself, William Walworth, across the field. Tyler,
realizing that such an audience with the king would place him far from his
men and heavily outnumbered, grew suspicious. He came up with a hand
signal which, if implemented, meant that the rebels should immediately
attack. His orders were that, during such an attack, every member of the
opposing forces should be killed, all apart from the king. Joined by just one
man bearing his banner, Wat Tyler set out across the field.
 
It is telling that we only have government accounts of what happened next.
The majority of these people, it seems, were not there. In their version of
events—the only version we have–it seems as though Wat Tyler met with
the king. There, he issued his list of demands once again. This time, the
demands had increased. Now, Tyler wanted the church’s property to be
seized and the wealth distributed among the poor, he wanted numerous
legal changes, and he demanded that there only be one bishop for all of
England.
 

As Tyler worked through his list of demands in front of the king, William
Walworth silently drew his dagger. Sneaking up behind the rebel leader, the
mayor cut him along the neck. One of the king’s squires jumped to help,
taking out a sword and stabbing Tyler two times. As the rebel tried to turn
back towards his men, he fell from his horse. The wound was mortal. He
would not live.
 
From across the field, it was not clear what had happened. The hand signal
agreed before Tyler had departed had not been seen. Instead, they saw a
rider set out from across the broad expanse and come towards them. It was
the king, the fourteen year old boy himself. He spoke out to the rebels,
telling them that he was happy to meet their demands and that they should
accompany him to Clerkenwell–the place where the Hospitaller palace still
burned–to seal the pact. With that, he rode off, taking his men and his army,
too.
 
The rebels were left confused. They didn’t know what to do. A few set out
across the field themselves and recovered Tyler’s body. He was dying,
clearly, so was taken to a nearby hospital to see what could be done. After
more than an hour of trying to come up with a plan, the previously well-
organized rebels decided that they would follow the king’s instruction. They
set off for Clerkenwell.
 
Unbeknownst to them, anti-rebellion forces were beginning to mass.
Perhaps inspired by the news of Wat Tyler’s death, hundreds were
gathering. The Mayor, the king, and many other authority figures sent out
the call for any able bodied man to take up arms against the rebellion.
 
When they arrived in Clerkenwell, the rebels immediately demanded that
the king hand over everyone who had been a part of Wat Tyler’s murder. As
the rebels protested their case to the king, the anti-rebellion mob gathered
around. Slowly, without the rebels realizing who they were, these men
encircled the rebels. Eventually, the leader was able to inform the king that
he had the upper hand. Noting that the rebels were now heavily
outnumbered and surrounded, the king demanded that they disperse, lest
they be punished for their actions.

 
Acknowledging that the tables had turned, the rebel crowd began to break
up. This time, there was little organization. They moved away in dribs and
drabs, the only truly organized group seemingly led by John Ball, the
preacher, who took a band of rebels back across London Bridge. Whereas
they had passed over victoriously just three days before, now they were
fleeing the city.
 
Mayor William Walworth went looking for the rebel leader, Wat Tyler. He
found Tyler in the hospital near Smithfield, his wounds being attended to by
the nurses. Even though the injuries were likely mortal, Walworth was not
going to take the chance. He dragged Tyler from the hospital bed and out
into the street. There, like so many of the rebels’ victims, Tyler had his head
struck off. It was used to replace the heads of the king’s men on the poles
above London Bridge.
 
Many of the king’s inner circle received knighthoods. They had helped to
repel the mob from the city. But they had not entirely dealt with the
problem. Outside of London, many thousands of people were still angry.
The rage at the taxes and treatment of the poor was not just confined to
Essex and Kent. Indeed, in the weeks before and after the Peasants’ Revolt,
there were incidents all across the country.
 
Reports from Suffolk showed that a local preacher had gathered together
disgruntled locals to burn down the home of a corrupt nobleman, and
chased out clergymen from a monastery that held people in the grips of
serfdom. Records were burnt, wealth was plundered. The chancellor of
Cambridge University was similarly executed for corruption. A group of
rebels managed to take control of Nottingham Castle, marching through the
open gates in an echo of what had happened in the Tower of London. Other
castles were taken in this fashion, other aristocratic houses were sacked, and
other people were executed. It happened up and down England. Added to
this, many of the targets happened to belong to the Hospitallers.
 
It is clear that there was some communication and organization between the
rebels. As far north as Yorkshire, almost to the same day, peasant uprisings

took place. The fallout from the rebellion was huge. Across the country, the
king and the authorities clamped down on even the tiniest signs of disorder
and discontent. The pieces of paper that had been taken by some of the
rebels from the meeting with the king were disavowed. Promises were
broken, arrests were made, and people were executed. Inquisitions were
held. Not only to try to root out the rebels, but to uncover the wider web of
communication hidden behind the revolt. There was clearly a suspicion that
there was much more to the uprising than a simple and sudden rush of
blood to the collective heads of the peasantry. Someone, people suspected,
was behind all of this.
 
In a book about the Freemasons, you may be wondering why we have
started the discussion with examples from the medieval age which have
seemingly nothing to do with the Masons and their modern iterations. But
the stories about secret societies go back much further than you might
imagine. In looking closely at the Knights Templar and the Peasants’
Revolt, we can see the shadowy operations of a clandestine organization. In
order to thoroughly understand why modern masonry is such a
controversial subject, we should understand its ties to these age-old events.
As we will see in the next chapter, things might be more intertwined than
you may have ever imagined.


The Shadow Organization
 
The aftermath of the Peasants’ Revolt was brutal. Though most of the
records and discussions of the time stem from those who had a particular
interest in appealing to the king’s favor, there are ways in which we can
look deeper at the potential truth hidden behind the propaganda and bias.
For example, the paperwork associated with the questioning and
investigations by various aldermen and other state figures often turns up the
mention of a strange organization. While many of the rebels admitted that
they were legitimately outraged at the authorities, others happened to refer
to a mysterious group which dispatched representatives and messengers,
stirring up discord and helping to inspire the rebellion. This group was
referred to in the records as the Great Society.
 
A book about the Freemasons would be remiss not to mention the Great
Society. Though we have covered a lot of ground already in this history, the
benefit will soon arrive. The idea is to draw a line between the earliest
iterations of the Knights Templar, through to the Great Society which
helped organize the Peasants’ revolt, through to the emergence into wider
society of the Freemasons, and then their ultimate acceptance as a part of
the fabric of modern civilization. While some might suggest that this hints
at a wider conspiracy theory, that one organization has been dominating the
political machinations of Western society for many centuries, this is not
true. Instead, the presence and importance of secret societies (of which the
Freemasons are the most famous in the modern world) should be examined
with great scrutiny. In order to do this, understanding why the modern
Freemasons might be connected to their medieval forebears is essential. In
order to continue this quest for knowledge, we should ask ourselves: who
were the Great Society?
 
When we look back at the official account of the Peasants’ Revolt, there are
a few points which stand out. First, the role of the king. Though still a
teenager at the time, Richard II is painted as a leader and a decisive figure.
He makes decisions, inspires men, and eventually crushes the rebellion. But

this flies in the face of reality. In truth, it was not until the age of twenty
three that Richard truly ruled his kingdom. Before then, it was governed
mostly by an elected council of regents, an inner circle of men who acted
and made decisions on the king’s behalf. Unofficial descriptions of Richard
that have passed down tell us of a rather weak-willed, stammering teenager.
Definitely not the sort of boy to have ridden up to a rebel army and spoken
confidently to them after cutting down their leader.
 
Second, the role of the Tower of London is somewhat suspect. It was the
easiest place in England to defend, especially against a small band of rebels.
Why was it so easy for Wat Tyler to simply stroll in with a small group of
men? Why did he not bother holding it himself as a headquarters after
making his executions? Why bother taking it at all if the meeting with the
king held any chance of resolving the rebels’ issues? It seems more as
though the point of the meeting with the king at Mile End was to remove
the king from the city, rather than the rebels. This then opened up the Tower
for the attack from Tyler, the rebel leader who didn’t even bother to attend
the meeting with the king. Could it be that the attack on the Tower was the
true objective?
 
A third point, and in a similar vein; why were key members of the king’s
council left behind in the Tower for the rebels to execute? The Archbishop
of Canterbury being left behind is perhaps understandable, seeing as he had
tried to flee the Tower using a boat that very morning. But Robert Hales
being left in the Tower is much more difficult to explain. As the prior of the
Knights Hospitallers, Hales was not only an experienced battle commander
and one of the best fighters in the kingdom, but he was the man who should
naturally have been chosen to accompany the king while he met with a
great threat to the kingdom. Hales had fought in the latest Crusade with
great success. He was head of a military order of monastic knights. He was
known throughout the kingdom as a fearsome man and a fine soldier. Why
leave such a man behind?
 
There are just so many questions. Why did the king not return to the tower
following the meeting with the rebels? Was it a coincidence that his
household servants and staff happened to be in place already? We come

back again to the idea that it was the king’s council of regents, rather than
the king himself who made these decisions. They likely arranged such
matters beforehand and simply led Richard around.
 
It also helps to look at the king’s role in the aftermath of the rebellion. For
many, royal pardons were issued. Towns which had played host to the
rebels were issued an amnesty, allowing them to return to their business and
for the matter to be forgotten. But it did not apply to everyone. There were
287 men specifically named as being excluded from the amnesty. Apart
from those on the list who already happened to be in prison following the
crackdown on the rebels, the other men simply vanished. They do not
appear again in the record books. Men such as Henry de Newark and
Richard de Melton were named on the list of the 287, as well as being
mentioned in a royal writ that was issued on the 10th of December, 1381,
wanted for the role they had played in riots in Beverly. The response from
the local government was that the men were simply not to be found
anywhere in the area. They had vanished.
 
As such, the natural follow up question is to ask where they went. In a time
when movement between towns and cities was much more difficult and
much less practiced, the disappearance of people outside a local sphere of
influence was a much bigger deal. The fact that these men were just a few
examples, that it was the same story for many of the men on the list of the
287, seems strange in and of itself. Some historians have drawn a parallel
between the vanishing of these rioters and the vanishing of the Knights
Templar seventy years beforehand. The two groups are similar: recently
condemned by the authorities, wanted by the government and the church
both, and suddenly in desperate need of shelter, food, and somewhere to
hide. For so many men to suddenly find refuge with such skill seems
indicative of a pre-planned escape mechanism, perhaps the existence of safe
houses and bolt holes ready for those men who would inevitably draw the
government’s ire. This support, it has been suggested, was provided by the
so-called Great Society.
 
At the same time, the reaction of the church was telling. Despite the fact
that the rebels cut off the head of the Archbishop of Canterbury, his

replacement was not concerned with direct retribution. Instead, the church
launched a campaign against heresy, the very same crime which the
authorities accused the Templars of committing seven decades earlier. But
the true impact of the rebellion on the church would not be felt for a while
yet. It was the seeds of doubt and resentment which emerged during the
Revolt that would later flower in full during the Protestant Reformation.
 
But, as mentioned before, the biggest mystery of the Peasants’ Revolt is
undoubtedly the shadow organization that seemed to be at work arranging
things and colluding behind the scenes. That there was some level of secret
organization happening behind the rebellion seems to be a fact agreed upon
by most historians, though they differ on the exact details and scope of the
mystery group. Furthermore, one of the main questions is whether such an
organization was acting in direct response to the political situation of 1381,
or was in fact a pre-existing body that had begun to act in response to
grudges and agendas held for many hundreds of years? To put it simply,
was the organization a one off response or an already established group?
Could the 287 men absent from the amnesty have been suspected members
of the group? Could this mysterious shadow organization have actually
been the lingering remains of the Knights Templar, who had been in hiding
for seventy years?
 
All indications point to the fact that such a large scale organized response to
the government must have taken a great deal of planning. Thanks to
recovered documents from sheriffs and bailiffs, we know that the
authorities believed that meetings had been held in secret in the months
leading up to June. This would have required a great deal of effort.
Establishing a network of trustworthy people, vetting members, and
deciding upon agendas and meeting places is tough, even when limited to a
single geographic spot. Trying to do the same across all of medieval
England would be incredibly difficult.
 
As it stands, the organization behind the Peasants’ Revolt needed to be
disciplined, clever, motivated, and prepared. Such a secret society, one
which knew how to erect and maintain a means of clandestine
communication across the country without being caught, seems to have

been out of the reach of the average peasant. Even working in groups of two
or three towns, the means and resources available to the average working
man would likely have been far from enough to accomplish such a task.
Add in the fact that the majority of the peasants were illiterate and the true
scope of such an organization begins to become apparent.
 
It should also be mentioned that, as hard as any such organization would be
working to keep itself secret, there would be those who were working to
uncover them. Spies, traitors, and double agents were not out of the
question. In response, secret signals are used. These could be gestures, pre-
arranged conversation cues, or mannerisms. The important part is that, in a
society working across England, when messengers and agents do not know
one another, such a system much be standardized. Again, this shows a level
of resources and skill above the typical rebellion.
 
However, in a time when it is easy to read many sprawling conspiracy
theories and often overreaching ideas of what a secret society might be
capable of achieving, it should be noted that the Peasants’ Revolt was not
entirely orchestrated by the Great Society. There were a great many social
and political motivations for the uprising. The most obvious of these is the
Black Death and its aftereffects. The effect the Plague had on the labor
market was one of the driving forces of the rebellion and it would be
intellectually dishonest to suggest something like the idea that an
organization purposefully introduced an epidemic into the country to create
the conditions for a revolt. Nor could they have been responsible for the
corruption and attitude of the church, nor the taxes and laws created by the
king’s government.
 
Instead, the organizing hand behind the Peasants’ Revolt seems to have
seen these conditions and opportunistically seized upon them when stoking
the fires of rebellion. Taking old issues and grievances among the people,
they articulated and voiced such problems for all to hear. They focused
blame and anger, directing it toward their own goals. The fact that Wat
Tyler was killed before the Revolt could truly fulfil its goals likely means
that we will never know what this mysterious leader and his organization

truly wanted. We do know that the guiding hand of the rebellion seemed to
die with him, with the organizers shrinking back into the shadows.
 
So where does this leave us? Though we suspect that the existence of the
so-called Great Society was certainly true, we have close to seven centuries
separating us from the reality. Furthermore, the quest to uncover evidence is
difficult. Not only have just a fraction of the documents from the time even
survived into the present day, but those that did are often written from the
perspective of the authorities. As we have seen, the secret society in
question was adept at hiding itself from the government. Those of us who
are searching seven hundred years later are already at a huge disadvantage.
Rather than proof of the Great Society itself, we see the imprint of the
organization. We see the foot print, rather than the foot itself. We can
interpret their existence based on the circumstances, the environment, and
the government’s response, rather than any one piece of brilliant evidence.
There is no smoking gun. There is not even a reference to a single Great
Society, the sources refuse to use ‘the’ as the definitive article, instead
mentioning ‘a’ Great Society. We only use the label of the Great Society
due to the fact that we have no better name.
 
Furthermore, trying to prove the existence of a secret society seems to be a
contradiction in terms. To be truly secret and truly successful, a secret
society would not be known to anyone else but members. That is perhaps
why there is no official record of any kind of secret society anywhere in
medieval England, other than the Lollards (whose work is only tangentially
related to this matter).
 
And now, at least—and somewhat briefly—we come to the Ancient Order
of the Free and Accepted Masons. From the outset, we should state that
there is no contemporary documentation that confirms the operation of the
Freemasons in England during the rebellion. Equally, no evidence exists to
the contrary, though the burden of proof remains on the former position.
Instead, the evidence linking the Freemasons with the uprising comes from
a few years later.
 

After 1717, there was a shift in the way the Masons operated. As we will go
into detail later on, they moved out of the shadows and became a public
organization. It is after this time that the Freemasons exist as a verifiable
group. But that has not prevented people who have been writing about the
Freemasons to trace the lineage back even further. A cursory internet search
or a glimpse through a number of the less-thoroughly researched books on
the matter will list men such as Pythagoras, Julius Caesar, and other
historical figures as being members of the order, or perhaps even
Grandmasters. These are often flights of fancy, with little to link the
speculation to reality. Such matters are hardly worth mentioning, beyond
acknowledging their speculative existence. Other, slightly more tempered
suggestions, have put forward men such as King Solomon (the man who
built on Temple Mount) and that his temple was the first edifice dedicated
to Masonry. More modern historians have labelled this an equal flight of
fancy. However, that is not to say that the lineage of the Freemasons cannot
be traced back to many centuries before the time when they first emerged
into public view.
 
For many historians, the roots of the organization now known as the
Freemasons can be traced to the medieval times. During this period, it has
been suggested that stone masons and other professionals banded together
in guilds (a verifiable fact) and that these guilds then transformed into
secret societies. This is one of the most commonly accepted versions of the
origin of the Freemasons. One only need look at the name to see the clear
etymological link between a guild of masons and the Freemasons. So how
does this relate to the Peasants’ Revolt and the Great Society that may have
organized it all?
 
Historians have pointed first to the alleged leader of the rebels, Walter the
Tyler (to give him his full name.) As was the case in many professions
handed down from father to son in England at the time, the surname of a
man (typically using the additional ‘the’) would be an indication of his
profession. In an age when a profession might stay in a family for years and
communities would be relatively small, such names were important.
Though their modern versions have been divorced from such professional
qualities, one need only look at the surname of Wat Tyler to note that he

was likely a tradesman, or had at least come from a family of trades-
orientated tylers (tilers).
 
Wat Tyler is a fascinating figure in English history. Seemingly from
nowhere, he emerges to lead one of the country’s largest ever rebellions,
leading 100,000 peasants in a march against the aristocracy. He destroys
many properties (including many belonging to the Hospitallers), burns
many records, and executes many people (including both the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the prior of the Knights Hospitallers). Just as quickly as he
appears on the scene, he departs. A few days after becoming one of the
most important people in the entire kingdom, he is executed and his head
stuck on a pole over London Bridge. In all, his time in the spotlight lasted
about eight days. Before then, we know nothing of the man. After, he
becomes a legend.
 
As such, there have been suggestions that Wat Tyler might have been using
a false name. Though his name might suggest a history as a roof tiler, his
clear military acumen and leadership qualities seem to render this
redundant. Instead, it could be that he chose the name ‘Tyler’ on purpose,
wishing to indicate his position and his importance to those who knew the
relevance of the name.
 
At this point, we will make a detour into Masonic law. For those who are
unfamiliar, a Masonic Lodge as an organization is a well-defined structure.
Within each lodge there are specific titles relating to specific roles and jobs.
The name Tyler is one such title. Within the context of a Masonic Lodge,
the man who has the title of Tyler is considered the sentry and the enforcer,
the sergeant-at-arms of his respective Lodge. It is his responsibility to
screen potential members, to   check their credentials, to ensure that the
meeting place is secure, and then—while the meeting takes place—to stand
guard outside the room while holding a drawn sword. In modern parlance, it
is essentially a ceremonial position. In the secret societies of old, at a time
when they existed outside of (and often in opposition to) the law, it was an
essential post. The name Tyler, to Masons, means something incredibly
specific.
 

Therefore, if were are to entertain the idea that there might be a link (any at
all) between the Great Society and the group who would eventually become
the Freemasons, we can understand that the name Wat the Tyler was far
more than a random pseudonym. To those in the know, the emergence of
Wat Tyler at the head of the rebellion would have been a secret sign, a
signal that this was an ordained military leader, the man who would hold
the sword and deliver discipline and military success. The connection is
tenuous, certainly speculative, but it is interesting nonetheless.
 
On a similar level is the idea that Yorkshire was an important center of the
uprising, especially in the city of York itself. The city has long played an
important role in Masonry, with Masons as recently as the 18th Century
being certain of the idea that the York Lodge is the oldest in the country.
The founding of the Lodge, they say, dates back to the construction of York
Cathedral in medieval times. Over the course of the 18th Century, the York
Lodge would play a key role in Freemasonry. Annoyed at the decision of
London Lodges to go public with their existence in 1717, they spent the
next decade distancing themselves from their southern brothers and
asserting their right to stand alone, an importance and a privilege they
suggest has been incumbent to the York Lodge since “time immemorial.”
Added to this, the special position of York with regards to Freemasonry is
demonstrated by the modern belief—especially among American Masons—
that the York branch of Masonry is the most authentic, most in tune with
Masonic traditions.
 
There’s no denying that the rebellion was certainly ideologically similar to
many Masonic principles. Looking at the Revolt on a macro level, the
rejection of serfdom, the determination to be free, and to throw of the
shackles of domineering power relationships is very much in line with
many ideas held aloft by the Masons. Indeed, one of the central concepts of
the order—known as the Landmarks of Freemasonry—requires that a
Mason be a “free man born of a free mother.” Serfdom, seemingly, would
prohibit this. Indeed, the fact that—by the close of the 15th Century—almost
every man (at least, every white English male) in England could be
considered “free” has been used by some to indicate that the very existence
of such a requirement points to the idea that Masonry as a concept is very

old. That the Peasants’ Revolt was perhaps a demonstration in favor of
Masonic ideals, however, is not proof that any Great Society could be
considered a forebear or an early iteration of the Freemasons. It does,
however, help add color to the argument that the Masons may have existed
(and held influence) long before the time that is most commonly accepted.
 
Perhaps the strongest evidence tying our various strands together is best
demonstrated by looking at another society altogether. The key to
understanding the potential earliest glimpses of a Masonic secret society
could well be demonstrated through the existence of the Knights
Hospitallers. The numerous attacks of the rebels on Hospitaller properties
and the execution of their prior (or leader), Sir Robert Hales, is very telling.
Take, for example, George de Donesby. Despite being from Lincolnshire,
he was eventually arrested some 200 miles from his home and did indeed
confess to being a member of the so-called Great Society. The coincidence
here is that the striking peasants back in his home town were particularly
distraught at the behavior of their local lords and had stopped paying taxes,
taxes which would have eventually ended up in a manor controlled by the
Hospitallers. He is one of the few men who can be directly tied to the
existence of the Great Society and also possessed clear structural
resentment of the Knights Hospitallers.
 
Of course, the string of attacks by the rioters on Hospitaller properties
demonstrates that this was clearly an agenda driven process. For example,
taking the rioters especially north of London into Highbury in order to burn
down the Hospitallers’ newly rebuilt manor is a clear indication that they
were to be considered a natural enemy of the rioters. In the middle of
London, surrounded by a litany of potential targets, the rebels went six
miles out of their way to attack Hospitaller property. Similar examples can
be found across the country, where rioters made special dispensation to
target such properties. In Cambridge, for example, men rode ten miles from
their path to burn another Hospitaller manor.
 
It has long been held that the Peasants’ Revolt was partly a demonstration
against the corrupt nature of the church. In so far as this is true, the rebels
certainly targeted churches and religious buildings in their attacks,

particularly when they were burning records which might be used by the
government in propagating serfdom. But the churches that they did attack
were disproportionally owned and operated by the Hospitallers. It was only
the properties that were owned by these Knights that the rebels purposefully
sought out and burned down. Other attacks were often sporadic crimes of
opportunity. Very rarely did the rebels deviate from their set path other than
to attack Hospitaller properties.
 
Indeed, the one church which the rebels did not seem to want to burn down
was the Hospitaller church just off Fleet Street. Instead, they took all of the
available records out from the building and burned them in the street. Was it
a coincidence that this same property had previously been one of the
Knights Templars’ favored properties? Might there have been a wish to
preserve this church over all others, despite the presence of the
Hospitallers? The church had been consecrated in 1185 by Heraclius, the
then-patriarch of the holy city of Jerusalem in the name of the Knights
Templar. The same patriarch similarly consecrated the Hospitallers’
property in Clerkenwell, but—perhaps as that property had not previously
been owned by the Templars—the rebels had no issue with burning it down.
Could it have been a coincidence that the attacks by the rebels were so
clearly aimed towards one of the oldest enemies of the Knights Templar?
Could this have been an act of vengeance from a group which had
seemingly been driven underground and out of existence?
 
Even small touches, such as the choice of uniform among many of the
rebels, points towards a Templar influence. In places such as Scarborough,
Beverly, and York, the rebels attired themselves in a white shawl, hooded
and with a red decorative touch. Not only does such an item indicate
planning—it would have been hard to make 500 of these on the spot and
distribute them over long distances—but it was remarkably similar to the
choice of clothing worn by the Templars themselves, a white mantle with a
red cross.
 
One of the most interesting links comes from the death of Jack Strawe.
Strawe was one of the highest ranking members of the rebel army,
something of a right hand man to Wat Tyler. He was caught and taken to

London, whereupon he was sentenced to death for his crimes of helping to
organize a rebellion. The authorities still tried to extract a confession from
the man, however, and in exchange offered Strawe the chance of a Christian
burial and the promise that three years’ of masses would be said in his
name. All he had to do was to confess the “true purpose” of the rebellion.
Strawe agreed and gave the authorities a statement. In this statement, he
confirmed that the plan was not only to assemble a massive crowd of
common people and to execute any lords who opposed them, but to destroy
the Hospitallers. Not just their property, but their organization. This hatred
was left unexplained, but there seems to be only one logical answer to those
who ask this question—just who could have hated the Hospitallers to such a
degree?
 
It was a hatred that had been brewing for decades. Ever since the official
disbanding of the Knights Templar in 1312, following the five years of
torture and investigation by numerous institutions, there had been the
question of what should be done with the Templars’ extensive business
portfolio. Many of those interested in breaking up the Templars wanted the
wealth for themselves—and they took it —but one of the chief beneficiaries
was the Knights Hospitaller. It’s easy to see why a group who had been
hounded and chased into secrecy might resent and loathe one of their chief
rivals. Would this have been the motivation behind the destruction of
Hospitaller property and the execution of the grand prior of the order,
Robert Hales? Could the Templars have had a similar grudge against the
Catholic Church—the same organization which had founded and then
abandoned them—to the point where they ignored the Holy Sacrament,
ignored ancient rites of sanctuary, and even executed the Archbishop of
Canterbury? It’s obvious that the Templars might have resented both
institutions and that the Revolt provided them with the opportunity to
extract some kind of revenge.
 
Indeed, there seems even to be a direct reference to the Templars in the
chronicles taken from Bury St. Edmunds. One of the most bloody sites of
the Revolt, it was specifically excluded from the amnesty. When digging
into the records from the time, Antonia Gransden’s book highlights the ire
that might have been raised by the Templars. The chronicles repurpose

some of the Templars’ most heroic and notable tales, with the Benedictine
authors turning the Knights into treasonous men rather than tragic heroes.
The accounts even go so far as to accuse the Templars of poisoning the
King of Cyprus and his family. It would be enough to prompt a hidden
Templar force into anger and hints at the propaganda campaign that was
issued following the Templars’ demise. As the source of some of the more
extreme lies about the Templars, Bury St. Edmunds might well have had the
violence brought upon the town through the actions of the Benedictine
monks.
 
All of this supposition brings us to one important question. Though the
Peasants’ Revolt is commonly regarded as a failure, is this actually true? If
indeed there was a Great Society—which might have been the descendants
of the Knights Templar—providing guidance, expertise, and motivation,
was the Revolt actually a success for those behind the scenes?
 
If we take the point of view of the so-called Great Society and assume that
they bore some connection to the Templars, then was the destruction of
Hospitaller, Crown, and Church property actually one of the major goals of
the rebellion? If so, then there was more than a modicum of success to be
enjoyed. Destroying vast amounts of valuable properties, destroying
records, and removing wealth from the noted enemies of the Templars
would certainly indicate that the Revolt could have been a success from the
Templar point of view.
 
But this is difficult to believe. If we are to entertain the idea that the
Templars were themselves the Great Society—or at least, that they formed
its foundational layer—then we must wonder how an order than had been
either destroyed or driven underground for sixty-nine years could possibly
have been so influential. As well as having many of their most important
commanders executed during the purge against the Templars, those knights
who were members of the order would have aged drastically. Those aged
twenty, for example, would be approaching ninety years by the time of the
Revolt. They would have had to have been lower ranking members, at the
very least. It seems implausible that members such as these would be able
to live long enough to inspire a rebellion (especially if we discount more

wild propositions, such as the Templars’ ownership of the Holy Grail and
any attendant life-extending properties such an item might possess).
 
Likewise, the idea that the Templars could perpetuate themselves in secret
over a number of future generations, still maintaining that initial lust for
revenge, seems just as unlikely. Could such a society remain secret in
England for close to seventy years, positioning itself to take advantage of
certain societal changes and alterations that would eventually lead to the
Peasants’ Revolt?
 
Stepping back from the intricacies of the story for a moment, we can look at
the facts:
There was likely a group (loosely structured) of people who
sympathized with the Templars in England around the time of their
disbandment. This is seen in the larger numbers of members who
managed to evade capture in England compared to other countries.
When the crown and the church later worked together to find
remaining Templars, they found only three members.
Of the Templars who were captured in England during the first wave
of arrests, many managed to escape from prison. This means that they
had help, either on the inside or the outside.
The first wave of arrests in England happened three months after the
order was originally given on the continent. This would provide the
Templars in England time to make preparations and prepare their
legacy and hiding places.


During those three months, the Templars could well have erected a
new organization, a loosely structured group designed to help them
following the order from the Pope.
If such a group did exist, it would be founded with the considerable
resources the Templars had at their disposal, which would be needed
to carry on their fight long after the demise of the original members.
Thus, it would be well-funded and would surely morph over the
coming generations.
If such an organization were to live for a long time, then the use of
simple goals and objectives would allow them to remain focused,
despite loose organization and the threat of detection.
 
But where could such an organization exist? Is it possible that we can draw
a line between the fall of the Templars, the rebellion of the Great Society,
and then the emergence of the Freemasons? We have already began to look
at just how all three could feasibly share the same motivations and—as we
will eventually see—how they share much of the same ideology. In the
future, the Freemasons would even incorporate many of the Templars’
words and phrases into their very existence. But in order to try and get to
the bottom of this mystery, we will need to look north of the border. The
key to all three organizations, it seems, is to be found in Scotland.


Scottish Roots
 
Scotland seems to be the common denominator when discussing the
Freemasons and the Knights Templar. It is in Scotland that marks both the
fall of the Templars and the rise of the Masons, though the exact nature of
the transition is the hazy, difficult part. Depending on who you believe,
such a transition could have taken place over a matter of years, of decades,
or of centuries. In this next chapter, we will try to figure out how exactly the
foundation might have been laid by the Templars to form the organization
which might eventually become the Freemasons, as well as how this relates
to the Great Society and the Peasants’ Revolt. In order to achieve this, we
should take a moment or two to consider the political situation in Scotland.
 
The relationship between Scotland and England is fractious, to say the least.
Historically, the two countries have loathed one another for centuries. In a
large part, this was due to the actions of a man we have already encountered
in this book, Edward I. Nicknamed the Hammer of the Scots, Edward
dedicated much of his life to dealing with problems to his north. We have
already discussed Edward’s role in restoring England’s status and do not
have time to go into great depth on the fascinating story of his wars with
Scotland. However, a brief overview is necessary to set the scene.
 
Simply put, Scotland wanted to be independent from English rule. For clear
reasons, England did not want this to happen. Relationships between the
Lords of Scotland and the English crown allowed for a kind of accord,
which suited both ruling parties. But the Scottish people were not pleased.
From the ranks, a man rose up and fought against the English. His name
was William Wallace. Immortalized in modern film, most people have
heard of Wallace and his demands of freedom. He was one of the most
successful Scottish battle commanders when it came to leading the fight
against the English. By the end of 1297, Wallace had led small Scottish
armies against much larger English forces and had won.
 

But Edward I was a formidable foe. He and Wallace locked horns and
fought against one another over the coming years. These battles were
fought against a greater geopolitical struggle, as Scotland tried to win over
the allegiance of France and the Vatican, hoping that such an alliance might
secure their independence. England fought back on the diplomatic stage,
too, as Edward sealed their own accord with France in 1303. Edward, who
made great use of the military force of the Templar Knights, finally won
over when he convinced Wallace’s fellow Scots to betray him. Abandoned
by many Scottish Lords, William Wallace was caught and then executed in
horrific fashion. Edward I seemed to have won and earned himself the
nickname which would eventually emblazon his tomb. He had finally
hammered the Scots.
 
It was the monarchs to follow that would have the most importance,
however. As strong a leader as Edward I had been, those who followed
possessed none of his fortitude. By the time Edward II was crowned king of
England, he had inherited a delicate situation. To the north, Scotland was
ignited with hate against the English. To make matters worse, the
emergence of Robert the Bruce meant he now faced a Scottish king of his
own. Robert had murdered his rival for the crown and was beginning a
renewed campaign for Scottish independence. Though he had initially
suffered defeat while Edward I was alive, he had retreated and planned his
revenge. The brutality of Edward I against the Scottish would leave his
successor with a furious nation led by a daunting opponent.
 
To the south, the death of Edward I had many implications. While Edward I
was well-regarded by Prince Philip of France, Edward II was nowhere near
as impressive a figure. Indeed, it was Edward I’s admiration and use of the
Templars which meant that Philip was unable to make a move against the
organization. With the death of Edward I, the Templars no longer enjoyed
such protection. Philip, noting the power vacuum that had emerged, was
now able to make his move. In tandem with the Vatican, he launched the
campaign against the Knights Templar.
 
So this leaves us with two institutions with shared resentments. Scotland
and the Knights Templar had both been betrayed by France and the Vatican.

With the departure of Edward I, the Templars no longer enjoyed a position
of privilege within England. Hounded by Philip’s forces and the church,
they were forced to flee, to retreat from the public eye and to find a place of
sanctuary. With their wealth and their knowledge, it seems as though they
would have been welcomed across the border in Scotland. The two bodies
shared similar enemies, which practically made them allies.
 
Following the orders issued by the Vatican for the outlawing of the Knights
Templar, countries across Europe reacted differently. While Templars in
Paris, for example, were captured, tortured, and executed, this was not the
fate of every single member. True, the leaders of the Templars had been
tempted to go to France before the order was issued and this meant that the
top level leadership (including the grand master) was killed, with as many
as 56 Templars being burned alive on just one day in Paris. In France,
certainly, the strike against the Templars was vicious.
 
But in Spain and Portugal, for example, there was a greater threat. Muslim
armies had been invading the Iberian Peninsula from the south, with the
Templars’ military branch being a key part of the fight against the invaders.
Accordingly, the local branches of the church conducted their own
inquisition into the Templars. While the French and Italian clergy had
extracted confessions under torture— during which the Templars allegedly
admitted to everything, from urinating on the cross to blaspheming against
God—their Iberian counterparts found the Templars to be innocent. But that
did not mean they could be allowed to exist. Instead, the local Templars
were rebranded and emerged as an apparently new order, the Knights of
Christ. A key difference in this new outfit was that they were responsible to
the local king, rather than the pope. The new Knights of Christ were
permitted to continue their fight against the Muslim invaders.
 
In Germany, it happened differently. Hugo of Gumbach, the local leader of
the Templars, decided to don his battle armor and marched defiantly into
the council being held by the Archbishop of Metz. There, he issued a
proclamation assuring everyone that the Templars were entirely innocent
and that their grand master was falsely accused. In fact, he stated, it was
Pope Clement V who was the evil party. Hugo declared that he was no

longer in thrall to the Holy See because of this. Along with all of the other
Knights Templar present, he was innocent. So convinced was he of his
innocence, both he and the other armored knights would gladly enter into
trial by combat with anyone who believed otherwise. Such accusations
abated rather quickly.
 
On Cyprus, the pope’s instructions carried even less weight. As the location
of the Templar headquarters, it took months for the ruling Prince of Cyprus
to even acknowledge the papal bull and when the Templars were eventually
tried, they were found to be innocent. The trial so incensed the pope that he
immediately dispatched his own team of inquisitors to the island to perform
a retrial. Unfortunately, however, no documents tell us of the outcome of
such a trial. By this time, however, the Templars would have had more than
ample time to prepare for the Vatican’s men.
 
Even in France, things were not panning out exactly as Philip had hoped.
One of the main motivations for his taking down of the Templars—to take
their vast wealth for himself—was proving to be difficult to satisfy. The
treasure that he might have expected to find seemed to be gone. The
Templar fleet, one of the largest in Europe, had similarly gone missing from
La Rochelle. The eighteen ships that were owned and operated by the
Templars seemed to have simply vanished from existence.
 
What wealth did remain would be transferred officially into the ownership
of the Hospitallers. Eventually, Pope Clement V would decree that the
wealth and property of the Templars would transferred to the rival order,
excepting those on the Iberian Peninsula, due to the threat from the Muslim
forces. It would be an order that angered Prince Philip, the French monarch
hoping that a new order would be founded, with himself at the head, which
would officially be granted the wealth of the Templars. There would be
something of a concession to Philip, however, as local monarchs would be
permitted the chance to recoup the money they had spent on the arrests,
torture, and prosecution of the Templars, figures which might seem to have
been plucked out of thin air. This desire to please everyone by the church
would form the basis of a campaign to launch a new Crusade in the future.
 

So, while the treatment of the Templars was different across Europe, it was
the situation in Great Britain that pertains most to the story we’re telling.
And in England, the change in monarch was notable. The transition from
one of the country’s strongest kings to one of its weakest plays a big role in
the tale.
 
There are many stories about King Edward II of England. One of the best
known concerns the teenage king’s love life, with many historians
speculating that his true love was not the French princess to whom he was
betrothed, but a young man named Piers Gaveston. Their blossoming
homosexual romance had escaped Edward I’s attention while the older king
fought fiercely against Scotland. The relationship would eventually become
a wedge driven between father and son, with the anger strong enough to
prompt Edward I to strike his son and drag him around a room by his hair.
Eventually, Gaveston was banished.
 
Naturally, the new King Edward II’s first act was to recall his lover from
banishment. The move set the tone for the new reign, with the king’s
council vying for power. Gaveston’s role in this was to mock his lover’s
advisors, causing consternation throughout the aristocracy of the country.
This proved to be a distraction when the papal orders filtered through.
While Clement V demanded that the court deal with the Templars, those in
power were too distracted by the question of how to deal with Piers
Gaveston. Against this backdrop, Robert the Bruce was resuming his war
for independence and the upcoming wedding between Edward and Isabella
of France was occupying the thoughts of many.
 
The pope and Philip both petitioned the English to hurry up in their
prosecution of the Templars. The new king seemed reluctant to believe the
charges, though. His father had been a strong advocate and ally of the
Templars and their presence was a notable part of the young prince’s
childhood. He believed the charges to be false and wrote to other monarchs
around Europe asking for their support on the matter. Before they could
reply, the official papal decree reached him and Edward was left with no
choice.
 

That’s not to say he acted immediately, however. A period of months
existed between receiving the decree and persecuting the English Templars.
It was more than enough time for the Templars to make plans. When the
king’s men eventually rode out from London to track down the Templars,
they found the knights had simply vanished. Only a few stragglers were
caught. Furthermore, the records kept by the order had vanished with them.
Even the Templars’ treasure seemed to have disappeared. When the officers
entered the Templars London headquarters, expecting to find a huge amount
of wealth, they found less than £200, a fraction of what was expected.
 
At the same time, King Edward II had also vanished. He had departed to
France to be married to the young Princess Isabella (twelve years old at the
time) and had left Gaveston in charge. That meant that Gaveston—to the
horror of the nobles—was not only ruling the kingdom but was in charge of
the prosecution of the Templars. He didn’t seem to care for the task and the
attempts to capture any Templars in the months following the papal decree
were half-hearted. Of the few who were captured, some even managed to
escape. Either there was a properly organized escape plan held by the
Templars, or the people conducting the pursuit had little taste for the
prosecution. In likelihood, it was a combination of both.
 
In England, those Templars that were captured were not tortured. Though
they remained incarcerated by the time Edward returned to the country and
afterwards, they were not subjected to the same horrors that befell those
captured Templars on the continent. This riled the pope to the point where
he sent his own torturers over to England to carry out the task, as well as
threatening excommunication for anyone who helped the Templars in any
way. Even though Edward placed some restrictions on the torturers working
in England—no mutilations, for example—he nevertheless bowed to the
ultimate papal authority. While this seemed to bring no confession out of
the few Templars in prison, it had the effect of driving the hidden members
even further from the gaze of authorities gaze.
 
While England eventually acquiesced to the pope’s whims, Scotland was a
different story. The pope tried and failed to have Templars in Scotland
arrested. Indeed, despite the fact that Robert the Bruce did make a few

perfunctory arrests in the first month of 1308, his on-going military
struggles meant that—when confronted with a trained and useful military
man such as an armored knight—he was more prone to recruitment than
punishment. Robert was disinterested in any potential Crusade, didn’t care
about monastic military organizations, cared not for Philip of France or the
pope, and was aware that trouble was brewing down south as Edward II
prepared to resume his father’s campaign to quell Scottish independence.
To that end, he had allegedly cast aside the papal decree concerning the
Templars. It was never announced in Scotland. As such, it seemed that
Scotland was a legal sanctuary for any fleeing Templars.
 
That meant that, should any Templar knight find himself in a difficult legal
situation down in England or Europe, he could not only expect to find
haven in Scotland, but he might well be welcomed with open arms,
providing he was willing to join Robert the Bruce’s military. Given that the
Scottish cavalry at the time was supposedly poor in numbers and quality,
trained and equipped knights were essential.
 
By 1313, England was in a precarious position. A longstanding issue with
Piers Gaveston and the nobles had eventually led to the king’s lover being
executed. As the nobles tried to reassert influence over Edward II, the
king’s father-in-law—Philip of France—advised that he should ratify his
allegiance to the church. This meant embarking on the Vatican’s newly
announced Crusade. A year earlier, the same council which had official
disbanded the Templars once and for all announced an attempt to reclaim
the Holy Land in the name of Christendom. Despite England ostensibly
pledging to help, to do so would have been suicidal. Sending off the
country’s best fighting men when Robert the Bruce stared down from
Scotland would have undone all the progress Edward I had worked so hard
to achieve. Even while the Crusade was announced, Robert was moving
through Scotland and steadily reclaiming castle after castle. If Edward
wanted to reclaim his authority in the kingdom—and if he wanted to use a
successful military campaign to do so—then the Crusades were not the
opportunity he needed. Instead, he would have to fight the Scottish.
 

And so Edward rallied a force of 25,000 men to march north and dominate
Scotland once and for all. In his army, the king of England had 5,000
cavalry and 10,000 archers. In response, Robert the Bruce was able to
muster 10,000 troops. But Robert knew the English were coming. Long
before Edward and his army arrived, the Scottish could carefully select the
battlefield. As the English marched mile after mile, making themselves
tired and hungry, the Scottish dug in and made sure they were well fed and
refreshed. As it happened, Robert placed his army on the spot between the
advancing English from the south and one of the few remaining English
outposts in the region, Stirling Castle. This meant Edward would not be
able to resupply before he met the Scottish army.
 
When it came to planning the battle, Robert drew on everything he had
learned from William Wallace. He dug potholes across the field to hinder
the English armed knights and hid men with twelve foot spears to take
down the horses that might charge the Scots. These he hid under cover,
camouflaging their presence. Wallace had been betrayed when his own
cavalry, led by one of the disgruntled nobles, had abandoned him at a vital
moment. Not wishing to fall to the same fate, Robert placed himself at the
head of Scotland’s small band of armored knights. According to the legend,
the core of these cavalry men were made up of fugitive Templars, men who
had fled north and accordingly sworn allegiance to Robert. The battle
would allow them to exact some modicum of revenge on the man who had
betrayed them to the pope.
 
It was a famous Scottish victory. As the English army was outflanked, they
turned and fled. The deciding moment had come when the followers of the
Scottish camp—the women, boys, and other non-combatants—had
suddenly decided to take up arms and swarm the English, who assumed this
to be a fresh wave of Scottish reinforcements. The fleeing army was routed,
with England losing as many as 15,000 men compared to Scottish losses of
just 4,000. The Scottish victory was so resounding that it would put an end
to English rule over Scotland for close to 400 years.
 
In addition, the sheer scale of the English defeat left Edward II’s kingdom
in anarchy. Ambitious nobles, disgusted by their ruler’s ineptitude, began to

take on more power for themselves. Across the country, the collapse of law
and order meant that bands of outlaws began to roam free. It became the
time of the feted outlaw heroes, men such as Robin Hood who fought
against the corrupt rulers and preyed on the wealthy. Eventually, the
ramifications of the defeat would be so violent for Edward II that he would
lose his throne. Not only would he no longer be king, but he was betrayed
by his wife and his nobles, the former summoning a mercenary army and
the latter welcoming said army warmly. By 1327, on the 22nd of September,
Edward was executed. Such was the humor of the executioners when
dealing with the homosexual king that they choose one final insult. The
method of execution involved thrusting a red hot iron spit directly up
Edward’s rectum. In his place, Edward III—at the time still a teenager –
would take over the throne. It would be Edward III’s successful reign which
would set the scene for the eventual Peasants’ Revolt.
 
So where does this leave the Templars and the Freemasons? According to
the legend, they would be found in Scotland. So disastrous was the reign of
Edward II that not only did he lose Scotland for centuries, but his actions
were essential in driving the outlawed Templars north. Once they arrived,
they would have needed to remain in secret. After all, their very existence
was deemed an affront to god. But their riches, their military expertise, and
their very presence were a boon to the Scottish king. So, with the need to
remain in hiding, the hidden Templars would need to repurpose their
organization. They were no longer a military order of knights, as such, but
were now a clandestine secret society. They had an agenda, with vengeance
that needed to be inflicted. Still very much fugitives, their mind set would
have needed to have changed from men on the run to those in hiding, from
world domineering men of power to cold and calculating power players. As
they moved behind the scenes, the Templars would have needed to become
a powerful secret society. Still maintaining their ambitions, could they have
become the Great Society which would trouble England seven decades
later?


Fugitives
 
On paper, the flight of the Knights Templar was well set up to succeed.
Those Templars in England, Cyprus—and most places other than Italy and
France—were given as many as three months in which they could plan their
escape. Add to this the wealth, the political connections, and the means of
transportation (especially the fleet) the Templars possessed and it’s easy to
see why so many people believe that the order possessed the organization
necessities needed to escape persecution. Obviously, a number of the higher
profile Templars were executed, and many hundreds of members were both
tortured and killed. But on the whole, the attempt to totally annihilate the
Templars seemed to have failed.
 
But that didn’t meant the Templars had it easy. They had been officially
outlawed by the church. This seemingly meant a blanket ban across Europe.
All of Christendom was seemingly antithetical to their presence, as decreed
by the pope. All around was enemy territory. Given that a huge proportion
of the land in Europe was owned by various church-affiliated groups, none
of whom were particularly beholden to the Templars, most areas were
dangerous for members. Add in the fact that they would have stood out
among the locals by their dress, their hairstyles, their mannerisms, and even
the fact that they were chiefly a French speaking society, meant that going
into hiding would have been more than difficult.
 
This meant that a fugitive Templar would need assistance. If he was to pass
under a new identity — as would surely be essential—then he would need
someone to vouchsafe for his new character. At a time when towns and
cities were far smaller than they are today (London, for example, was a city
of 25,000 and the biggest in England) that would have to be done on a
personal level. The Templars needed friends.
 
It is here that we see a striking similarity between what the Templars
suddenly required and one of the most ancient rules of Freemasonry.
Known as one of the Old Charges of the Masons, the rule states that no

brother should go “into a town” unless he can do so in the presence of
another brother who can vouchsafe him, or “witness” on his behalf. Given
the authorities held the power to arrest strangers who received no such
backing, there is clear historical precedent for an old rule which is now
dealt with in mostly a figurative sense. Indeed, the five years which passed
between the first announcement of the pope’s anti-Templar order and the
final, official dissolution of the organization, plus the slowed down or
delayed process undertaken in certain countries, there would have been
more than enough time for the Templars to erect a secret structure of checks
and balances. Code words and pass phrases could denote trust, with their
existence easily spread through the Templar community before they went
into hiding. By the time the authorities finally came looking for them, these
checks and balances could help the outlawed Templars remain hidden.
 
We should take an extra moment to mention one of the biggest mysteries of
the Templars. What happened to their fleet? The ships which departed from
La Rochelle made up one of Europe’s wealthiest armadas, but seemed to
simply vanish. The fleet had arrived in France to bring grand master
Jacques de Molay to the pope, whereupon he would be arrested. But when
the authorities went to find the Templar ships, they had vanished. Their
presence is not recorded in the chronicles of any other French port, nor are
they mentioned as having docked in the Thames or any other major port.
 
There has been much speculation over what happened to these ships. For
those Templars who were on board, not only were the galleys a valuable
asset in and of themselves, but they also provided the perfect means to
evade the authorities. They could be sailed anywhere, while still providing a
living space at the same time. If they so desired, the Templars could simply
have lived aboard their ships, making land occasionally only to replenish
their supplies, and even that could be done in any smaller, less visible port.
The ships even provided the Templars with the chance to make a living, as
they happened to be the ideal vessels for high seas piracy. Should they be so
inclined, the military minds of the newly-outlawed Templars could have
easily used their ships to board others in the Mediterranean or even raided
the coast. As a side note, there is a confusing section of the initiation
ceremony of the modern Master Mason, in which the man pledged to make

himself a brother to “pirates and corsairs.” It seems a strange entry in the
Masonic rules, but some have pointed towards this as being a link to the
missing Templar fleet. While worth noting, however, this is almost entirely
speculation.
 
For some people, however, the fate of the Templar fleet ties neatly into the
story that we are trying to uncover. There has been much written about what
happened to the ships after they departed La Rochelle, as well as what they
were carrying. Though the most imaginative end of the spectrum often
contains flights of fancy such as the Holy Grail and other religious relics,
it’s worth noting that the wealth and knowledge of the Templars was likely
far more traditional. They were a wealthy group, with members sourced
from every country and every social group. They knew a great deal about a
great many people. When the ships vanished, that information resided
within the members. Accordingly, many believe that this wealth and
knowledge would be combined with another society, merging together the
nascent principles of a band of stone masons with the recently forbidden
knowledge of the Templars. For some people, the missing Templar fleet
provides the catalyst for the notion that the order combined with the
fledging Freemasons. But could a fugitive group such as the Knights
Templar really have combined with a seemingly random collection of stone
masons?
 
Taken at face value, the idea that the Knights Templar and the Freemasons
share a common heritage seems to be incredible and almost unbelievable.
Here we have two of the most notorious secret societies in history, the idea
that they might be linked somehow seems to be nothing more than wishful
thinking. But, over the course of this book, we have looked at the
background of medieval Europe, and England in particular, as being the
ideal melting pot for any number of clandestine groups. Shared
resentments, similar patterns, and a mysterious history unite both groups.
But there is something more than just pure speculation linking the two
societies.
 
The traditional history of the Freemasons holds that their fraternities
emerged from a guild-like organization that regulated and promoted the

works of tradesmen. This is perfectly conceivable and, indeed, much
evidence exists to demonstrate that there is a great deal of truth to the
matter. But it is not incompatible with the idea that the Templars had an
influence on the fledgling masonry guilds. Take, for example, the Old
Charge of Freemasonry, one of the organization’s oldest pledges. The rule
requires members to promise that they will reveal no secret of any fellow
member which might eventually lead said member to lose either his life of
his property. For an organization which existed to promote and protect
tradesmen and their skillsets, this rule doesn’t make much sense. For a
fugitive Templar, it is absolutely essential. There are free secrets held by the
stonemasons which might have endangered someone’s life or their property,
while secrets were often a matter of life and death for those in any way
associated with the Templars.
 
So a theory emerges. This theory suggests that the Templars, fugitives on
the run from the authorities, somehow merged with the earliest iterations of
the Freemasons. Accordingly, such a merger resulted in many Templar
rituals and ideas being inserted into the rules and charges of the
Freemasons. It seems outrageous on the surface, but taking a closer look at
some of the historical records can reveal an increasing amount of support
for this theory.
 
Let’s take a look at the three organizations who might be regarded, in the
14th Century, as being the enemies of the Knights Templar. These were: the
monarchy, the church, and the Knights Hospitallers. Of these three enemies,
it is perhaps the church which presented the biggest challenge to the
fugitive Templars. For their entire existence, the Knights Templar had been
a religious organization. Christianity was baked into the very foundation of
the order, who answered only to the pope and, thus, to God. But the
Templars had been betrayed by the very man they answered to. The church
had declared them to be outlaws and heretics. While they might have
retained a belief in God, the Templars had been cut off from their supposed
leader, their grand master having been burned alive by the pope himself.
 
In the medieval mind-set, trying to balance a fervent belief in God’s
existence with this kind of betrayal must have been difficult. In complete

secrecy, it seems unsurprising that the Templars might have grown to resent
the institution of the Catholic Church, and hated the corruption and greed
that it had come to represent. But these thoughts were necessarily private.
At the time, there was no alternative. The Vatican held a monopoly on
belief in Western Europe. Though the seeds of what would become the
Protestant Reformation had been planted, they were yet to blossom into a
real Christian alternative. The very fact that the Templars were able—or, in
actual fact, forced—to entertain such thoughts in complete secrecy became
key to their resentment of the church and how this manifested.
 
As such, we should look at the Freemasons’ and their comprehension of
religion. In the Freemasons, there is one single point which has formed the
foundation of the society as a whole. That is, the central tenet around which
all other rules and regulations revolve. Before being considered a member, a
Freemason must assert his belief that there exists one Supreme Being. But,
beyond this initial belief, religious matters are not regulated. How the
individual practices such belief is not a concern of the Freemasons. Indeed,
members are forbidden from discussing their beliefs when inside the Lodge
and are forbidden from trying to convert other Masons to their particular
viewpoint. This central rule of Freemasonry is both essential and ancient. It
is the one rule which has lasted longer than any other. It is the foundation of
Freemasonry.
 
It is easy to see how such a rule intersects with the idea of Templar
influence. At the time, religious beliefs of a stonemason or tradesmen
would not matter. Indeed, with the church simply being a domineering
force, everyone would simply be expected to follow the Vatican’s guidance.
Such a rule would be, seemingly, unnecessary. But for the Templars, thrust
into a world of self-doubt and resentment, a rule made sense. As a monastic
order, they would not have relinquished their belief in God. But recent
experiences with the Vatican would not only have opened their minds to
alternative forms of religious practice, but would have made it a danger for
them to have discussed such matter. Better instead that, aside from being
assured that all members believed in a Supreme Being, religious matters
were not discussed within the society. Such a rule provided a greater degree

of protection for possible Templars than it might have done for any stone
masons.
 
It’s possible to draw such links consistently when looking through the
ancient precepts of Freemasonry. Many of the society’s oldest rules and
regulations seem to be perfectly suited to fostering fugitive Templars from
the authorities and integrating them into the organization. But, and this
should be stated numerous times, trying to find historical evidence for such
a tie remains elusive. There exists no one definitive document or record
which suggests that there was a secret society founded by fugitive members
of the Knights Templar. Thus, the majority of the links we discover and the
theories we devise remain theoretical. But that does not put an end to the
investigation.
 
Trying to figure out the Masonic comprehension of religion, for example, is
still difficult. Medieval guilds were ostensibly religious organizations. They
were, as evidenced throughout Europe, devoted to the church. They had
patron saints, they staged religious plays and performances, they donated to
local churches, they commissioned religious artworks, they would often
help members go on pilgrimages, they would occasionally proclaim to own
holy relics, and they would be tightly tied into the fabric of their local
community in a way which worked in tandem with the church. This was not
just true of almost every stone masons’ guild, but almost every guild
throughout Europe. So why should one particular guild develop such a
secular, secretive approach to religious notions? Why would a guild of
stone masons seemingly develop a rule which not only presupposed
Christianity but allowed for members of other religions, too?
 
Indeed, the only people excluded by the Freemasons’ rule seems to be
atheists, a religious position almost alien to the medieval mind. When
looking at the history of the Masons, it’s just one example of how more and
more questions emerge the closer you look. That the existence of a Templar
influence seems to answer so many of these questions so perfectly hints
towards a theory which is almost impossible to prove. Such a rule, it’s
obvious, would be ideal for the fugitive Templars who needed protection
from their society and a means of expressing their sudden religious doubts.

Now enemies of the church but retaining their religious position as a
monastic order, these fleeing Templars were the perfect beneficiaries of the
Freemasons’ rule. When piecing together the jigsaw, the facts all slide
neatly into place.
 
Let us again look at the simple facts of the matter before drawing any
conclusions:
The Knights Templar had been outlawed by the Catholic Church, the
organization to which they had supposedly devoted their lives.
The members were given enough time to prepare themselves for
hiding and possessed great resources, skills, and knowledge which
would facilitate such a move.
Following the papal decree, the Templars had good reason to resent
the church, the monarchy, and the Knights Hospitaller.
Scotland, due to political reasons, provided the Templars with a
perfect place to hide.
Around the end of the 14th Century, there begun to exist a secret
society whose members referred to themselves as Masons.
Though supposedly emerging from one of the many trade guilds that
existed in medieval Europe, there is no documented evidence of the
exact origin of said secret society.
The so-called Freemasons and their rules seemed to be perfectly
ideologically suited to fugitive Templars who wished to evade
detection.
Many of these rules would have been irrelevant to the day-to-day life
of a stone mason in the late 14th Century.
Both the Freemasons and the Knights Templar share an identification
with the Temple of Solomon as being important to their beliefs.
Behind the organization of the Peasants’ Revolt was a so-called Great
Society, who seemed to provide structural advice and backing to the
rebellion.


The Peasants’ Revolt targeted institutions, properties, and resources
which were owned and operated by groups and organizations who
would be considered enemies of the Knights Templar.
No members of the Great Society were ever caught and formally
tried.
 
When working through the points, it seems clear that it’s possible to draw a
line through the facts and emerge with a theory that the Knights Templar, on
the run from the authorities, was able to have an influence on the founding
principles of what would eventually become Freemasonry. These ideas
manifested themselves during the Peasants’ Revolt before vanishing back
into the ether. Moving through all of the similarities and parallels between
the Freemasons and the fugitive Templars would take more space than is
available in this book, though one is left with the notion that there is much
more to the idea than is supported by the scant evidence we have from the
period. After all, the very defining feature of a secret society is that it is, in
fact, secret. Trying to uncover the truth from a distance of six centuries is
almost impossible. But that does not mean that speculation and
investigation is not possible.
 
Instead, we should leave this concept firmly in our mind and move on to the
early history of the Freemasons. Throughout these next sections of the
book, it can help to remember just how exactly a Templar influence in the
Freemasons might have dictated the organization’s ideological course or
helped nudge them in a certain direction. While we are left without much in
the way of definitive physical evidence, the majority of this book has thus
far worked to establish the idea that such a connection is not impossible. As
we move through to the ending, the journey thus far should illuminate what
is to come. While we might not be able to answer the question of what
happened to the Knights Templar, we can ask whether the early years of the
Freemasons could possibly have been influenced by such a group.
 


The Birth of the Freemasons
 
These days, the Freemasons are a global concern. Not in the conspiratorial
sense, whereby the Masons are blamed (or credited) with any manner of
geopolitical events. Rather, they are a global organization. Indeed, the
Freemasons are the largest fraternal organization anywhere on the planet.
Their members total nearly three million in the USA alone. In Britain,
considered the birthplace of Masonry, there are as many as 700,000
members. Around the world, there is a million more. Such an organization
attracts interest, which is why as many as fifty thousand pieces of literature
have been produced concerning the Freemasons, from books to pamphlets
to magazine articles to websites. The book you are reading right now is just
one of many texts which attempt to examine some aspect of Freemasonry. It
is, as mentioned, a global concern.
 
The world has changed since 1312, when the Knights Templar was formally
dissolved. It has changed since 1381, when the Peasants’ Revolt took place.
It has changed since 1717, when the Freemasons decided to officially reveal
themselves to the world. These days, the Freemasons are an entirely
different organization from what came before. Though they might still wear
the dressings of the original secret society, the sheer interest and
information available to the wider population means that they are
something of a shadow of their former selves. This book is not interested in
modern Masonry, such as it is. Instead, we want to know more about the
origins of the Freemasons and how they might have been influenced.
 
One of the most difficult parts of examining the history of the Masons is the
books written by actual members. Over the years, there have been efforts by
writers to not only included seemingly any influential historical figure as a
noted member, but also to place early Masonic branches in places such as
ancient Egypt, Celtic Britain, and Persia. At one time, it seemed as though
the Masonic scholars were competing to see what outrageous claims they
could make and get away with. These days, such inclinations have died

down, but have left the waters muddied for those of us who seek to know
the truth.
 
Over time, the historians have gradually retreated in their claims. After the
dalliances with ancient history, there were claims that linked the first
Masons with the founding of the Temple of Solomon (establishing a link
between the Masons and the Templars) which was based on a few lines in
the Master Mason’s initiation ceremony. But historical links with the actual
Temple of Solomon (and how it is described in the bible) do not correlate
with the lines in the ritual. Instead, the lines seem more allegorical.
 
So while there is little evidence which links the founding of the Freemasons
with Solomon’s Temple, as conceded by modern Masonic historians,
Templar influence is not precluded. Indeed, such links between the Temple
of Solomon (the verified headquarters of the Templars following the First
Crusade) and the Freemasons seem to be derived from medieval guilds. But
why were medieval tradesmen, men who should have been more concerned
with tools, techniques, and materials, delving into allegorical Christianity?
Such matters only serve to raise more questions.
 


In fact, there are only really two organizations which claim the Temple of
Solomon in common. They are the Freemasons and the Knights Templar. Is
this a coincidence? Or is it the case of the demise of one such organization
helping foster the rise of the other, sharing with it several key beliefs and
approaches, as well as resources, tactics, enemies, and ideologies?
 
The circumstances certainly seem to suggest that this was the case. The
Templars in England had a great deal of time to prepare themselves in 1307,
matched by the fact that the newly crowned King Edward II was one of the
weakest and most ineffective in the country’s history. Such men would have
been welcomed across the border in Scotland but would have needed to
remain hidden.
 
Indeed, such was the delay between the beginning and the official end of
the persecution of the Templars by the church—lasting seven years, from
1307 to 1314—that those Templars who were driven into hiding would
have had their secretive bonds forged together. Over seven years in hiding,
these hidden fugitives could have become like brothers, their structure and
organization growing more formal and codified by the day. By the time the
persecution of the Templars had officially ended, those in hiding may have
morphed into a brand new secret society, one which remembered the
wrongs of the past. With resentment of the church, the crown, and the
Hospitallers as their natural focus, the fugitive Templars found themselves
in possession of a new organization, more secretive than before, one which
could have made its base in Scotland.
 


The signs and icons of Freemasonry are easily explained by the existence of
the Templars. The square and compass logo, for example, is strikingly
similar to the seal of Solomon that represented the Templars original home.
One need only remove the horizontal lines from the Templar seal to
discover a simple interpretation of the Masonic symbol. Elsewhere, around
the typical Masonic Lodge, one might see the circles and mosaics which
were shared in common with Templar iconography. The clothing worn
during Masonic rituals, the oaths taken, the colors, the signs, and almost
everything else about the rituals of the Freemasons can be tied to the
Knights Templar.
 
Historians have uncovered many examples of the rules and orders of
tradesmen guilds from across medieval Europe. Often, these are dry and
uninteresting pieces. They lay out the terms for membership and so on.
Never do they seem anything like the ordinances of the Freemasons.
Instead, it seems as though the Freemasons rules are best not interpreted
literally. Rather, they are figurative lessons, a cover story which allowed for
the existence of what was ostensibly a guild but had a secret purpose: to
conceal the remaining members and ideas of the Knights Templar.
 
There were even certain groups within the Masons who, in the 18th Century,
would take the name ‘Knights Templar’ to recognize a high-ranking,
exclusively Christian group within the Freemasons. These kinds of links are
undeniable, though it is difficult to say how much is original and how much
was devised later by the Masons and constructed purposefully in
remembrance and deference to the Templars. Rather, the best evidence is
often found at the brief moment between the fall of the Templars and the
rise of the secret Masonic Lodges.
 
Over time, as the Templars died out and new recruits were added, such an
organization morphed and evolved. The mutual protection offered by the
codes and rules led to agendas and grudges being carried over. Before the
group was even formally known as the Freemasons—when they were still
an almost completely secret society—they almost emerged into the public
consciousness when wreaking havoc on their old enemies during the

Peasants’ Revolt. As such, the Peasants’ Revolt is one of the key moments
in this story, as it shows us the best example of the secret society which
existed in between the Templars and the Masons, a group which was still
evolving and maturing. That it should only have been known as the Great
Society seems to reveal such change, as well as how little anyone really
knew about the group.
 
But, as ever, these ideas must be tempered by the very legitimate
expectation for evidence. While the facts may all seem to align and
corroborate with this theory, there is a lack of physical proof. In these
terms, aside from the whisperings about the Great Society, we are left with
a period from the beginning of the 14th Century to the beginning of the 18th
Century in which the last official documentation of the Templars fades and
the official emergence of the Freemasons begins. So how should we
examine this gap and what does it mean for the theory?
 
Again, we can connect the dots and evidence of a type does begin to
emerge. We return once again to the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381, simply
because it was a time when these secret machinations we are attempting to
discuss seemed to rise so close to the surface. There are hints of Mason and
Templar activity in the motivations and actions of the rebels. The targeting
of the Hospitallers, the executions of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
ease with which they strode into the Tower of London, the protection
accorded the Templar church, and the occasion mention of the so-called
Great Society. All of these can be linked in some way to one of the two (or
even both) organizations. Walter the Tyler, with his Masonic-influenced
name, seemed to direct the rebellion in a military manner, something
familiar to the Templars. As the head of a secret society—one with
seemingly incredible resources, knowledge, and influence—Tyler could
well have been one of the earliest Masons of the last Templars.
 
Even in the time after the Peasants’ Revolt, the existence in England of the
Lollards (a religiously motivated secret society whose existence we have
neither the time nor the space to cover in great depth) hints at a group
operating behind the conventional structures of government, away from the
official records. The man who succeeded the executed Archbishop of

Canterbury after the Revolt went so far as to identify the Lollards in 1382,
especially through his attempts to have the group destroyed. But the
Lollards—in one form or another—survived. We know more about the
Lollards over the course of the next two centuries, with their structure and
organization having been documented in real sources. Though they were
seemingly unconnected to the Freemasons or the Templars, their existence
is proof in itself that a secret society could function and exist in medieval
England. Their existence continued through the medieval age and into the
time of the Reformation. Every now and then, they would spring into
action, such as the time in 1414 when Sir John Oldcastle led a revolt against
the crown.
 
There are many similarities between the Lollards and the Freemasons, but
perhaps the most important fact concerning the Lollards is simply that they
existed at all. As such, we have hard evidence that a secret society could not
only operate in England but that they could wield great power. Evidence
such as Henry Kingston’s documented account of Lollard movements in
Leicester reveals a group who had taken St. John as their patron saint (the
same as the Freemasons) and named themselves for him, had held secret
meetings, preached ideas similar to those held by the Masons (against
lawsuits in the case of debt, for example), were protected by knights in the
area, and were persecuted for heresy. This description of a Lollard cell
provides not only a template for what could eventually become
Freemasonry, but could even be construed as an early example of the same
secret society in action. This could easily be the description of a 14th
Century Masonic Lodge.
 
Such circumstantial evidence carries us through to the 17th Century. By this
time, the Lollards had seemingly disbanded. Religious ideas in England
were preoccupied by the Reformation but reports of secret societies had not
ceased. The historian C. V. Wedgwood, for example, notes in a book about
the reign of Charles I that there were reports from the Archbishop of
Canterbury about secret meetings that were happening throughout the
kingdom. This culminated in the arrest of a man named Trendall, who
happened to be preaching against the church’s hierarchy in London. It was
the Archbishop’s desire to burn the man at the stake, a means of punishing

heretics that was almost a generation out of date. Even though the
Archbishop wrote to colleagues for advice on how to conduct the burning, it
never seems to have taken place. Trendall seems to have escaped the
punishment. Maybe he had friends in high places. All we know for sure is
that he gave his profession as a stone mason.
 
It’s similarly possible to chart the existence of Masonic principals as they
become increasingly common in the work of noted public figures. Both
John Locke and Francis Bacon, for example, included in their works
numerous ideas and notions that have direct ties to Freemasonry. These
could be incredibly specific—such as Locke’s incorporation into the
constitution of South Carolina prohibitions against filing lawsuits to retrieve
money—or more general—such as Bacon’s ideas about religion and science
which echoed Masonic viewpoints, especially visible in his work titled the
New Atlantis, which seems to imagine an entire society built in secret along
Masonic principles. There are many such references throughout the 15th,
16th, and 17th Centuries to Masonic ideas in literature. While these might
seem circumstantial, they can be used to demonstrate how the Freemasons
were having a growing influence in England at the time.
 
The idea that the Templars might have influenced the Freemasons is not a
new one. Indeed, the history of the Freemasons just after they went public
was rife with accusations of Templar influence. The Rite of Strict
Observance, for example, was a German branch of the Freemasons set up in
the 18th Century which explicitly reorganized the structure of the Lodge and
renounced the Templar origins of the Masons. In the view of the Strict
Observance members, the Templar fugitives had travelled to Scotland and
allied with a stone mason guild. Several hundred years later, this short lived
branch of the masons rejected this supposed Templar influence. It was
hardly intrinsic to the history of the Freemasons, but it demonstrates the
notion as having existed long before this book.
 
Others have suggested that the occasional proposals of the links between
the Freemasons and the Knights Templar are anything from a Jesuit plot
designed to discredit the Masons, to a plot device used in novels and
something which can therefore be dismissed. Often, such ideas depend on

the acceptance that the Templars were indeed guilty of all of the false
charges levelled against them by Prince Philip of France and the Vatican.
As such, it can usually be read as an attempt to discredit the Freemasons by
making them guilty by association, an allegation that depends upon a
falsified version of history.
 
But the idea persists. Even without evidence beyond the circumstantial,
there are those who are convinced either way. People can be certain that the
Templars founded the Masons or that there is no truth to the matter at all.
Typically, those who are the most convinced in either direction tend to
shout the loudest and remain the most vehement. But the most damaging
aspect of the frequent arguments over the validity of the claim is that it
seems to have endangered any real investigation into the matter. So
adamant are the naysayers that no such link exists between the two secret
societies, that our chances of ever learning the complete truth are surely
diminished. Furthermore, the outlandish claims often concerning the
Masons and the Templars—often those which lean in a more conspiratorial
direction—can serve to discredit the notion in the public’s mind. Even those
theories that are demonstrably false and built on zero evidence—that the
Freemasons were alive and present among the Celtic Druids, for example—
only serve to muddy the waters when we try to find the verifiable facts
behind the story.
 
However, there is no doubt that the Freemasons of today are different when
compared to the Freemasons of the 18th Century (or before). Today, their
society is no longer secret. There are a great many books about the modern
Masons which can help teach you everything, right down to the exact
wording of the rituals themselves. It’s only in the past, when we look
towards history, that any true mystery surrounds the Freemasons. Of all the
mysteries, it is their origin and their birth which will always remain the
strangest and the most controversial. These days, being a member of the
Freemasons is often a social pastime, even when ascending into ranks
which explicitly reference the Knights Templar. Though the story of the
Templars is told, the members are no longer concerned with vengeance or
similar notions. While they are told the story, it seems to be a perfunctory
retelling, rather than something meant to inspire or educate. Nowadays, the

true importance of the Templars to the Freemasons is lost amongst the
ocean of ritual, just another part of the history for which there is a thousand
and one explanations. Unfortunately, the truth is hard to come by.


Conclusion
 
In the earliest days of the Christian faith, true believers had to keep their
faith a secret. Banned from practicing their religion, they were one of the
best examples of a secret society. To communicate with one another, they
took logos. The image of a fish—the simple shape which is still used today
— became a calling card for fellow Christians. It also provided them with a
cover story, allowing anyone with a fish image to simply say that they were
a fisherman rather than a member of an outlawed religion. Even after
Christianity became an accepted practice, the image of the fish remained.
The meaning changed, essentially, as it was no longer the calling card for a
secret society. The fish was once a cover story, a means of staying alive
when being hunted by the authorities. In many ways, it is a parallel to the
idea of the Templars and the Freemasons.
 
As we have seen in this book, there exists a huge amount of circumstantial
evidence that suggests that the fall of the Knights Templar coincided with
the founding of a secret society in Great Britain. The fugitive Templars
could well have allied themselves to a small Scottish guild of masons,
taking on their icons and symbols as a cover story that allowed them to
escape the persecuting eye of the authorities. Just as a guild might protect
trade secrets, the Freemasons were founded to protect the lives of the
Templars on the run. The ideas that they maintained and carried with them
went on to form the foundation of the Freemason ideology which would
persist into the present day. Though modern Freemasonry is not secret in
much the same way that Christianity grew to be mainstream, the lasting
legacy of the Templar influences remains in place just as the symbol of the
fish is evident in almost every church around the world. Though the modern
organization is entirely different, it does not hurt to remember the past.
 
In this book, we have not ventured into the territory of the conspiracy
theory. Modern Masonic writing is often too obsessed with the idea of the
secret society and how they might run the world from some clandestine
bunker. But—just as this is almost certainly untrue—is does not do justice

to the most interesting aspects of the Masons’ history. The involvement of
the Knights Templar in the founding of the Freemasons is not something we
can prove, though we can detect hints and suggestions as we look at history.
Instead of regarding the Freemasons as some modern threat, we should look
instead to their past and how they were shaped by events centuries ago. The
truth of the link between the Knights Templar and the Freemasons might
never be known, but we know enough to whet the appetite. When
investigating a secret society, this is more than can ever be expected.


Further Readings
 
Butler, A. (2011). City of the goddess. London: Watkins.
Haag, M. (2009). The Templars. London: Profile.
Harwood, J. (n.d.). The Freemasons.
Hodapp, C. (n.d.). Freemasons for dummies.
Hodge, S. (n.d.). Secrets of the Knights Templar.
Jeffers, H. (2005). Freemasons. New York: Citadel Press.
Johnstone, M. (n.d.). The Freemasons.
Jones, B. (2006).  Freemasons' guide and compendium. Nashville, TN:
Cumberland House.
Morgan, P. (2006). The secrets of the Freemasons. London: Arcturus.
Nicholson, H. (2010). The Knights Templar. London: Robinson.


Volume 4
 



Contents
 
Avant-Propos
The Roots of Freemasonry
Freemasonry Officially Begins
Freemasonry during World War One and its Aftermath
Freemasons, Fascism, and Communism
Freemasonry of 1950s America
Freemasonry and the Killing of Kennedys
Freemasonry and Organized Crime
Freemasonry in the Age of Terror
The Freemasons of the Future
Freemasons—Are they Truly Free?
Further Readings


Avant-Propos
 
In their three centuries of official existence, Freemasons have been
routinely praised and despised, regularly cheered and derided. Some believe
that they are a fraternal organization that promotes leadership and good
character, while others are convinced that they are a secretive cabal hell-
bent on world domination. Mason-backed organizations such as the
Shriners are praised for their charitable giving, while other lodges are held
in contempt for their secretiveness.
 
When it comes to stark dichotomies such as this, the argument to
moderation would indicate that the truth lies somewhere in between. Well,
fallacious as that argument is, Freemasonry would still be a riveting tale
even if it did fall neatly between both sides of the equation!
 
In this book we will explore the last 100 years of Freemasonry, as well as
the larger implications of Masonic influence and practice. We will also
discuss Masonry’s latest trends and probable future trajectory. So, if you
don’t know already—read this book to learn the full story of what really
goes on in that quiet, nondescript little lodge on the corner! Because despite
what your grandfather may have told you, there is more going on than card
games, pancakes and fish fries! Here, in one concise chronological timeline,
discover the last 100 years of Freemasonry!


The Roots of Freemasonry
 
The roots of Freemasonry have always been shrouded in mystery, but many
authorities trace them all the way back to the siege of Jerusalem in 1099
AD. This siege, waged by European invaders against Arab defenders, was
set in motion by the Pope’s call for a Crusade against the Muslim powers
then occupying the Holy Land. The reasons behind this sudden Christian
Crusade against Islam have long been hotly debated, and the narrative has
frequently changed over the centuries in order to match the political aims of
those telling the story.
 
To cut through some of the spin-doctoring and get a better understanding of
this complicated backdrop, let’s just lay out the bare-bones facts. First, you
have to consider how many times the Holy Land has actually changed
hands. The Jews controlled the region from about 1000 BC to 70 AD, after
which it was the Roman Empire’s turn. The Romans forcibly expelled most
Jews after laying waste to Jerusalem and burning down the centerpiece of
Judaism, the holy Temple. At this point in history, the Romans were pagans
and not much interested in the Jews’ monotheistic religion or the relics they
left behind. This changed after a Roman Emperor named Constantine came
to power in 306 AD. Constantine, initially a pagan himself, eventually
turned toward Christianity, and with his conversion the entire Roman
Empire followed suit.
 
In one of the most remarkable reversals in history, an Empire that had once
fed Christians to the lions for entertainment in its arenas and coliseums
became Christian itself. This revived interest in the Empire’s Eastern
frontier—the Middle Eastern lands Jesus had once walked—and this led to
the building of new churches and infrastructure in these previously
abandoned backwaters. In the coming centuries, however, the ancient
superpower of Roman civilization began to wane, and as it weakened it
became increasingly hard for it to protect its far-flung borders.
 

By 600 AD the rise of a powerful new religion called Islam forced the
Roman Catholics from the Middle East. These erstwhile Christian lands
were forcibly converted to Islam and placed under direct Muslim control.
This was the status quo for the next few centuries, until in the year 1095
Pope Urban II issued a call to arms for a Crusade to drive the Muslim
occupiers out.
 
The Pope actually sold his proposed military campaign as a counterattack,
pointing out that it was the Muslims who had invaded and seized the land
from Christians in the first place. Never mind the fact that this counterattack
had been delayed by about 400 years; Christians were told that they would
be rightfully retaking land that had been stolen from them. As the Pope
presented it, the reasons for the Crusade were twofold.
 
First and foremost, the Pope was answering a distress call from his
Christian brothers in the East. The remaining segment of the Eastern
Roman Empire, which consisted of Greece, most of Anatolia (modern-day
Turkey), and large parts of the Balkans, was on life support. In the face of
renewed Muslim aggression, it was teetering on the verge of collapse. Now
known as the Byzantine Empire, this Greek-speaking relic of Rome’s
former glory was being threatened with utter annihilation by encroaching
Islamic armies. The Pope hoped to prevent this by raising an army to
defend the Byzantines—and alongside this goal, he also floated the idea of
reclaiming the Holy Land. It was this complicated backdrop that led to the
siege and reconquest of Jerusalem by Christian armies in 1099.
 
So where in this complex tapestry of conquest, religion, and political
intrigue do the Freemasons come in? Some say that nascent Freemasonry
arrived on the shoulders of a special order of crusading knights who called
themselves the Knights Templar. This band of warriors came to prominence
shortly after the Christian takeover of Jerusalem, spurred by the need to
protect the thousands of Christian pilgrims from Europe who were soon
streaming into the city to see the land of Christ.
 
Because then as now, the Middle East could be a dangerous place. Most of
these pilgrims were not fighters—many were not even armed—and as such

they made easy targets for thieves and revengeful Muslims alike. An armed
escort of knights was deemed necessary to protect these spiritual seekers
from the very real threat of physical harm, and the Templars were created
for this express purpose.
 
Founded by a French knight named Hugues de Payens in 1119, the
Templars were to be the perfect blend of spiritual and physical warriors.
These men were basically to be an order of fighting monks who would risk
life and limb to protect their fellow Christians. The name Templar is
derived from the Temple Mount of Jerusalem—the site of the old Jewish
Temple—which the young order of knights was given as their headquarters.
(Why this newly established group was given such a prime piece of
religious real estate upon which to set up shop has never been fully
explained.) “Knights Templar” is actually a shortened version of their
official title, which was the “Poor Knights of Christ and the Temple of
Solomon”. The biblical temple builder Solomon was an important figure for
the Templars—and as we will see, Solomon is important to the Freemasons
as well.
 
It has long been rumored that the Templars received a great secret when
they took up residence in the Temple Mount. What the secret was isn’t
exactly clear, though—theories include everything from Solomon’s treasure
hoard to secret extra-biblical texts, and even the head of John the Baptist
and the Holy Grail. It is perhaps due to the long history of such claims of
miraculous finds that the military campaigns of the Crusades have become
so conflated with treasure hunting.
 
But whatever secret treasure the Templars may have found, their primary
mission was indeed a military one. They served as an elite strike force at the
front lines of numerous engagements against Islamic revanchists. Ironically,
as their esteem as protectors and guardians of the Holy Land grew, the
“Poor Knights of Christ” began to become rather wealthy. Within a few
decades the rich men of Europe were enthusiastically donating to their
cause, giving the Knights a reliable source of income.
 

Not only that, the European upper class essentially began to use these
trusted knights of Solomon’s Temple as a kind of rudimentary banking
system. They would temporarily hand over their assets to the order for
safekeeping as they traveled to the Holy Land. These deposits soon added
up to a large sum of money, and some believe that it is this more than
anything that led to the Templars’ eventual downfall. For the Templars were
now powerful not only militarily; they had also become the financial
masters of the European nobility. The leverage that this gave them over the
kings and queens of Europe brought with it great resentment.
 
This resentment finally came to a head on the unlucky day of Friday the
13th of October in the year 1307. It was on that day that the Templars’
French headquarters was stormed on express orders of Pope Clement V and
King Philip IV of France. The official reason was charges of heresy, but
considering the large amount of money that Philip owed to the Templars, it
is easy to assume that his primary motive was a financial one.
 
The arrested Templars were sent to French dungeons and subjected to
excruciating torture until many of them confessed to crimes they had most
likely never even thought of—let alone committed. And whether they
confessed to the charges or not, they were all eventually burned at the stake.
 
Pope Clement V, under continued pressure from Philip, disbanded the
Knights Templar altogether five years later in 1312. The plotting of the
Pope and the French King did not ensnare all of the Templars, however, and
many managed to escape the dragnet that had been laid for them. So where
did these survivors go? And just what became of them? Since most of
Europe was now against them, they were forced to pick a nation still far
enough off the beaten path to serve as their refuge—Scotland.
 
Scotland was so far removed from the affairs of its European counterparts
—and even neighboring England—that when the Vatican issued orders to
round up the remaining Templars, the Scots paid no attention whatsoever.
Those involved in the manhunt for the outlawed Templars found that the
trail grew cold after they fled to Scotland. And it is in the footsteps of these

fleeing Templars that we find the first whisperings of the institution we now
call Freemasonry.
 
It is no coincidence that many of the grand lodges of Freemasonry are
called “Scottish Rite” cathedrals. It all goes back to the Knights Templar
and their last refuge. Because almost as soon as the Templars disappeared
into Scotland, the roots of Freemasonry began to emerge.


Freemasonry Officially Begins
 
 
The Freemasons officially revealed themselves to the world on June 24,
1717, when their first grand lodge opened in Britain. On this Saint John’s
Day, four previous gathering spots—all local taverns—pooled their
resources to create one grand lodge in which they could all meet. This first
grand lodge officially became a “regulatory body” in 1721. And as the
typical conspiracy narrative would have you believe, in the centuries since
that great coming out party, the Masons have always had their finger on one
manner of intrigue or another.
 

With famous members such as George Washington and Benjamin Franklin,
it has been said that the very founding of the United States of America was
a plot hatched in a Freemason lodge. When France erupted in revolution a
few years later, the finger was pointed at the Freemasons once again. But is
there any truth in any of these claims? Well—the one country where
Masonic influence would be the hardest to deny would indeed be the United
States of America.
 
It is true that many of the Founding Fathers were Freemasons, and a trip to
the national capital will reveal all manner of Masonic regalia on display.
From the Washington Monument all the way to the design of the Pentagon,
the Masonic square and compass have been put to good use. George
Washington, who is probably the most famous of Freemasons, joined the
craft in 1753 when he was 21 years old. He later led America to
independence as a revolutionary general before becoming the very first
president of the fledgling republic.
 
This republic was still fractured from the war, however, and the very
loosely written Articles of Confederation drafted in 1777 weren’t nearly
enough to keep the individual states from splitting off and going their
separate ways. A constitutional convention was accordingly held to resolve
differences and create a unified government. The delegates to this
convention were all from different backgrounds and walks of life, but often
enough the one thing that held them together was their mutual participation
in Freemasonry. For better or worse, this was a tie that helped bind them
together even as they sought to tie up the loose ends of the nation.
 
However, the purpose of this book is not to examine these historical
connections. Our focus here is to uncover modern Freemasonry. The
modern Freemasonry of the last 100 years has attempted to shed some of
the intrigue of its past with a friendlier gentleman’s club type atmosphere.
Whole new charters have been written for modern-day Freemasons to teach
them how to be more open and congenial in order to attract new members.
 
But at the very same time, it is Freemasonry’s last century that seems to
hold the most drama and intrigue. Even as the Masons are attempting to put

a fresh face on an old craft, as we will discover in the next few chapters of
this book, there is still more than enough mystery to go around.


Freemasonry during World War One and its
Aftermath
 
 
As the 20th century arrived, Masonic leadership was contemplating an
expansion of the Masonic ideal on the world stage. At a Masonic
convention in Paris in 1900, it was decided that the time was ripe for the
implementation of a truly international Masonic order. This idea floated
about French, British, and American Masonic lodges for the next couple of

years without much action being taken. Then, in 1903, a former Grand
Master from Switzerland, Edouard Quartier-la Tente, decided to make the
scheme his own personal pet project.
 
It is interesting to note that just as the Masons were attempting to achieve
international solidarity, the international climate of the world at large was
beginning to unravel. The imperialism of powerful nations such as Britain,
France, Germany, Russia, Japan and the United States was setting the stage
for powerful collisions in their respective spheres of self-interest.
 
It could be argued that the first salvo of what would become World War
One was fired against Russia by the Japanese in 1905.And when Japan
defeated this once great Imperial power, it was proof that the old-world
order could indeed be changed.
 
Conspiracy theorists who see a secret society behind the scenes of every
political intrigue can find links to the Freemasons in every changing breeze
of history, but most of this is mere conjecture. But in 1914, when the
outbreak of World War One was all but assured, the spark that lit the fuse
was indeed struck by a secret society—a group who called themselves the
Black Hand. This secret cabal instructed a team of young Serbs to
assassinate a group of visiting foreign dignitaries in Sarajevo, Bosnia. They
succeeded in killing Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, and
the Austro-Hungarian Empire soon declared war on Serbia. This prompted
Serbia’s ally Russia to declare war on Austria-Hungary. And then, to make
an incredibly long and complicated story short, due to a myriad of
entangled alliances, practically all of the globe’s great powers declared war
on one another and were soon locked in a protracted struggle. This domino-
effect downward spiral of worldwide conflict started with one lone terrorist
associated with a secret society.
 
But who were the Black Hand? Wouldn’t it be idle speculation to suggest
that a group of Slavic radicals had any links to Freemasonry? Not so—if
you were to ask the assassin himself. The very man who gunned down
Archduke Franz Ferdinand, Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip, testified
that he did so at the instigation of the Freemasons. He stated that one of his

handlers, a man named Cigonovich who was a Freemason himself, had
informed him that the Archduke had been condemned to death by a
Freemason lodge. The lodge that had allegedly delivered this death sentence
was none other than the Grand Orient de France in Paris.
 
According to Princip’s testimony, he was a hit man hired by the
Freemasons, who had already made the Archduke a marked man for a
Mafia-style hit. Many have since denied these claims of a Masonic
connection to the lead up to World War One as nothing but the fantastical
imaginings of a deranged assassin. But you do have to ask yourself, why
would a man, already convicted, with nothing left to lose lie? Princip died
in prison, and he went to his grave stating that the Freemasons were behind
the crime that he carried out.
 
You also have to wonder if it was coincidence that the Freemasons proved
to be crucial in rebuilding the shattered institutions of the post-war world.
After the war, US President Woodrow Wilson led the way in establishing an
international body to handle future disputes. Known as the League of
Nations, this short-lived precursor to the United Nations was fleshed out by
Wilson’s close adviser “Colonel” Edward M. House, who was a 33rd degree
Grand Lodge Freemason. The organization was founded on April 28, 1919,
and people have speculated about possible Masonic infiltration ever since.
Such misgivings aside, the League of Nations began operations on January
10, 1920, with the stated objective of ending all wars.
 
This aim proved to be a tough pill to swallow for Italian dictator Benito
Mussolini after he forced his way to power in 1922. Mussolini initially had
many friends and associates who were Freemasons, but after he and his
Blackshirts marched on Rome and consolidated their power, it wasn’t long
before Mussolini became deeply suspicious of Italian Freemasonry. His
campaign against the Masons began with strict restrictions upon the press
(of which many high-ranking Freemasons were a part). Masons who pushed
back against the stranglehold that Mussolini had placed upon them became
direct targets.
 

Soon, Il Duce had all of the major Masonic lodges in Italy shut down. In
1925 Mussolini famously remarked in an interview that Italian Freemasonry
was a political organization that was subservient to the Grand Orient de
France—the same massive Masonic lodge allegedly behind the
assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. Mussolini apparently believed
that no Freemason in Italy could possibly be loyal to him, since they all
took orders from this French lodge.
 
Shortly after giving this interview, Mussolini ordered the complete
destruction of all Italian institutions remotely associated with the Masons.
The brutal dictator declared, “Masonry must be destroyed and Freemasons
should have no right to citizenship in Italy. To reach this end all means are
good, from the club to the gun, from the breaking of windows to the
purifying fire—the Freemasons must be ostracized—their very life must be
made impossible.”
 
The only one to stand up against this onslaught was Grand Master Domizo
Torrigiani of the Grande Oriente d’Italia—the lodge that had been the
center of Italian Freemasonry. After having his lodge forcibly shutdown,
Grand Master Torrigiani challenged Mussolini by demanding that
democratic principles be respected. Mussolini responded by having
Torrigiani exiled to the remote Mediterranean island of Lipari, where he
would die in obscurity.
 
All of this was certainly a slap in the face to the black-shirted Freemasons
who had helped dear old Benito gain power in the first place. Shortly after
ousting Torrigiani, Mussolini began to target lesser-known Freemasons and
their associates. His fascist thugs forced their way into homes, ransacking
the residences, terrorizing those unlucky enough to be found inside, and
arresting and killing many in the process. The victims of this latest wave of
persecution included another Grand Master, Raol Palermo, who was
detained and eventually executed.
 
But perhaps the most famous Freemason that Benito Mussolini targeted was
none other than Aleister Crowley. I know some may raise their eyebrows to
see the dark British mage Aleister Crowley being labeled a Freemason, but

in truth, there probably wasn’t a secret society that Crowley wasn’t a part
of. If it was secret, mysterious and set apart from mainstream society,
Aleister Crowley was sure to be a card-carrying member. And the
Freemasons were no exception. In fact, if you study Crowley’s teachings,
the symbolism he employed, and even his dress, you can tell that much of
what he used was either directly or indirectly borrowed from Freemasonry.
Even though officials of Freemasonry endlessly deny that Crowley ever had
any access to their lodges, the influence is very obvious. Crowley himself
claimed to have been initiated by a man named Don Jesus Medina during a
visit to a lodge in Mexico City. (It is perhaps rather ironic that Crowley, the
man known as the “Wickedest Man in the World”, claimed to have joined
the Freemasons under the auspices of a man carrying the name of Jesus.)
 
Whatever the case may be, Mussolini for one—after barring all Freemasons
from Italian society—wasn’t going to take any chances with Mr. Crowley.
So, shortly after declaring Crowley to be much more wicked than he was,
Mussolini had him driven out of his Abbey of Thelema—the occultist
sanctuary he had built for himself on the island of Sicily. Crowley then
disappeared from the Masonic milieu, but future Freemasons have been
haunted by his presence ever since.
 
It is important to reiterate that modern-day Freemasons vehemently deny
that Crowley was ever a member. And they do so for good reason. In the
official Freemason charter, a good reputation and good moral character are
prerequisites for membership. Someone like Crowley, who was known for
conducting ritual orgies and sacrificing cats (and perhaps even people),
could hardly be deemed an upstanding citizen by anyone’s standard. But the
fact that Crowley so frequently ripped off and coopted the secret rituals and
symbols of Freemasonry for his own nefarious purposes is a clear indication
that he was at least present at more than a few lodge meetings.


Freemasons, Fascism, and Communism
 
 
The aim of this book is to provide a fairly straightforward, chronological
history of Freemasonry and the world events that it has allegedly been a
part of and/or been shaped by. For this reason, we’ve expressly avoided
bobbing and weaving from one date to another. We want to give you as
clear of a timeline as possible, without any unnecessary complications.
 
Having said that, even though this chapter does pick up chronologically
where the previous one left off—in the early 1920s—a little background is
necessary. The rise of fascism and communism after World War One had
some very complicated repercussions for the world at large and the world of
Freemasonry in particular, and this requires a little bit of digging further
into the past to understand just how these things came to be. But for the
sake of chronological continuity, we will keep it brief.
 

First of all, the idea of communism as we know it originated in the mind of
the 19th century writer and philosopher Karl Marx. Marx was not himself a
Freemason (although it has been alleged that he had connections to the
lodge in England, where he lived out most of his life). However, many of
his followers were Masons, and the communist ideology he espoused would
cross paths with Freemasonry quite a few times in the late 19th and early
20th centuries.
 
The biggest communist revolution occurred in Russia in 1917. The level of
Masonic involvement in the Russian Revolution has long been debated. It is
true that Freemasonry was rather widespread in Russian civic life in the
early 20th century. The Freemasons were an intellectual bastion in Imperial
Russia. Their lodges were places where otherwise oppressed Russians could
openly voice their criticism of the Russian government.
 
It is interesting to note that the stated charter of Freemasonry today dictates
that politics is not an allowable topic of discourse at Masonic meetings.
This outward ban on speaking up on anything political was most likely put
in to allay governments’ fears about these secret gatherings. But if you
believe the words of Alexander Kerensky, the man who led the initial
revolution and briefly presided over a new Russian federal government
before the communist takeover, the Freemasons were open agitators against
the crown.
 
The Masons were allegedly fomenting revolution by encouraging peasants
to go on strike for “bread and land”. Others have made the claim that
Kerensky himself was a Freemason, and allegedly even a Grand Master at a
Russian lodge in 1916. But if conspiracy theorists wish to implicate Russian
communists as Freemasons, it would stand to reason that Grand Master
Kerensky would have stayed in power. Obviously, this was not the case;
Kerensky and the provisional government he headed were quite literally run
out of town when the Bolsheviks took over the apparatus of the state.
 
Nevertheless, the idea that leading communists were Freemasons would
continue to be bandied about in the following years. A few hundred miles to
the east, in Austria, a young artist and military veteran named Adolf Hitler

spent much of the 1920s virulently stating this case. He usually claimed that
the communists were all part of either a Masonic or Jewish international
cabal; when he felt the urge, he would claim it was a combination of both.
 
In his 1925 book Mein Kampf (My Struggle), Hitler devoted whole chapters
to the disparagement of Freemasonry. He accused Masons—with the help
of the Jews, of course—of attempting to take over all aspects of German
society and conniving to steer the nation into the eager hands of the
communists. Once Hitler came to power, he made it official; the Nazi
party’s handbook states that “The natural hostility of the peasant against the
Jews, and his hostility against the Freemason as a servant of the Jew, must
be worked up to a frenzy.”
 
Hitler’s diabolical ranting and ravings have of course been discredited, and
no evidence has been found that the Freemasons were ever part of any
sinister collectivist plot. Nevertheless, when Hitler was elected as Reich
Chancellor in January of 1933, the Nazis rapidly went forward with their
plans to shut down the Freemasons. The push to move the Freemasons out
of Nazi Germany began with a stern warning given to the Grand Master of
the Grand Lodge of Germany on April 7, 1933, by Hitler’s number-one
loyal stooge Hermann Goering.
 
Despite the inhospitable nature of his errand, it is said that Goering was at
least polite enough to say “please” when he asked the Grand Master to
leave. The Nazis’ manners didn’t last for long, however, and soon they were
rooting out whatever Freemasons remained by absolute brute force.
Freemasonry itself was officially banned in 1934, making anyone who wore
the Masonic apron automatically an enemy of the state. All throughout
World War Two, the authorities in Nazi Germany systematically persecuted
any Freemasons unlucky enough to be found inside the territory of the
Third Reich. Tragically, many who could not escape ended up as fodder for
the concentration camps.
 
It is estimated that as many as 100,000 Freemasons were killed in the
Holocaust. Many of them ended up in the horrific facility known as
Buchenwald, where they were at the mercy of the so-called Hangman of

Buchenwald—Martin Sommer. This depraved Nazi was rather fond of
hanging Freemasons (along with other inmates) up in the trees of the nearby
woods, and due to the cries of the dying men dangling from them, the locals
dubbed the grove the “Singing Forest of Buchenwald”. Here the destroyed
bodies of Freemasons, along with Jews, homosexuals, Jehovah’s Witnesses,
Gypsies, communists, and anyone else the Nazis deemed a threat to the
state were hung from the branches.
 
But the saddest sight for many inmates was the tree that the famed German
poet Goethe was said to have sat under during his heyday in the 1700s. This
tree, which had been preserved and revered long before the Nazis decided
to build a hellish detention center nearby, came to represent a twisted
mockery of Germany’s more enlightened past. It was high literature and art
in the face of the dreadfully degraded reality of the concentration camps.
Strangely, the Nazis had actually chosen Goethe as their anti-Freemasonry
poster child, saying that this hero of German culture had been against the
Masons. Even for the Nazi high command, this was an extremely bizarre
thing to do, since Goethe had actually been a Freemason himself!
 
Along with the oppression dished out by the Axis powers under Benito
Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, Freemasons had yet another totalitarian fascist
dictator to fear in the form of General Francisco Franco of Spain. Franco
seized power in 1936, sparking the Spanish Civil War. The claim that he
was freeing Spain from communism and Freemasonry was literally part of
this man’s war cry, and any Freemason taken prisoner by the fascists was
immediately executed.
 
But Franco was not satisfied with merely eliminating Masonic POWs, and
he eventually decided to become even more proactive in his persecution of
Freemasonry. In March of 1940, he set up his own modern-day version of
the Spanish inquisition, the Tribunal for the Suppression of Masonry.
Accompanying legislation not only made it a criminal offense to be a
Freemason but also made it possible to punish a Mason’s relatives. Franco’s
fascist regime was now able to rip entire families apart simply for their ties
to Freemasonry.
 

Even Franco had to make exceptions in his brutality from time to time,
however, as was the case when a couple of his own generals were found to
be Freemasons. Although these men were forced to renounce their Masonic
membership, they were ultimately spared punishment because Franco
needed them on the field of battle during the ongoing Civil War. In the end,
Franco won that war, and just as importantly he managed to keep his
country out of the larger conflict of World War Two. Unlike its fascist
counterparts of Germany, Italy, and Japan, Franco’s Spain was able to
survive the conflagration intact, and when the smoke cleared he found
himself to be the last fascist standing.
 
His hatred of Freemasons survived the war as well. Shortly after the Allied
victory, Franco began to pen a series of anti-Masonic articles under the
pseudonym of J. Boor. These articles were eventually compiled into an
anthology called Masoneria which was published on May 3, 1951. In this
book, Franco blamed the Freemasons for destroying the Spanish Empire of
old—and for just about every other problem or crisis the country had ever
experienced. Freemasonry remained officially anathematized in Spain until
Franco’s death in 1975, when King Juan Carlos succeeded him and rolled
back the ban.
 
Freemasons, fascism, and communism have had a long and complicated
history, and Freemasons have been scapegoated for just about every societal
ill you could ever imagine. Fascist totalitarian dictators lashed out with fear
against what they could not control and tried to shut down the free spirit of
the Freemason for good. But the resilient spirit of Masonry could not be
chained down, locked up, or denied.


Freemasonry of 1950s America
 
 
The 1950s was in many ways America’s heyday of unprecedented growth.
After the victorious war, the American economy was booming. And even as
the former superpower of the British Empire was falling apart, the US had
risen to the top as the military hegemon of the world. It was also during the
1950s that American Freemasonry reached its zenith, with the majority of
the world’s Masons belonging to a lodge within the United States.
 
For many Americans today, the 50s symbolize the good old days, but in
reality, those good old days were fraught with all kinds of difficulty. For
one thing, the Cold War threat of nuclear annihilation was never far from
anyone’s mind. The Atomic Age had begun when the United States dropped

the first nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan—on the orders
of the Freemason President, Harry Truman.
 
The atomic bombing of Japan has always been highly controversial for a
variety of reasons. Number one, the idea of detonating a nuclear bomb over
a city full of civilians now strikes most people as overkill, to say the least;
and number two, evidence has since surfaced that seems to clearly indicate
that Japan was on the path to surrender before the bombs were dropped.
The question, then, is why did Truman do it?
 
Some conspiracy theories paint a picture of a US president influenced by a
diabolical branch of Freemasonry hell-bent on making an example to the
world of the power wielded by the coming New World Order. Now, the
“New World Order” has been bandied about in conspiratorial circles for
quite some time, but just what does it mean? Is this something that some
blogger somewhere simply made up? Well, if you would like some sort of
tangible proof, just pull a dollar out of your billfold and flip it over to the
backside. Now look under the pyramid. You will see the phrase “Novus
Ordo Seclorum”. What does that mean? It’s Latin for “New World Order”.
 
Just how it got there, and what it means, has been debated for decades—
ever since 1935, when fellow Freemason FDR commissioned the design for
the bill. One theory is that the pyramid, which is unfinished and sports an
all-seeing Masonic eye, is an allegory for the Masons’ unfinished business
of creating a world government.
 
It wasn’t long after the end of World War Two that nuclear weapons
technology spread to the Soviet Union, creating a nuclear standoff
dangerous enough to threaten the entire planet. Were Freemasons behind
this unexpectedly rapid nuclear proliferation? There are some who would
say they were. There are KGB reports that spies for the Soviet Union were
indeed seeking membership in Masonic lodges in the United States.
 
The most famous of these alleged spies were Julius and Ethel Rosenberg,
who were convicted of handing America’s nuclear secrets over to the
Russians in 1951. The Rosenbergs had also managed to seriously endanger

the lives of hundreds of thousands of US troops in the Korean War through
the release of sensitive data on the capabilities of the US Air Force. This
gave the Soviets near air supremacy throughout much of this engagement.
 
But not all 50s Freemasons were in cahoots with the communists. And one
Freemason who particularly wanted to prevent the expansion of
communism was General Douglas MacArthur. MacArthur initially led UN
forces in the war that broke out on the Korean peninsula in 1950. Following
the amphibious invasion of Inchon, he managed to push the communist
Korean fighters all the way back to the Chinese border. He then intended to
take the fight to China itself, even advocating the use of nuclear weapons to
effect the complete decimation of the People’s Republic. Harry Truman
ultimately overruled MacArthur, ordering him to stand down and removing
him from leadership due to his defiant stance.
 
Nevertheless, MacArthur remained legendary in Japan, where after World
War Two he had served as the supreme allied commander and built the new
Japanese governing structure from scratch. He had also made sure that a
few Masonic temples were built as well. As early as 1947, he had the
fledgling provisional government of Japan open the door for Japanese
citizens to start and join their own Masonic lodges. These included a new
lodge at Yokosuka Naval Base, as well as three separate lodges that were
established in Tokyo.
 
Even while MacArthur was building up his legacy in Japan, a senator
named Joseph McCarthy was building up his infamy back home in
America. He was officially hunting for communists, but Freemasons were
on his radar as well—so much so that many felt the need to create splinter
groups and factions outside of mainstream Freemasonry in order to keep
McCarthyism from getting inside the lodge.
 
One such group was initiated by the exiled Polish politician and Freemason
Jozef Retinger. The group first met at the Bilderberg Hotel on May 29,
1954. It was from the name of this initial meeting site that this secret cabal
came to be known as the Bilderberg Group or more simply as the
Bilderbergers.

 
Among other things, the group had a stated objective early on for pushing
towards a European Union. The EU was still very much on the drawing
board in the early 1950s, but the Bilderbergers would push on until their
dream became a reality. In fact, the first direct precursor to the European
Union, the European Community, was conceived by the Bilderbergers and
made reality with the Treaty of Rome—that old capital of European Empire
—in 1955.
 
For many conspiracy theorists, the creation of a united European super state
is just the first stepping stone to creating a world government. Proponents
of this theory vigorously claim that groups like the Freemasons and the
Bilderbergers are actively taking part in the process after having made
major inroads in the 1950s.
 
According to some, the plotting and scheming behind the scenes was not all
political. Some of it was cultural. There have been claims that Bilderberg-
backed Freemasonry became heavily involved with the music scene of the
1950s, sponsoring acts such as Elvis Presley in order to influence the
culture of the nation. This is all just conjecture, of course, and has not been
proven one way or the other. But as you can see, the happy, idyllic 50s were
not all about Leave it to Beaver and Ovaltine; there were some people with
nothing short of world domination on their minds.


Freemasonry and the Killing of Kennedys
 
 
The election of John F. Kennedy was an exciting time for many Americans.
It seemed to be a time of great hope and optimism in which, as Kennedy
himself described it, “the torch had been passed to a new generation of
Americans”. But it is alleged that there were many “powers that be” behind
the scenes that did not much appreciate the fact that this torch had been
passed at all. Those who wanted to maintain the status quo saw the dashing
young President as a great threat to their hegemony.
 
Contrary to many of his associates (who just so happened to be high-
ranking Freemasons), Kennedy wanted to deescalate the crisis that was
developing in Vietnam. He was considering a removal of US troops by
1965. Obviously, this is not what occurred, and after Kennedy’s death in
1963, the US became increasingly locked into the Vietnamese struggle. But
while it is certainly true that Kennedy’s foreign policy ran afoul of many

powerful people in Washington, DC, is there any evidence that his death
was part of a Masonic plot?
 
Admittedly, the links that conspiracy theorists point to are tenuous at best.
First of all, they highlight the coincidences surrounding the place and time
that Kennedy was killed. He was gunned down on November 22, 1963, as
his motorcade traveled through Dealey Plaza in Dallas. The so-called
circumstantial evidence linking this event to the Masons begins with the
fact that Dealey Plaza was named for a Freemason called George
Bannerman Dealey. The plaza was also home to a giant Masonic obelisk
that stood directly over the site of Kennedy’s murder. Just a coincidence for
most, but some see more. And if you’re up for another stretch of the
imagination, it has also been pointed out that as soon as Kennedy landed in
Texas, he was greeted by a group of school children singing the song “The
Eyes of Texas”—which just so happened to be written by a Freemason!
 
Most of us would find such insinuations from such minor details to be
absurd, but there are many hardcore conspiracy theorists who maintain that
there is indeed a connection between the assassination of John F. Kennedy
and Freemasonry. According to these theorists, the gunman who was
arrested for the crime—Lee Harvey Oswald—was just a stooge chosen to
take the fall for the greatest assassination in history. As Oswald famously
told the press immediately after the shooting, he “was just a patsy”.
 
Oswald unfortunately never had the chance to elaborate on this statement,
because soon thereafter he too was gunned down—killed by nightclub
owner and petty mobster Jack Ruby. Ruby stated at the time that his reason
for marching into a police station (he just happened to know exactly where
Oswald was being held) and shooting Oswald before he could stand trial
was simply that he was consumed by anger and indignation at the man who
had killed the president.
 
This petty crook and racketeering gangster, it turns out, was a very patriotic
man; according to Ruby, he simply wished to avenge John F. Kennedy. But
those who knew Ruby best found such assertions entirely laughable.
District Attorney Jim Garrison, who investigated the case, summed up the

absurdity of Ruby’s claims of being caught up in a patriotic passion when
he stated, “Jack Ruby had no strong political views of his own. He was just
a hoodlum out for a buck.”
 
Whoever was responsible for Kennedy’s death, he was succeeded by a
powerful Freemason named Lyndon Baines Johnson. It interesting to note
that while Johnson claimed he was going to continue Kennedy’s policies,
when it came to Vietnam he ordered an immediate change of course. Just a
few days after Kennedy’s death, Johnson rattled off a memo to one of the
top generals handling the situation in Southeast Asia, General Maxwell
Taylor, telling him, “The more I look at it, the more it is clear to me that
South Vietnam is our most important military area right now.”
 
Shortly after this directive was issued, the still-controversial Gulf of Tonkin
incident occurred. The American version is that US naval vessels engaged
in sea battles with North Vietnamese ships. The Vietnamese have always
maintained that the attack never occurred—the whole thing was made up
merely as a pretense for war. If this is the case, it would certainly fit into the
Freemasonry narrative of “order from chaos”. This is a belief that the best
way to achieve an objective is to first create a problem (such as imaginary
boat attacks), then find a solution (war in Vietnam), so you can get what
you really wanted in the first place (US domination of Southeast Asia).
According to some theorists, this is Freemasonry 101.
 
Whatever the truth may be, right at the same time America was getting
dragged into a horrible quagmire in Vietnam, the Masons of England were
celebrating a major milestone. 1967 was the 250th anniversary of the
founding of the first grand lodge in 1717. A rally to commemorate the event
was held in the Albert Hall lodge in London. Over 6,500 Masons from all
over the world attended this gathering. A quarter of a millennium later, the
place where it all began was still going strong.
 
In the States, meanwhile, the Kennedy conspiracy was getting even thicker
after Jack Ruby passed away in prison. The world was shocked when a
Dallas Deputy Sheriff named Al Maddox revealed that Jack Ruby had
confided in him his belief that he had been injected with “cancer cells”

shortly before his death. Maddox claimed that Ruby told him, “They
injected me for a cold—but it was cancer cells”. Ruby apparently believed
that he had been tricked into taking a vaccination shot that contained some
sort of carcinogenic contagion. At the time, Deputy Maddox had just
thought that Ruby was being paranoid—but when he died just a few weeks
later from an extremely aggressive, fast-growing cancer, he began to
believe Ruby had been telling the truth.
 
But that wasn’t all—Maddox also claimed that shortly before Ruby died, he
had handed him a small scrap of paper on which was scrawled the message,
“It’s a conspiracy! If you keep your eyes open and your mouth shut, you’re
going to learn a lot!” Now, if Ruby really did deliver this cryptic note
shortly before expiring, it’s almost certain he wasn’t speaking of a
conspiracy over the chicken nuggets in the prison cafeteria. If Ruby really
wrote these words, he was clearly indicating that the Kennedy assassination
and his involvement in shooting the alleged assassin were part of a vast
conspiracy.
 
And many conspiracy theorists believe that it wasn’t enough to kill John F.
Kennedy, his assassin, and his assassin’s assassin. It was also necessary to
kill his brother with a mind-controlled robot named Sirhan Sirhan. The man
who bore this double-barreled appellation was a 24-year-old Palestinian
national who seemingly just happened to wander into the Ambassador
Hotel in Los Angeles where Robert Kennedy was giving a victory speech
following the California primary during the 1968 election. After his big
win, RFK seemed poised to get the Democratic nomination when Sirhan
stumbled upon the scene and shot him dead.
 
The gunman was tackled and taken to the ground immediately after
delivering those lethal shots—and then it was as if he had just woken up out
of a dream. Alarmed at what was happening around him, the bewildered
Sirhan claimed to have no knowledge of what had just transpired. It was as
if he had been sleepwalking when he pulled the trigger. How can we
account for such a thing?
 

Well, if you believe some conspiracy theorists, the explanation is obvious:
Sirhan was programmed by a dark Masonic cabal. According to Sirhan’s
own memory—or what is left of it—he was merely in the area looking for a
party to go to. The 24-year-old was apparently ready to have a night out on
the town when he stumbled upon the Ambassador hotel where Kennedy
was speaking. He hit the bar and had a few drinks. Sirhan claims that after
he left the bar, he realized that he was too intoxicated to drive, so he went
down to the hotel pantry to get himself some coffee so he could sober up.
 
Here he claims that he met a pleasant young woman who began to chat with
him. They made random small talk as the nice lady helped Sirhan fix his
coffee. But after taking one sip of that coffee, the next thing Sirhan knew he
was being tackled to the ground and accused of killing Robert F. Kennedy,
who was bleeding to death just a few feet away. To this very day, Sirhan
Sirhan claims to have no knowledge of what happened between that first sip
of coffee and the aftermath of the shooting. Was Sirhan drugged? Or, as
many conspiracy theorists and anti-Masonic activists claim, was he
somehow programmed and placed in a hypnotic trance so he would carry
out the shooting? What happened between him, the nice lady in the pantry
and that cup of coffee? Some say she was a CIA agent working in tandem
with Freemasons.
 
As strange as this tale has become, it gets even stranger with the uncovering
of a Russian KGB memo that seems to implicate President Johnson himself
in the assassinations of both Kennedys! It is hard to believe that an
American vice president would collude with others to have his president
killed so he could step up to take his place, but this is exactly what the most
extreme of the conspiracy theories hold. And since Johnson was a high-
ranking—yep, you guessed it—Freemason at the time, he had plenty of
connections to help the plot go forward without a hitch.
 
So, who really did kill the Kennedys? Have you ever heard the expression
“a picture is worth a thousand words?” Because you can discuss the inner
workings of conspiracy all day long, but this one photo of then vice-
president Lyndon B. Johnson exchanging a curious wink with Congressman
Albert Thomas seems to tell it all. Everyone else in the picture is grieving

the loss of John F. Kennedy, yet Representative Thomas, LBJ, and even his
wife Lady Bird somehow seem to be quietly congratulating themselves.
Congratulating themselves on what?
 
 
This photo was taken immediately after LBJ was sworn in, and it was
initially excluded from the records—most likely due to the unseemly effect
created by the winking LBJ and smirking Lady Bird. For several decades,
only the photo shown at the beginning of this chapter was known to the
general public. When this image was finally uncovered, it created a
firestorm of speculation.
So what really happened? Who was really behind the killing of the
Kennedys? If anyone knows for sure, they must have taken an oath of
secrecy—because they sure aren’t talking.


Freemasonry and Organized Crime
 
 
Any Freemason will tell you that the order refuses to have anything at all to
do with criminals. In fact, one of the main stipulations for membership is to
have good moral character—meaning no criminal record. Yet there are a
few tales of Freemasonry brushing up against the dark underbelly of
organized crime. And nowhere has this been more the case than in the
Masonic lodges of Italy. It seems that dealings between the organized crime
syndicate known as the Sicilian Mafia and Italian Freemasonry can be
traced back to the oppressive dictatorship of that anti-Masonic fascist
Benito Mussolini.

 
Mussolini tried his best to root out and round up Freemasons and Mafia
members alike during the 1920s and 1930s. Il Duce despised any
organization that he couldn’t control, and both Freemasons and the Mafia fit
that bill. However, his oppression had the unintended side effect of driving
the Freemasons and the Mafia together. The old adage “we must all hang
together, or we shall all hang separately” was never more apt than during
the reign of Mussolini. Realizing that they would both sink if they didn’t
render aid to each other whenever possible, the two persecuted groups
began a vigorous collaboration against the Italian government. In all irony,
in targeting the Mafia and Freemasonry for extermination, Mussolini simply
made both groups stronger as they created a tight network of opposition
against his best (worst) efforts—so tight, that even long after Mussolini was
dead and gone, these bonds would remain.
 
The centerpiece for much of the discourse between Italian Freemasonry and
the Mafia was the so-called P2 Lodge, which operated under the
jurisdiction of the Grande Oriente d’Italia. This lodge was in official use
from 1945 to 1976, but by the late 1970s its charter had been withdrawn.
Why was the charter withdrawn? Well, apparently, after a man named Licio
Gelli was appointed Grand Master, it was found that he had ties with Italian
fascists. The fact that a group of Freemasons would appoint a fascist to lead
them after fascism had nearly destroyed them decades before is full of
incredible irony, but this is apparently what happened.
 
When the governing apparatus of the Grande Oriente discovered Gelli’s
background they were appalled enough to disavow the lodge and cut ties
with them. This didn’t stop Gelli, however, and even without support from
Freemasonry’s centralized bureaucracy, he continued to run the P2 Lodge as
an unofficial, yet fully functional satellite of the mainstream Masons.
 
For the rest of the 1970s, Gelli was busy bending the lodge to his own will.
He built close ties with local politicians, wealthy bankers, and members of
the Catholic clergy, as well as news media and publishing companies. One
of the most important figures from this influential cabal that Gelli cobbled
together was Michel Sindona, a top financier for the Vatican. It was through

Sindona that a powerful banker by the name of Roberto Calvi made the
acquaintance of Gelli and the P2 Lodge in 1977.
 
Known as “God’s banker”, Roberto Calvi was the President of the Banco
Ambrosiano in Milan. Banco Ambrosiano was a top shareholder of the
papal bank. After joining forces with the P2 Lodge, Calvi began to establish
a string of foreign shell companies on its behalf, including ten located in
South America alone. These offshore companies were notorious for their
money laundering and other decidedly unethical transactions. The papal
bank directly contributed to this money laundering scheme by helping to
fund Banco Ambrosiano.
 
But soon enough Italian banking authorities began to zero in on the
operation. Calvi knew that his days as a free man were numbered—but did
he also know that his days of being alive were drawing to an end as well?
Before the police could even swoop in to arrest him, in the summer of 1981
Calvi was found dead, hanging from Blackfriars Bridge, a famous landmark
in far-off London.
 
From the outset, the scene of the supposed suicide seemed oddly staged.
Calvi hung from the bridge by a bright orange rope wrapped tightly around
his throat. Lodged deep in his pockets, he had wads of cash amounting to
over 10,000 dollars—and a couple of bricks. As well as the obscure
symbolism of bricks in Masonry, it would later be discovered that the
orange rope was none other than the “cable tow” used in Masonic rituals. (It
is a standard Masonic initiation rite to tie this cord around the initiate’s
neck.)
 
While many would assume that this was a clear message that death lurks for
those Masons who decide to leave the lodge, Freemasons themselves
protest that this cord has nothing at all to do with death. Although it may
look like a hangman’s noose around the initiate’s neck, it is actually meant
to symbolize the fraternal cord that connects all Freemasons together. Even
if there is an innocent explanation for the orange rope, though, the fact that
Calvi was hung from Blackfriars Bridge, a well-known Masonic landmark,
made the matter suspicious in some minds.

 
Of course, even if Calvi was murdered, it wasn’t necessarily by the Masons.
Some suspect that the Mafia was the real culprit in the killing and sought to
frame the Masons by using Masonic paraphernalia and a Masonic backdrop.
But there was no proof either way, and the case was eventually shelved as
one of the 20th century’s more bizarre mysteries. Then, in 1991, Roberto
Calvi’s son Carlo reopened the investigation by hiring a private investigator
named Jeff Katz to look into his father’s death.
 
Katz and a team of 30 other investigators spent much of the 1990s doggedly
searching for answers. They managed to trace a trail to several notorious
underworld figures in the process, and apparently they struck a nerve.
Because it wasn’t long into the investigation that one of the detectives, Luca
Tescaroli, was sent a mysterious package containing black powder, two 12-
volt batteries, and a message on a scrap of paper that warned, “This is an
ultimatum. Stop.”
 
It was obvious that someone, somewhere, did not want the investigation to
continue—but it did. The investigators uncovered an intriguing clue when
they came upon British police records of the murder of a petty thug named
Sergio Vaccari just days after Calvi had turned up dead. At the time, police
had had little reason to believe that these murders were connected. The
Rosetta stone proved to be the Masonic papers that Sergio Vaccari was
carrying.
 
A fellow Italian Freemason with many of the same underworld ties as Calvi
dying in London at the same exact time—it seemed to be a coincidence
worth following. Picking up on this lead, investigators found that Vaccari
had recently been kicked out of the apartment he was renting. Just before
giving him the boot, his landlord had offered him another unit. In fact, he
had apparently given Vaccari two choices, and a seemingly satisfied Vaccari
had picked the one he preferred.
 
After getting settled in, however, Vaccari had requested information about
the other option that the landlord had available. That option just so
happened to be an apartment in a building called Chelsea Cloisters—which

is where Roberto Calvi was staying prior to his sudden death. Once this
revelation came to light, the Katz team was able to find several more all-
too-coincidental links between Roberto Calvi and Sergio Vaccari.
 
Was fellow Freemason Vaccari somehow behind the murder of Calvi? And
was Vaccari in turn murdered to keep him from talking? Anyone who
understood how the Sicilian Mafia worked knew that a two-bit thug like
Vaccari wouldn’t be able to operate without marching orders from mob boss
Francesco Di Carlo. But when Di Carlo was finally made to answer the
questions of these intrepid investigators, he did not supply them with a
confession. Instead, he cryptically responded, “I was not the one who
hanged Calvi. One day I may write the full story, but the real killers will
never be brought to justice because they are being protected by the Italian
state, [and] by members of the P2 Masonic Lodge.”
 
And sure enough, when five suspects were put on trial in 2005 for their
alleged connection to Calvi’s death, they were all acquitted. It seemed that
they had bucked the system and skated free due to their beneficial
connections. This, of course, only seemed to verify what the old mob boss
Francesco Di Carlo had said about the state and Freemasonry lending their
protection to Calvi’s murderers. Could it be true? Are Freemasons somehow
above the law?
 
Well, the idea of Masonic immunity to justice was literally put on trial in
2004, not in Italy, but at a lodge in New York. Here the Masons were once
again in the headlines for all the wrong reasons, due to a standard initiation
ceremony that ended in the death of the initiate.
 
Freemasonry’s rituals involve much dramatic playacting, such as
blindfolding members, putting ropes around their necks, and—as was the
case in this tragedy—putting guns to their heads. In this particular
ceremony, the goal was to induce a state of fear and obedience in the new
Mason. But despite the high anxiety, no one was supposed to get hurt.
Naturally, an unloaded gun is supposed to be used in such a ceremony, but
on this occasion the gun was fully loaded. It went off and struck the initiate,

a 47-year-old man named William James, right in the face. James was dealt
a mortal wound and died almost immediately after being shot.
 
The Mason conducting the ceremony, Albert Eid, apparently had two guns
on him that day, one that was loaded and one that was not loaded, and
according to his testimony, he simply chose the wrong gun. From the outset
this seems to be a tragic accident, but there are of course those who claim
that the death of William James was not so accidental after all. And not all
of them are professional conspiracy theorists.
 
In this case, there are conflicting stories from among the Masons
themselves. You would think that a clandestine brotherhood worth the name
would look out for a wayward member, but when it came to Albert Eid, the
Masons couldn’t seem to be bothered. Immediately after the shooting, Carl
Fitje, the Grand Master of New York State, went on the record to proclaim
that Freemasons do not use guns in any of their ceremonies. So, what
happened? Was Eid’s lodge going rogue and making up their own unofficial
initiation ceremonies?
 
Eid was charged with second degree manslaughter, to which he initially
pled not guilty. He explained that the initiation ceremony was supposed to
have him shoot blanks as the new initiate, James, sat blindfolded in a chair
while another Mason struck cans with a stick. This was supposed to scare
James into thinking he had been shot. Unfortunately, the blindfolded man
really was shot, and he perished so rapidly thereafter that fear wasn’t even a
part of the equation.
 
Eventually, Eid cut a deal and pled guilty to criminally negligent homicide,
receiving a sentence of five years’ probation. It was an extremely light
sentence for such a charge—so light, in fact, that it has engendered
speculation that Eid’s ties to Freemasonry helped him get off easy. Perhaps
we will never know.


Freemasonry in the Age of Terror
 
 
Of course, conspiracy theories about the Masons (or anything else, for that
matter) wouldn’t be complete if we did not—in one way, shape, or form—
bring up the events of 9/11. Innumerable theories have been launched in
regard to that tragic day in the late summer of 2001. They range from secret
government cabals, to astrology and numerology, and to all manner of other
so-called “secret sources of knowledge”.
 
But clamoring the loudest among these conspiracy theories is the idea that
9/11 was the effort of behind-the-scenes plotters from a secret society such
as the Illuminati or the Freemasons who sought to use their age-old model
for change: order out of chaos. As mentioned previously in this book, it had
long been a theme of Freemasonry to create order from chaos. The idea is

that you create a problem, then offer a solution, and thereby generate the
change you wanted.
 
In the case of 9/11, the theory states that the attacks were carried out to
create a problem which would be solved by the invasion of the Middle East,
which would bring the plotters what they wanted—control of Middle
Eastern oil. It’s a fairly basic formula, and some may find it outright absurd
(if not insulting) in the context of 9/11, but there are many who subscribe to
just this theory. In fact, the current President of the United States, Donald
Trump, is one of the leading proponents of the idea.
 
Thanks to his previous life as a civilian building contractor, Trump
considers himself an expert on architecture, and he has long insisted that the
two planes that hit the World Trade Center should not have been able to
take down the twin towers. According to Trump, the Trade Center was one
of the first buildings to have been “built from the outside” with a network
of reinforced steel supports on the exterior of the structure. As President
Trump describes it, “Most buildings are built with steel on the inside,
around the elevator shafts. This one was built from the outside, which is the
strongest structure you can have.”
 
Yet Mr. Trump maintains, “it was almost like a can of soup” the way the
hijacked planes easily sliced through the buildings. So how, then, does
Trump (and others) explain the destruction of the World Trade Center?
Many contend that since the impact of the planes wouldn’t have been
enough, bombs must also have been detonated to take down the buildings.
While—to be clear—there is absolutely no proof of this, this 9/11 theory
remains very popular to this day.
 
Some have even asserted that it was a plot by Freemasons in tandem with
elements of the government that strategically placed tactical nuclear
weapons in the buildings to bring them down. Was this another case of
Masonic “Ordo Ab Chao”—”Order out of Chaos”?
 
Well, before we even look down that rabbit hole, let’s consider that this
conspiracy theory does not take into account all of the brave men and

women who lost their lives on that September day—and who just so
happened to be Freemasons. Yes, many of the firefighters, police and other
emergency personnel belonged to the Masonic order. But despite their self-
sacrificing support during America’s darkest hour, it remains difficult for
Freemasonry to shake the specter of these conspiracy theories.
 
Ironically enough, these same theories were eventually picked up by the
Islamic terrorists for their own use. This propaganda methodology was on
full display during the ISIS takeover of Iraq in 2013. In the United States,
President Barack Obama had just won reelection when the chaos of ISIS
began to disrupt the Middle East. The emboldened terrorists were tearing
through Syria and Iraq virtually unchecked, and they soon began to launch
personal attacks against President Obama himself in which they accused
him of conspiring with Freemasons.
 
An ISIS spokesperson at the time issued the following statement:
 
The slaves of secularism and agents of the Freemasons appealed to their
Crusader master, the Black of Washington, to save them from assaults of the
Knights of Khilafah, who have become very close to conquering their
capital, and eradicating their malice from the land of Muslim Kurdistan. So,
the dog of the Romans [Obama] thrusted his Air Force into a new dilemma;
and entered into a military pact with the agents of yesterday, the Kurds, to
commit the same stupidity that he had not awakened to, even until now! And
it seems that this submissive fool forgot or pretended to forget the quagmire
of Iraq years ago, in which tens of thousands of crusaders were annihilated
and tens of thousands of them were injured with permanent disabilities, not
to mention the material losses and financial crises that nearly wiped the
United States off the map!
 
As you can see, the conspiracy theories that have been expounded upon so
much in the West have made their way all the way to the battlefields of the
Middle East. Right alongside their racist remarks about Obama being the
“Black of Washington”, these Islamic extremists clearly labeled any
American intervention against them as being nothing short of another
Crusade—and linked it explicitly to Freemasonry.

 
The irony of this whole situation is about as rich as it could get. Just before
ISIS called Obama a “Crusader master”, the president had been attempting
to downplay their atrocities by making erroneous moral equivalencies
between the Crusades of 1099 AD and the bloodthirsty murder, rapine, and
destruction of ISIS. After these oddly apologist remarks on the terror
group’s actions, Obama was then ridiculed by the very extremists he had
attempted to downplay! But whatever names and labels the Muslim mafia
known as ISIS wishes to hurl at Barack Obama, as far as anyone can tell,
President Obama has never been a Freemason.
 
However, his Secretary of Defense, John Kerry, most certainly was. And it
is interesting to note that just as the war in Iraq and Syria really began to
heat up, John Kerry went on the record to state, “We will make order out of
chaos.” As we have seen throughout this book, this is one of Freemasonry’s
best-known slogans. It is the strategy that they have preached to be the most
effective means to effect change in the world. Coincidence, maybe—but
Kerry and Obama’s foreign policy during the Obama administration’s
second term did indeed seem poised to dismantle the Middle East.
 
We will have to go deep into conspiracy-theory land for some of this stuff—
but it goes a little something like this: Do you remember back in the 2016
presidential campaign when Donald Trump shocked the world with the
seemingly absurd statement that “Obama founded ISIS?” To most
(including yours truly) this seemed completely ridiculous. But if you
believe the conspiracy theory that deep state actors with ties to Freemasonry
(such as John Kerry) are actively working to dismantle the Middle East, the
perspective on Trump’s seemingly absurd statement begins to shift.
 
Because here it is claimed that the American CIA, directed by President
Obama, did indeed arm rebels to use as mercenaries in clandestine missions
in the Middle East. This would certainly not be without precedent; the CIA
has been doing such things for decades. Just think back to the Cuban exiles
who were armed and organized by the Kennedy administration to overthrow
Fidel Castro back in the early 1960s. Now flash forward to the 1980s, when

the Reagan administration used the CIA to arm Taliban fighters in
Afghanistan after the invasion by Soviet Russia.
 
The CIA ended up utilizing a guerilla leader named Osama bin Laden. Yes,
that’s right—that Osama bin Laden. It’s undeniable now that bin Laden was
a CIA creation set in motion to fight off the Soviet Union. You can argue of
course, that after bin Laden served his purpose in the Cold War he became a
monster that got out of control. How could his CIA handlers have known
that he would go rogue and create the terror group known as Al-Qaida? But
whatever the outcome, bin Laden’s operation was indeed at least initially
funded by the CIA—and some say, by the Freemasons.
 
So, can the same exact thing be said for ISIS? Was it indeed an Obama-
backed CIA/Freemason project that got out of control? Is that why Obama
always downplays the mess that erupted under his watch? Because he and
John Kerry and a hidden Freemasonry/CIA deep state cabal were the actual
founders of the terror group? Is that why in his final presidential address,
Obama famously referred to ISIS as simply being the “JV” team? Were they
initially proxies of his and a whole cabal of Freemasons? This is just one of
many conspiracy theories involving terrorism and Freemasonry.


The Freemasons of the Future
 
 
In recent years Freemasonry has attempted a kind of PR campaign in order
to gain new members. Because the truth is, the Masons are dying off. The
median age of current members is from 60 to 80 years old, and without a
surge in new recruits, this means that there will be a sudden drop in
membership in the near future. In fact, it is predicted that an estimated 100
lodges will be forced to shut down and every single year if this trend
continues.
 
It is for this reason that current leadership is forced to look toward the
future—today. There have been continual efforts to convince the millennial
generation in particular that it’s “cool” to be a Freemason. In their outreach
to these younger potential members, social media campaigns have been
initiated online and several new university lodges have been created on the
ground—all in an effort to attract the youth.

 
Young people are becoming increasingly dependent on internet-based
community connections, so in order to survive and remain financially
viable, the Freemasons of the future will need to utilize communication
technology to keep themselves relevant. It has also been determined that the
future will have to be more open than the past. The days of dark meetings in
windowless lodges are over, and now the Masons are attempting to be much
more transparent.
 
As much of an oxymoron as it may seem at first glance, this secret society
is now seeking more transparency! This has been deemed necessary in
order to combat some of the more rampant rumors that have been
circulating about the lodge. Masonic leadership feels that in order to get
people to stop talking about the more extreme myths and legends of the
craft, they need to get them talking about something else. They realize that
the best way to kill the gossip is to confront it head on.
 
Now many lodges are doing away with many of their more mysterious
traditions, rituals and rites of initiation in favor of more pancake dinners,
card tournaments, and fish fries. The Freemasons are becoming more of a
communal and charitable organization, and there are many who believe that
their future lies in following the example of the Shriners.
 
The Shriners are an entirely charity-focused organization that is a direct
offshoot of the Freemasons. Shriners successfully raise millions of dollars
for several worthy causes every single year. They have even created their
own “Shriners Hospitals” to take care of the sick. With all of the good will
they have created, you would be hard pressed to find anyone launching any
diabolical conspiracy theories against them. Shriners march in parades,
wear funny hats, drive miniature cars, dress up as clowns, and help kids
with cancer, and you are unlikely to find such charitable givers and helpers
of the community lumped in with the Illuminati!
 
It is for this reason that many believe that Freemasonry as a whole needs to
take this example and become much more community focused in order to
survive in the future. In order to remain viable, keep up their membership,

and avoid some of the more conspiratorial tales they have been plagued
with in the past, this secret society just might have to give up many of its
secrets.


Freemasons—Are they Truly Free?
 
One of the most famous initiation rites for new Freemasons is for them to
lift up their pant leg in order to demonstrate that they do not have any
shackles attached to the leg on display. This is meant to show symbolically
that the prospective initiate is not shackled or chained down to anything in
this life and is a free agent able to make his own decisions. But how free are
the Freemasons? Some detractors who have left the group would answer,
not very.
 
These disgruntled former members allege that the Freemasons are nothing
more than a cult. In particular, many Christians have left the group because
they found that its rituals went against their faith. Certain symbolism, and
perhaps the fact that certain higher-ups are meant to be addressed as
“worshipful masters”, has rubbed Christian believers the wrong way. This
conflict has been with the Masons from the very beginning; it was the
reason the Catholic Church banned the group long ago.
 
But ideological differences aside, could Freemasonry be said to be a cultish
group controlling its members? Secrecy is a form of control, and no doubt
the fact that Masons are expected to take and keep certain oaths could be
viewed as a cult form of discipline. But having said that, several members
have left the Masons and divulged secrets. Whole books have now been
written exposing just about every supposed secret the Freemasons ever had.
None of these former members have been killed.
 
So even if spooky rituals are conducted insinuating physical harm to those
who leave the group, for the modern Mason at least, these seem to be
nothing more than empty threats—used more to set the mood than anything
else. In the case of William James, who lost his life during a Masonic ritual
in 2004, there was certainly an aspect of intimidation in the initiation, but as
the shooter Albert Eid explained, it was just a scare tactic and nothing more.
 

All the members were so horrified at what had happened that they quit to
distance themselves from the lodge that conducted the fatal ceremony. If
mainstream Masonry is this skittish about an accidental death, it would
hardly seem likely that they would purposefully cause the deaths of those
who choose to leave the craft. Nowadays the lodge has a revolving door,
with members going in and out as they please. Freemasonry may be in
decline, but at least its members are still free.


Further Readings
 
Now that we have brought this book to a close, let’s take a look at the many
resources that made it possible in the first place. Here you will find
thoughts and theories from all sides of the aisle when it comes to the
history, influence, and impact of Freemasonry. Feel free to look through
them as much as you like.
 
The Secret Societies Bible: The Definitive Guide to Mysterious
Organizations. Joel Levy
This book is an exhaustive reference point for secret societies. They’re all
listed in alphabetical order, so not only will you find Freemasons under “F”,
you will also find chapters on the Knights Templar, the Rosicrucians, and
the Chinese Triads. This gives you a better understanding of all secret
societies and how they connect and intersect with Freemasonry. If you
would like to have a bigger picture of how Freemasonry interacts with other
shadowy groups, then you are going to need to read this book.
 
The Freemasons in America: Inside the Secret Society. H. Paul
Jeffersons
This book shines a spotlight on the influence of Freemasonry in America.
There is perhaps no other place on the planet that has been influenced by
Freemasonry as much as the United States of America. This book helps to
highlight the connections that the very Founding Fathers of the US had with
Freemasonry—and how this connection to the inner workings of the lodge
has continued to this very day.
 
Rule by Secrecy. Jim Marrs
The late great Jim Marrs was a kind of connoisseur of conspiracy, and in
Rule by Secrecy he does not disappoint. He takes us down every possible
conspiratorial path you could ever imagine when it comes to the
Freemasons. From their founding shrouded in mystery to more modern
scandals and events, Marrs covers it all.
 

The Freemasons: A History of the World’s Most Powerful Secret Society.
Jasper Ridley
In this classic expose on Freemasonry, Ridley relays the rich and complex
tapestry that Freemasons have woven throughout history. Ridley is an
expert historian, so you can expect nothing but the best from his report on
Freemasonry.
 
A New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry. Arthur Edward Wate
This compendium of all things Freemasonry literally goes down the list,
rattling off every important aspect of the craft. From facts, to symbols, to
secret rites, this book is a convenient source of information.
 
Freemasons for Dummies. Christopher Hodapp
This book is not like your typical book from the For Dummies series.
Written by a Past Master, Knight Templar, and Freemason, this book covers
all the information that is allowed to leave the lodge doors. You won’t find
much in the way of conspiracy theories and sensational stories here, but for
a practical guide into the everyday mundane life of Freemasonry, this book
has no equal.
 
Born in Blood: The Lost Secrets of Freemasonry. John J. Robinson
In his discourse on Freemasonry, John Robinson takes us down the path of
conspiracy and details what he alleges to be the “secret” side of
Freemasonry that the general public knows nothing about. This book takes
us through some of the most riveting tales to have come out of the Masonic
lodge. You can learn a lot here about the sordid affair of the Vatican banker
Alberto Calvi, who met his end when he crossed paths with members of the
Sicilian Mafia working out of a Masonic lodge.
 
The Hidden Life in Freemasonry. C.W. Leadbeater
Coming straight from the mouth of a Freemason himself, this book takes us
through some of the twists and turns of Freemasonry from an insider’s
perspective. Here we can get some great insight into the craft’s everyday
routine. It isn’t full of all the sensationalism of extreme conspiracy theory,
but it’s a solid guide to how the lodge actually operates. So if you would
like to learn something concrete about the Freemasons and leave the wildest

conspiracy theories aside, this book is well worth putting on your
bookshelf.


Volume 5
 



Contents
 
Introduction
The Illuminati and Their Origins
The Illuminati Are a Secret Sect of Freemasons
The Illuminati Guard an Ancient Secret
The Illuminati Control the World
The Illuminati Were Just Lucky
The Illuminati Changed the World
The Illuminati: Satanism, Witchcraft, Rosicrucianism, and the Occult
The Illuminati are Dead
The Illuminati Caused the French Revolution
The Illuminati in Modern Society
Conclusion
Further Readings


Introduction
 
The Illuminati dominate any discussion of secret societies. Search the web,
spark up a conversation, or search through a library shelf and soon enough
you will encounter their name. They have become an ancient order and a
modern sensation at the same time. They are at once a ubiquitous herald of
the new world order and the people who market pop albums, and trying to
discern the truth about the organization can get lost amid the hail of noise
that inevitably follows any mention of their name. In this book, we hope to
do something different. Here we will try to separate fact from fiction and
confront the truth about the Illuminati.
 
In order to achieve this, we have uncovered fifteen of the most frequently
asked questions, queries, and accusations that people have relating to the
Illuminati. By taking a discerning, informed look at each of these ideas in
detail, we will be able to reach the truth that so many people seek but which
can be so hard to find. If you have ever wanted a handy guide to cutting
through the mess of information that you find online, then this guide will be
perfect for you.
 
Throughout the course of this book, we will look into the origins of the
Illuminati, their involvement with the Freemasons, accusations of Satanism
thrown at them, the idea that the caused the French Revolution, their
involvement with ancient and celebrity cultures, and their appearance on the
dollar bill of the United States of America. If you have ever wanted to know
the truth about the Illuminati in a simple, easy-to-understand guide, this
book is exactly what you need.


The Illuminati and Their Origins
 
It makes sense to start at the beginning. Even when discussing the early
origins of the Illuminati, a cursory glance at the range of sources out there
will provide the reader with a hundred different answers. Some say that the
society started life in Ancient Egypt, others say that they did not become a
real force until the establishment of the United States of America. In this
guide, however, we want to discover the provable truth. In this regard, it
should be stated for the record that – in spite of the protestations of some
people – there is a degree of truth to the Illuminati story. They began life as
a legitimate secret society, one with big plans and a restricted membership.
So before we go on to look at a few of the more disputed stories
surrounding the society, we should take the time to outline exactly what we
know and exactly what we can prove. To do this, we will need to travel to
Bavaria, Germany, in the 18th Century.
 
Though the name might have taken on new meaning in the modern age (a
point which we shall return to later), the original Illuminati were not only a
very real and very secret society, but they really existed, and we can
legitimately verify it. In fact, their history has been passed down to us over
the course of several centuries. Rather than providing insight into a
domineering global conspiracy, the history of the Bavarian group can
demonstrate to us how the politics and beliefs of the European
Enlightenment were put into practice. Rather than being built on the occult,
the strange, and the mysterious, the Illuminati of the 18th Century were
formed with very scholarly principles in mind. The story of how they came
into being, however, means taking a tour of the halls of German academia
of the time.
 
One of the most important names in this story is Adam Weishaupt, who was
working at the time as a professor as the University of Ingolstadt. His
specialties were Practical Philosophy and Common Law, giving us
something of an indication that he was something of a down-to-earth man.

He was not, however, surrounded by likeminded individuals. The
University of Ingolstadt was known to be a predominantly Jesuit institution.
The Jesuits – particularly devout and scholarly Catholics – occupied almost
every position, to the point where Weishaupt was the only professor who
did not count himself among their number. Though ostensibly dissolved in
1773, the Jesuit order continued to endure against the shifting praxis of the
Catholic Church. The University was one of their most important
institutions and – even if their name was not officially still above the door –
they very much controlled the finances for the school.
 
Figure 1 - Adam Weishaupt
 
The Jesuits were defined by their devotion to the Christian cause.
Unfortunately for them, this was a post reformation world. The efforts of
Martin Luther and his fellow reformists had been particularly fruitful in
Germany, leading the Catholics – and, in particular, the Jesuits – into
difficult times. Fighting to retain control of one of the last bastions of their

power, there was a marked effort within the University to discredit and
ostracize any member of staff who was not a member of the Order.
Weishaupt was clearly one such person, and his future at the University was
seemingly doomed. Anything that was deemed to be in any way liberal or
even Protestant was deeply abhorred by the Jesuits, and it is perhaps
because of this that Weishaupt found himself pushing back against the
institution’s ideals with such vigor. He became a consummate preacher of
the ideals of the Enlightenment, promoting reason, liberty, progress, and
constitutional government as the future. It was a worldview that left little
room for the Catholic Church and their teachings. It was inevitable that
Weishaupt would find himself in trouble.
 
However, he was a clever man. Knowing that there was little to be done
through soapbox style preaching, Weishaupt decided that he would conduct
his affairs in a far more secretive manner. As the idea of forming a secret
society grew more and more appealing with each passing day, the professor
began to consider potential members for his new group, searching for
compatible people who were already in and around the University of
Ingolstadt.
 
One of his first considerations was turning to the Freemasons. We will
cover the links between the Freemasons and the Illuminati in greater depth
in coming chapters, but their organization structure and secretive approach
seemed to be directly in line with the kind of group Weishaupt was hoping
to form. There was, however, a major issue. Membership of the Freemasons
was a costly endeavor. It would require a fortune to operate such a group
under their banner. Weishaupt also felt that there might be ideological
opposition from the already entrenched Freemasons. He had his own ideas
about the world, his own philosophies, and some of these might clash
directly with the way in which Freemasonry operated. Instead, Weishaupt
quickly realized that he had little choice but to start his own organization,
one which would be imbued with his Enlightenment ideals right from the
very start.
 
That is not to say that Weishaupt could not draw influence from other
people and other societies. In particular, he noted the way in which

Freemasonry was organized along a grade system, with members increasing
their knowledge and their involvement the closer they moved towards the
higher echelons of the order. This seemed, to Weishaupt, to be an adept way
of organizing those around him, and it would be perfect for the
establishment of a clandestine group within the walls of the University. In
order to remain hidden from the Jesuits and the rest of society, borrowing
the structure of the Freemasons would allow him to conduct the group’s
business with a relative confidence in their hidden nature.
 
The first name Weishaupt considered was the Covenant of Perfectibility
(Bund der Perfektibilisten, in the original German). It was under this name
that Weishaupt and four carefully selected students from the University first
met in 1776 on the 1st of May. Not only did they meet under the name of the
Covenant of Perfectibility, but they collectively decided that they would
employ the owl of Minerva as their sign. Being a secret society, they soon
realized that aliases would be a useful addition to their group, settling on
alternative names for all involved. Weishaupt himself became known as
Spartacus, while others took names such as Ajax, Tiberius, Agathon, and
Erasmus Roterodamus (who were otherwise known as Massenhausen,
Merz, Bauhof, and Sutor, respectively). The latter member, Erasmus
Roterodamus, would later be expelled from the group, with Weishaupt
citing “indolence” as the reason. All of the students studied law and so were
in close contact with and already known to Weishaupt. He could trust them,
he believed, and he knew them to have similarly inclined political views.
 
So the Covenant of Perfectibility continued to meet for almost two years,
until it was realized that the name was not ideal. It was quickly found that
the title was too vague and too strange to function as the name for a
potentially world-changing group. Weishaupt’s next decision would have
ramifications throughout the next few centuries, passing down to us a name
that has become famous not only for its association with Weishaupt and his
battle against the Jesuits, but one that has also become a hallmark of
popular culture. One of the names briefly considered was “the Bee Order,”
though this was soon rejected. It needed to be not only grandiose and
intimidating but also reflective of the group’s learned status. And so, in

1778, in the month of April, the group officially retitled itself as the Order
of Illuminati (Illuminatenorden in German).
 
And, just like that, the Illuminati were born. As we will see later in this
book, it was not simple sailing from there on out. Weishaupt’s efforts to
popularize and expand his society would prove to be difficult, with
arguments, encounters, and rival groups emerging alongside the Illuminati.
However, we can depend on these facts for the very essence of our study
into the history of the Illuminati. There are papers and accounts of the
group’s meeting that are extant to this day, providing documented proof that
the Order of Illuminati not only existed, but that it also was established in
an 18th Century German University. All of these factors will come to be
important when we address questions that appear later in this book, though
for now it is very useful in dispelling a number of key misinterpretations
about the origin of the Illuminati.
 
First, the Order of the Illuminati is not referenced in documents, writings,
recorded text, or any other kind of scripture before the events of 1778. As
such, it is quite easy to counteract against claims that the Illuminati are an
ancient secret society that only rose to the surface in the 18th Century. That
the group formed by Weishaupt was, at one point, operating under a
different name, demonstrates that the title of Illuminati was not an elder
group, risen up from the depths of history. It was a creation of the German
law professor, but it would prove to be a significant one. As we will see in
later chapters, there have been efforts to attribute the Illuminate’s existence
to a number of iconographical signifiers found through ancient, medieval,
and Renaissance art, though these are typically without any foundation.
That we have such well-organized and collected accounts of the formation
of the Order of Illuminati allows anyone with an evidence-based, empirical,
value system to point at a specific juncture in German history as the birth
point of the Illuminati.
 
The second point to counter is the suggestion, less common, that the
Illuminati are an American invention. As we have already seen, the year of
1776 was important in the founding of the Illuminati. The group shares this
in common with the United States of America, whose history hails July the

4th, 1776 as being the day the country became officially independent from
Great Britain. Many have pointed to this slight parallel as being justification
enough to suggest collusion between Weishaupt and the American
forefathers. However, this is rampant speculation. There exists no evidence
of any communication between any of the American leaders at the time and
Weishaupt. Furthermore, the name Illuminati was not actually created until
two years later. During the formative years of Weishaupt’s organization, it is
safe to say that men such as George Washington and Thomas Jefferson had
more important concerns that a small, unheralded, secret society hidden
within the walls of a Jesuit university.
 
That is not to say that they might not have been interested, however. It has
been a long-documented fact that the founding fathers of the United States
were heavily interested in the principles of the European Enlightenment.
The influence can be read in the Declaration of Independence and the
Constitution. Many of the ideals that the founding fathers were attempting
to imbue in their nascent country were shared by Weishaupt, the kind of
principles he wished to spread through the Jesuit-dominated University.
Had the two groups (the founding fathers and the Order of Illuminati) sat
down around a dinner table, it would not likely have been long before they
discovered common ideological ground. While it is an entirely unsupported
and almost impossible possibility that the men who helped founded the
United States also formed the Illuminati, we can at least concede that there
do exist parallels between the two groups. The key difference, however, lies
in the fact that Weishaupt’s society chose to operate in the shadows, while
George Washington et al were very vocal in their defiance.
 
Thanks to the evidence that we have gathered together, we can place an
almost exact starting point on the history of the Illuminati. But as we will
see in the next chapter, this history can quickly become complicated.


The Illuminati Are a Secret Sect of Freemasons
 
It is impossible to understand the history of the Illuminati without
mentioning the Freemasons. As one of the most successful secret societies
ever conceived, the Freemasons have entered into the popular public
consciousness in a way few other organizations have managed. They have
outposts all over the world, with these so-called Lodges being found in
North America, Europe, the Middle East, and many other places. Often
associated with wealth and strange rituals, their organization is said to be
built on the accruing of ancient knowledge, ideas that are then used to
increase influence and power throughout the world. Many secret societies,
whether real or mythical, have been linked with the Freemasons at one
point or another. Likewise, many conspiracy theories posit that the
Freemasons are the power behind the curtain, influencing events around the
world. The Illuminati are no different. But are the Illuminati actually a
secret sect of the Freemasons?
 
The answer is not straightforward, though there are indications that the two
organizations have become very intertwined at various points in their
histories. More than most, the Illuminati have taken ideas, members, and
attention away from the Freemasons, an exchange that has also occurred in
the opposite direction. While the answer to many of these questions of fact
and fiction regarding the Illuminati can be difficult to answer, there is little
doubt that there is a tangible bond between the Freemasons and the
Illuminati as they existed in the 18th Century. In order to discover exactly
what this bond entailed, we will need to delve once again into the history of
the Bavarian order.
 
After founding the Order of Illuminati, Weishaupt and his fellow members
faced one major problem: how to bring more people into the fold. As the
University of Ingolstadt was a Jesuit institution, recruiting from the student
body was tough and recruiting from the faculty even harder. So it fell on
one of the students to handle the bulk of the recruiting work. Massenhausen
(Ajax, as he was known) was the most active, especially as he left

Ingolstadt a short time after the group was founded. He went to study in
Munich, which proved a rich pool of resources. One of the most significant
Illuminati recruits was a man named Xavier von Zwack, who had studied
under Weishaupt previously. Von Zwack was embarking on a career in
administration, so he would provide the group with an insight into
government in the region, especially into the Bavarian National Lottery,
where the new recruit was now plying his trade.
 
Despite the success Massenhausen found in recruiting new Illuminati
members, this success quickly soured. Weishaupt began to view the
swelling ranks of the Order as a threat, with the student seemingly selecting
candidates that were later deemed to be unsuitable. This would later be
compounded by a somewhat erratic approach to romantic relationships, an
issue that meant Weishaupt could rely little on Massenhausen. In order to
remedy the situation, Weishaupt decided that the Munich outpost of the
Illuminati should come under new leadership. He trusted Von Zwack to
head up what was quickly becoming an important branch of the Order. The
civil servant agreed, but soon discovered that Massenhausen’s unreliability
had been far worse than previously thought. The man had been
misappropriating the subscription funds paid by members and had even
been reading the private communications between Weishaupt and his
former pupil. Accordingly, Massenhausen left the Order of the Illuminati in
1778. Having graduated from Ingolstadt, he took a position in a different
region of Germany and resigned himself to having nothing to do with the
group. As there were only twelve members by this point, he likely
considered himself to be missing out on very little.
 
Following this period, Von Zwack took on the mantle of chief recruiter. His
actions proved more successful, especially as he attempted to bring in a
number of more influential and mature people. Of these, Weishaupt was
pleased to see a man named Hertel come into the organization. Hertel had
been a childhood friend and was now a canon of the government body, the
Munich Frauenkirche. By 1778, as the group changed its name to the Order
of Illuminati, membership numbers were up to around twenty-seven. They
could be found in a number of different German cities, such as Ingolstadt,

Munich, Ravensberg, Freysingen, and Eichstaedt. All of them were given
codenames, taken from the cities of Ancient Greece.
 
But how does this relate to the Freemasons? As the ranks of the Order
swelled, Weishaupt decided that he would organize the membership along
Masonic lines. For example, there were three grades of involvement. These
were Novice, Minerval, and the Illuminated Minerval. These were roughly
equivalent to the way in which Freemason lodges organized involvement, in
which they assigned (and still assign) members to categories of Apprentice,
Journeyman, and Master Mason. Just as in the Freemasons, moving up
through the ranks would bring greater insight into the knowledge possessed
by the group. In addition, each movement up a rank would be accompanied
by something akin to social advancement. When reaching the stage of
Illuminated Minerval, the member would finally be shown the technical
secrets of the organization, including the secret handshakes, signs, and
passwords that provided entry into the innermost circles. This was a
structure borrowed almost wholesale from Freemasonry.
 
Freemasonry is an often misunderstood phenomenon. The origins of the
group can be traced back as far the 14th Century, with the Freemasons
themselves presenting (and often mythologized) version of their history in
their own Old Charges, a collection of historical documents. The
Freemasons have for their symbol a compass and square, a logo that can be
seen adorning buildings around the world. Walk through any capital country
(especially in Europe or the United States) and you will eventually come
across the symbol, often carved into stone above a doorway. With members
including everyone from local architects to American presidents, the
Freemasons are usually well represented at the highest levels. The stories
one hears about the Masons can often be deceiving. As with the Illuminati,
they find themselves at the center of many mistruths and false attributions
(though that is the subject for another book.) Just as with the Illuminati,
there is the suggestions of a secret order quietly pulling the strings from the
shadows. But the truth of the matter is that – whatever the Freemasons once
were – they rarely amount to little more than a social club in today’s world.
Often joined by businessmen, the influential, and the upwardly mobile, the
Masons and their Lodges function as a meeting place for likeminded

people. The organizations are networking clubs, akin to social media for the
pre-internet age. Introductions are made, relationships struck up. On a local
level, the Lodges serve as a means of putting compatible people in touch for
a mutual benefit.
 
However, the Freemasons are an organization with a great deal of history,
and this history can imbue the modern iterations with a seemingly archaic
quality. Similarly, at the time when the Illuminati were first discovering
how best to organize themselves, the 18th Century Freemasons provided
them with a social template. As the Freemasons were a very old society,
they had a number of pre-Enlightenment rituals and ceremonies that had
been passed down over the years. Many of these rituals are still held today,
especially when a member passing from one rank into the next. In the
course of moving up through the ranks, a Mason might first swear to fulfil a
number of obligations to his Lodge. From there onwards, he might swear to
keep the secrets of the Freemasons from both outsiders and those of a lower
rank. He will be provided with literature and an opportunity to look into a
number of private historical objects that the Masons have preserved. But
strangest of all is the fact that some of the Freemasons often include more
occult and outlandish rituals. As well as the compass and square, other
objects such as the trowel, the level, and the plumb rule are also
incorporated into the ceremonies, as well as a so-called moral lesson. These
rituals and ceremonies are ostensibly secret, though a number have been
revealed and even filmed. To the outsider, not aware of the actions’
allegorical meanings, they can appear strange and almost occult. But the
truth is that they are often harmless and – at least in the modern age –
something akin to theatre. By the time Weishaupt and his followers began
to take note of the Masons and their rituals, the ancient wisdom that these
rituals were said to represent had long since been forgotten. Instead, their
actions mirrored the Freemasons in other ways.
 
Just as with the Freemasons, the Illuminati began to limit their recruitment
strategies to people who fit within a select few demographics. All men were
expected to be Christian (as was essentially standard at the time), and
people such as Pagans or Jews were expressly prohibited. Alongside these
religious requirements, the Illuminati also forbade membership to monks,

women, and those who were involved with any other secret society. Ideally,
every single recruit would fit into the same description. That is, they would
be between the ages of 18 and 30, financially well-off, docile, and willing to
expand their knowledge. With the majority of the recruits coming from
current and former university students, membership of the Illuminati was
quickly drawn along very set and somewhat privileged lines.
 
However, as the Illuminati expanded, Weishaupt found that he needed to
keep tabs on his growing ranks. This was achieved by a system of counter-
espionage, in which certain members spied on other members. Weishaupt
was at the center, with many different people feeding him information,
often without realizing that they themselves were being recorded. Those
who were the most trusted were welcomed into the inner circle, a ruling
council that was also known as Areopagus. When selected novices were
given permission to go out and recruit, they were given the title of
Insinuants.
 


But recruiting became difficult. The Order’s rule requiring members not be
involved in other secret societies, in particular, proved to be tough. On
several occasions, Weishaupt had to step in to convince his recruits not to
join the far larger and more influential Freemasons. This became such an
issue that Weishaupt decided that he would join the Freemasons himself in
order to gather information for the betterment of the Illuminati. So, rather
than the Illuminati emerging from a sect of the Freemasons, the early
history of Weishaupt’s Order was marked by the difficulty that the
Freemasons caused.
 
Weishaupt moved through the Freemasons’ earliest ranks quickly. The Blue
Lodge’s three degrees (early steps along the path of Freemasonry) passed
by with very little noteworthy information. By 1778, Von Zwack was also
beginning to conduct research into the secrets of the Freemasons in the
hope of benefitting the Illuminati. He came into contact with a man named
Abbé Marotti, who claimed to be a priest with a good knowledge of the
higher echelons of Masonry. According to Marotti, the secret knowledge of
the Freemasons was related to ancient religions and the very earliest years
of the church. It was enough to convince Von Zwack that there was more to
the Freemasons than a simple structural quality that could be gained. He
reached out to Weishaupt and advised that the two secret societies should
join their forces or at least enjoy a friendly relationship. By the end of 1778,
Weishaupt’s lack of success in moving up through the ranks, as well as the
information from the priest, led to a changed attitude within the Illuminati.
They decided to establish a Lodge of their own.
 
Such was the organizational structure of the Freemasons that setting up a
Lodge was almost like setting up a franchise. Weishaupt and his fellow
Illuminati sent a warrant to the Grand Lodge located in Prussia – the
regional headquarters, so to speak – and after a small array of difficulties,
were eventually permitted to establish their own Masonic Lodge. They
named it Theodore of the Good Council, a name chosen specifically to
flatter and appeal to Charles Theodore, the Elector of Bavaria. The Lodge
was founded in 1779, and in no time, the members were almost entirely
Illuminati.

 
Within a few months, the Illuminati had total control of the Masonic
outpost. Their next goal was to ensure that they would be able to operate
independently, free from the instructions passed down by the Grand Lodge.
To do this, Weishaupt and his fellow members put themselves in touch with
other Lodges around Germany. In doing so, they built up relationships that
eventually allowed them to operate outside of the influence of the Grand
Lodge and to be recognized in their own right. They used clever internal
politics and machinations to surgically remove themselves from the main
Masonic host. Once it had been declared independent – and this
independence recognized by other Lodges –the Theodore of the Good
Council (which was, by now, just another name for the Illuminati) was
permitted to create and run smaller Lodges whenever they pleased. The
franchise was now allowed to create new franchises in their own self-
image.
 
So why is this important, and how does it tie the Illuminati to the
Freemasons? It should be stated at this stage that the Freemasons were a far
larger, continent-wide concern. What was happening in some remote region
of Germany was likely of little interest to the men running the Freemasons.
But what the Masons did have was a structure and an operating
organizational body. This allowed them to recruit and provided them with
some form of acceptable existence. Though many countries had outlawed
secret societies, the Freemasons had enough history that most people – at
least, those who might be recruited – were at least aware of their existence.
This kind of authenticity was something Weishaupt and his Illuminati
lacked. Having seen the Freemasons operate in such a way, the Illuminati
coveted the rival organization. Weishaupt’s plan was essentially parasitic.
Moving in under the guise of joining the club, the Illuminati adjoined
themselves to the host body, fed off the structural and recruiting benefits of
the organization, and used the Freemasons to make themselves stronger.
Once they felt suitably empowered, the Illuminati began to break away and
grow increasingly independent. While there might have been esoteric
designs on ancient knowledge held within the Masonic walls, it was the
functionality, the resources, and the reputation that the Illuminati truly
lacked. Weishaupt’s group already had an ideology and an ethos. What they

lacked was the ability to put these ideas into practice. By siphoning away
their needs from the Freemasons, the Illuminati were able to maneuver their
own society into a greater, more powerful position. 
 
As such, there might be some truth to the idea that the Illuminati are a
secret sect of the Freemasons. Certainly, at a pivotal moment in the history
of Weishaupt’s Order, the Illuminati were very much tied to their own
Masonic Lodge. They existed and operated within the Freemasons, using
the platform for their own benefit. But while this is true, it is important to
note that the Freemasons were often little aware of what was happening. To
tie the two groups together would be dishonest. At the time, the Illuminati
were like the mosquito sitting on the neck of the sleeping man. The man
might notice, wave his hand in the direction of some minor irritation, and
then roll over and fall back asleep. Once the mosquito has taken its fill, it
would simply fly away. At the time, the Illuminati were incomparable to the
Freemasons. But at the time, all they needed was a small boost in order to
raise their profile and recruit men like Adolph Knigge. As we will see in
later chapters, Masonic recruits such as Knigge would help determine the
course of the Illuminati in the coming years. This sharing of recruits and
structural organizations would be the biggest gift imparted to the Illuminati
from the Freemasons and would be their biggest point of comparison. It
would not be, however, a long term relationship.
 


The Illuminati Guard an Ancient Secret
 
As with the majority of conspiracy theories, many of the stories told about
the Illuminati depend on secrets. If the old adage is true, then knowledge is
power. Some people take this further, suggesting that the most powerful
secret societies in the history of the world have held on to some great
hidden truth that grants them exceptional influence. It is said of the Knights
Templar, who supposedly excavated a buried treasure on Jerusalem’s
Temple Mount during the Crusades. It has been said of the Priory of Sion,
who supposedly guarded the secret of the extant descendants of Jesus
Christ, before they were proven to be a small-time hoax blown out of
proportion. And it had been said many times about the Freemasons, who
supposedly guarded great secrets that were made known to only the highest
ranking members of the organization.
 
In the case of the Freemasons, this is likely due to the way in which the
society came into the world. One need only look at the name of the society
itself to discover that “Masons” is not just a title. During the Medieval
period, when the first rumblings of organization were gathering in European
cities, masons were important people. Roughly equivalent to today’s
architects, they guarded the knowledge required to build the most
impressive of buildings. These mathematical doctrines told members how
to cut stone properly and how to construct a load-bearing wall. In a time
when society was largely illiterate, these ideas were almost magic in their
execution. And because they were trade secrets, they were not just passed
along to anyone. Almost like a modern union, the Masons gathered together
and shared the techniques of their craft. To learn them, one would first need
to be an apprentice, a journeyman, and then a master. As time went on and
more and more people were admitted to the ranks, these traditional secrets
took on a more allegorical quality. The compass and square that are still the
logo of the Freemasons are no longer just tools of the trade, but rather
represent the ideals of knowledge and logic that the Masons hold dear.
While they might have once been a closely guarded secret, they served to

form the basis of the Order before taking on a more mystical meaning in
later life.
 
So how does this affect the Illuminati? At the time we left them, they were
beginning to infiltrate the ranks of Freemasonry. Having established their
own independent Lodge, they were closer than ever to the central
knowledge possessed by the Freemasons. But still Weishaupt was not
satisfied. Having joined the Freemasons and found nothing mystical that
would help his own secret society, he began to turn the majority of his
attention back towards the Illuminati. Besides, the Illuminati had their own
ideals to guard. They were founded on their own traditions and ideologies.
Formed on the principles of the Age of Enlightenment, the Freemasons’
ancient proclivity for architecture might have seemed altogether more
practical for a professor of Civic Law and philosophy.
 
This is where Adolph Knigge comes into the story. Having been one of the
recruits who came into the Illuminati in 1780, he had been a Freemason
with big ideas. Having joined the older society and sped through the ranks,
he had been filled with dramatic ideas and innovations that he thought
could be implemented. When he reached the higher ranks of Freemasonry,
his disappointment was palpable. Any plans that he suggested for reform
and modernization were quickly rejected. This is when he met Costanzo
Marchese di Costanzo, already a member of the Illuminati and one of the
order’s best recruiters. He noticed Adolph Knigge’s disappointment in the
Freemasons and let him in on a secret: the kind of plans Knigge possessed
were already being put into motion in certain secret circles. A short time
later, Knigge had been recruited into the Illuminati.
 

Figure 2 - Adolph Freiherr Knigge
 
 
Rather than the Freemasons initiations, which typically hinted towards their
technical past, the entrance materials for the Illuminati were decidedly more
intellectual. At the time, the very idea of liberal literature was outlawed in
Bavaria (and indeed, many other regions of Europe). Some of the most
progressive ideas that were born out of the Enlightenment were illegal. In
certain Protestant countries, these materials were widely circulated. They
offered criticism of the Catholic Church, as well as other Enlightenment
writings on matters such as liberty and an opposition to absolute monarchy.
They promoted science, empiricism, and a questioning of the surrounding
world. It is easy to see why such materials might be deemed detrimental to
the Bavarian state. But for anyone interested in joining the Illuminati, for
those men who had demonstrated themselves as being open to such ideas,
these were the mystical ideas that lay at the center of the Illuminati and
marked them out as being a dangerous and almost revolutionary group.
Knigge, along with a number of his close friends, seemed to be open to
such ideas.

 
One of the best recruiting grounds for the early Illuminati members was the
young, disillusioned men who found society too traditional and unwilling to
change. Secret societies offered them the potential means by which they
could meet and discuss such reforms. Before the internet age or the rise of
the mass media, such meetings were incredibly valuable. To the state, they
were incredibly dangerous. For most people, the Freemasons were the most
obvious choice of secret society, almost the ubiquitous name that was
commonly associated with the very idea of a secret society. But as we have
seen with Knigge, the size of the organization was often its undoing. As
there were so many Freemasons, it was harder to chart a course into more
revolutionary waters. In order to accomplish that, one would have to join a
society that was founded on the very principles that Knigge and similarly
minded men were hoping to promote. They would need to join the
Illuminati.
 
As such, the literature which Costanzo provided was the Illuminati’s
material for passing into the Minerval grade. Though the materials proved
distasteful to Knigge’s three companions, Knigge himself discovered
exactly what he was looking for. Rather than an ancient secret or traditional
mysticism that many people associate with the Illuminati in the modern age,
the group was instead founded on progressive and somewhat radical ideas.
These were illegal ideas, dangerous philosophies, but to a man like Knigge,
they seemed to be the future. There is a truth to the idea that the Illuminati
were built on a secret, but it is false to describe that secret as ancient.
Instead, the Enlightenment principles discussed within the clandestine walls
of the Illuminati were on the cutting edge of contemporary philosophy.
 
Knigge’s recruitment was important for a number of reasons. While we
might not know the exact materials he read (only their nature), it
demonstrates the kind of person to whom the Illuminati seemed appealing.
In many respects, he was the quintessential recruit for Weishaupt’s order.
Young, scholarly, rich, and with a desire to discuss very important ideas,
Knigge would almost become the poster boy for Illuminati membership. As
well as this, however, it was important for the effect that Knigge would
have upon the Order in the coming years. Knigge himself was somewhat

flattered by being welcomed into the Illuminati. The society’s attentions
were something of a compliment and a confirmation of the ideas he had
developed privately. He appreciated the principles on which the Illuminati
were built, namely a quest to educate the people of the world and protect
them from the despotism of monarchy.
 
However, in addition to these founding ideals, Weishaupt met with Knigge
and the two discussed other subjects. While Knigge talked about plans for
reforming groups such as the Freemasons, he also convinced Weishaupt of
the benefits of the so-called “higher sciences,” such as alchemy. By the end
of their discussions, Weishaupt threw his support behind Knigge, and
quickly the new recruit found his position within the society rising
exponentially. But in order to break into the highest ranks, Knigge would
have to prove himself. Weishaupt set him the challenge of recruiting new
members of exceptional quality. Knigge agreed, but only on the basis that
he would be allowed to select where the recruits were taken from. When
everything was agreed, Knigge returned, once again, to the Freemasons.
 
By now, it was clear that the Freemasons were a fertile source of recruits.
While Freemasonry might have once possessed a secret cadre of
knowledge, Knigge was able to recruit people to the Illuminati by revealing
to them the most current and progressive materials around at the time. The
Illuminati were the future, the coming order of things. At the time, however,
there was a problem. In an effort to give the Illuminati some degree of
credibility, Weishaupt had constructed an elaborate back story for the group.
This information was said to be made available to the highest ranking
members of the groups, though snippets were teased to potential new
recruits. Weishaupt outlined this history to Knigge, telling him about the
“Most Serene Superiors,” a seemingly cosmic force whom the Illuminati
served, along with a fictitious history of the Order that stretched back long
before the real founding date. Knigge, though mostly successful in his
recruitment, found the stories hard to remember. It was something of an
embarrassment when the new poster boy for the Illuminati could not recall
their supposed history.
 

Not deterred by Knigge’s inability to impart the Illuminati’s invented past,
Weishaupt looked upon the recruitment he conducted as largely successful;
so much so that he tasked Knigge with creating and executing one of the
Order’s first real actions: the distribution of a pamphlet that detailed the
continued existence and practice of the Jesuits. The pamphlet showed the
reader how the supposedly outlawed Jesuits were still in fact preaching and
practicing in Bavaria. It was the first time that the Illuminati crossed over
and made an impact on the world outside of their internal discussions.
Knigge was satisfied with the work in distributing the pamphlet but wrote
to Weishaupt in 1781 admitting to his own concern that he was unable to
convincingly answer questions about the Illuminati’s most mystical
histories. As Weishaupt began to realize that he might lose Knigge and all
the good work the man was doing, he admitted to having created the entire
history. The “Most Serene Superiors” were an invention, the ancientness of
the Illuminati was a construction, and many of the higher order of the
society had not yet even been written.
 
This, more than anything else, can highlight the lack of an ancient secret
that was being guarded by the Illuminati. There was certainly an awareness
within the group that such inventions could prove to be useful, perhaps in a
similar manner to the way in which the Freemasons used their history; an
allegorical lesson. However, it did not sit well with the supposedly radical
literature which the Illuminati themselves enjoyed. While it might have
been expected that Knigge was shocked and appalled by such lies, he
seemed to be quite the opposite. In fact, Weishaupt and Knigge discussed
the matter calmly. Even with the revelation that he would not be learning
some secret hidden truth belonging to the Masons or anything of the sort,
Knigge was promised that he would be brought closer to the central power
of the Illuminati. Alongside Weishaupt, he could read the original notes and
help craft some of the ideas that would be passed down to those most
trusted members. Knigge saw this as an opportunity to spread some of his
own philosophies and ideas. As he claimed, these new ideas would make
the Illuminati an even more attractive prospect for likeminded young
Germans. As such, Knigge was given 50 florins by the Illuminati council
(the Areopagus) and sent on what resembled a diplomatic mission.
 

By this point in the history of the Illuminati, it was clear to many people
that there was no great secret hidden away in the coffers of the Illuminati.
As we have traced their existence from its inception, we can be clear on
such a matter. But for those who came late to the party – like Adolph
Knigge – the matter was not so set in stone. With other organizations such
as the Freemasons teasing potential recruits with the possibility that there
might be some ancient occult secret that they will learn only when they
reach the higher levels, the Illuminati seemed to be certain that they too
should have this potential. But, as we have seen in the writing of Knigge,
the entirety of the Illuminati history at this stage was a poorly built
construction. It was one that Weishaupt or his Areopagus had not even
bothered to finish. While there are suggestions in the modern age that the
Illuminati were founded on some ancient principle, the truth is far more
interesting. The order came into existence purely to propagate and further
very new ideas. As we will see in coming chapters, such ideas would form
the backbone of many of the accusations later levelled at the Illuminati. But
in a much more immediate way, they would cause a great deal of internal
strife. While there is no closely guarded historical secret behind the
Illuminati, we will soon learn how they struggled to formulate their own
future. Before one sets out to conquer the world, it helps to have one’s
affairs in order.


The Illuminati Control the World
 
Travelling as we are through the history of the Illuminati, it is time to
confront one of the most enduring myths that circulates around the Order.
While we have seen in previous chapters that some of the accusations
levelled at the Illuminati do have merit and can at least be worth discussing,
the idea that the Illuminati control the world is a very modern suggestion.
As we will see in this chapter, they struggled at first to control their own
members. Filled with internal conflicts, divisions in ideology, and
disagreements over the future actions of the Order, it is important to see the
Illuminati as a very human construct. Just like any other human construct,
those within it are very prone to human failings. Rather than a single, driven
entity that pulls the strings from the shadow, this chapter will reveal exactly
how divided and difficult the members of the Illuminati found it to put their
ideas into practice.
 
In 1780, just a few years after the original founding of the Illuminati,
Weishaupt found himself in a difficult place. Though the order was still
very much in its early stages, the membership numbers had grown well. For
a secret society, they had managed to spread the word of their presence and
were beginning to generate something of a reputation, at least in certain
regions of Bavaria. However, there were divisions within the Illuminati. As
the founder, Weishaupt might have expected total autonomy over the group.
But the Areopagus did not agree. Those on the council seemed to find
Weishaupt to be something of a dictator; his approach was inconsistent and
marked by stubbornness. One of the only times he had offered to concede
ground – when Knigge looked like he might leave – proved to be the
apparent solution. Knigge became something of a go-between and a
peacemaker, talking to both the Areopagus and Weishaupt.
 
Knigge quickly realized that there were many problems within the
Illuminati. If they were to advance as an organization, then Knigge would
have to tackle such difficulties. The first of these lay in the recruitment
policy. It should be quite obvious that the success of a secret society lives or

dies on its recruitment tactics. Try to recruit too many people, and the
authorities will quickly become aware. Try to recruit too few, and you run
the risk of the group failing to grow. Recruit the wrong members, and you
will find that the society is incapable of achieving its original goal. It
becomes a difficult balancing act, which is why successful recruiters like
Knigge were so appreciated, and unsuccessful recruiters like Massenhausen
were quick to leave the order.
 
For his part, Weishaupt had placed an emphasis on recruiting university
students. This is perhaps understandable for a professor in a Jesuit
institution who saw his pupils as potential minds he could save on a regular
basis. But the resulting effect of this strategy meant that many of the more
senior positions within the Illuminati were quickly filled with bright,
energetic, and enthusiastic young men who critically lacked any
administrative experience. Instead of these younger recruits, the Areopagus
felt that it would be better served by recruiting older, more experienced
men, likely from the Freemasons. But therein lay a second problem. As
Knigge saw it, those older and more experienced Freemasons would likely
be perturbed by the Illuminati’s anti-religious (specifically anti-Jesuit)
stance. What had started as something of a distrust of the Jesuits had turned
into a general anti-religious sentiment throughout many areas of the
Illuminati.
 

Figure 3 - Illuminati pamphlet from 1788
 
It was a problem particular to Bavaria. In this part of Europe, the Catholics
were still in control. Elsewhere, the Reformation had seen an upheaval in
the way religion was practiced. While still technically Christian, the schism
between Catholicism and Protestantism was huge. Many people died as a
result of their beliefs. Wars were fought. To the anti-religious in the midst
of Catholic-controlled Bavaria, such an opposition might seem justifiable,
at least according to Knigge. But the people who the Areopagus hoped to
recruit? The older, more influential men? They might be put off by such a
stance. If the Illuminati hoped to spread beyond Bavaria, then this religious

distaste would have to be tempered. Both Weishaupt and the Areopagus
recognized the issues, but both found themselves with little solution other
than to place their trust in Knigge to find a resolution. Thanks to the man’s
contacts, he could make inroads into Freemason recruitment, untainted by
any obvious association with anti-religious views. He also possessed the
ritualistic skill that was required in order to refine the grade structure of the
Illuminati. They were still keen to make use of the Freemason’s approach,
but their efforts to write and build a progressive system of advancement
within the order (including rituals for passing up a grade and so on) had
ground to a halt. Knigge was given the task of writing and implementing
these rituals, as well as going out into the wider world to head up the
recruitment. There were a couple of conditions, in that he must submit his
ritual ideas for approval and would need to discuss many of his choices
before implementing changes to the highest grades. But beyond that, he had
autonomy to work on behalf of the Illuminati as he saw fit.
 
Marchese di Costanzo was given the task of writing to the Royal York (one
of the administrative centers for the Lodges in the area) and politely
mention that there was something of a discrepancy between the fees that
were offered to the Grand Lodge by the Illuminati’s Lodge Theodore and
the services and benefits they received in return. By this point, Lodge
Theodore had become a profitable venture for the Royal York, who noticed
the large increase in subscription fees that had come from the Illuminati’s
cover venture. Not wanting to lose out on this money, the Royal York
proposed a solution. In return for the continued subscriptions, the Lodge
Theodore would receive more access to the great secrets of the Freemasons.
Should the Illuminati send a representative up to Berlin, he would be able to
learn these secrets in person. Costanzo himself was again chosen by Knigge
to make the journey. He set off during April of 1780, hoping to reach
Prussia in fairly quickly. Once there, he was to be given the secret
instruction that he was to find some way of lowering the amount the
Illuminati were paying to the Freemasons. But Costanzo was delayed en
route, having gotten into a heated argument with a Frenchman he had
encountered in his carriage. The two had fallen out over a lady who
happened to be travelling with them, so much so that the Frenchman took
the time to send a message ahead to the carriage’s destination, Berlin. It

warned the King that Costanzo was in fact a spy. The message was enough
that Costanzo was immediately locked away upon entering Berlin. He was
only released when the Grand Master of the Freemason’s Grand York
personally intervened. But there was nothing the man could do to prevent
Costanzo from being banished, and the Illuminati man was sent back to the
Areopagus without having accomplished anything at all. It was just one of
the difficulties that Knigge would have to deal with.
 
One of the major issues that Knigge faced came from the Areopagus’s
efforts to insert the Illuminati into the more legitimate Freemasonry as an
official branch of the organization. The Illuminati already controlled Lodge
Theodore, though it found itself lacking in local power thanks to a nearby
Lodge that pulled rank. The complicated system of Freemason autonomy
meant that – while the Illuminati held much control over their own Lodge –
they found themselves having to bow to the nearby Elect Masters. There
had been efforts to similarly infiltrate this group, but only one Illuminati
member had succeeded. This meant that – for now – there was no way of
transforming the Lodge Theodore into an official combination of the
Illuminati and the Freemasons. By the end of January, 1781, Knigge had
managed to convince members of the Masters Elect to increase the power
of the Lodge Theodore, to the point where the Illuminati could create
smaller Lodges in their own image. But true independence was in no way,
shape, or form about to be discussed. Never mind giant global conspiracies;
the Illuminati were struggling to control the secret societies in a small
region of Bavaria.
 
That the organization was so quickly lost and at a crossroads can be a good
demonstration of how difficult it can be to entirely take over the world. If
we’re to believe the conspiracy theories, the global Illuminati network has
long been pulling the strings behind every major event for the past two
centuries. But that this stage of their existence, barely five years from being
a thought in Weishaupt’s mind, the Illuminati found themselves falling prey
to internal struggles and squabbles. This is important as it reveals the very
nature of the organization and why the idea of prolonged, hidden, and
effective power is inherently flawed. At their heart – whether that meant
Weishaupt, Knigge, or the Areopagus – there was no agreement. Opinions

pulled in every direction. This very human quality – to entertain one’s own
opinions – means that sustained power of the sort described in the
conspiracy theories is incredibly unlikely. As we will see in the coming
chapters, managing to maintain control and direction for the Illuminati in
just a few years can be almost beyond possible. So how was Knigge set to
handle this existential threat to the Illuminati?
 
Knigge quickly realized that – if he was to have any success in extracting a
better deal from the Freemasons – he would have to go to a higher power.
However, this was always going to be difficult. Knigge was aware that any
communications or any petitions to Lodges in London and other far-flung
countries would always have been too obvious. Any attempt to gain
autonomy in the form of a constitution would quickly become obvious that
the Illuminati were working towards their own independence. Far from
controlling the world, there was little the Illuminati could do to control local
Masonic Lodges. Until this was possible, they would have to slow down
their plans for expansion.
 
While the plans for expansion were slowed down, Knigge turned his
attentions inwards. Having cooled the heated relationship between
Weishaupt and the Areopagus, he began to focus on the other aspects of his
tasks. This included revising the structure of the Illuminati. As it was, they
controlled three Masonic Lodges, and Knigge decided that following the
structure of the Freemasons remained the best option. By 1782, on the 20th
of January, he put forward his new grade system. Once this was approved,
the Illuminati would be structure along three distinct classes. These were:
 
Class I – The Nursey
This would be the first order that people entered into and would
contain the Noviciate, the Minerval, and the Illuminatus Minor.


Class II – The Masonic Grades
These were borrowed wholesale from the Freemasons, though they
were titled there as Apprentice, Companion, and Master. After these
members could advance to a second tier within Class II, which
included the Scottish Novice and the Scottish King. Class II clearly
took influence directly from the Masons.
 
Class III – The Mysteries
The upper echelon of Illuminati membership, these were separated
into the lesser mysteries, order that were titled Priest and Prince, and
the greater mysteries, which were titled Mage and King. So difficult
was it to enter into these higher positions that it was unlikely that the
rituals or ceremonies for these tiers were ever even written down.
 
Having laid out a new structure for the group, Knigge began to reform the
Illuminati along his own views. Having grown disillusioned with the
Freemasons for not ascribing to his own ideals, here was a chance to
reshape the Illuminati only a few years after they had come into existence.
Far from a global order, they were still very much a local concern. Knigge,
however, hoped to change that. As ever, the solution lay in recruitment.
 
Whereas the Illuminati recruitment had been something of an experimental
system up to this point, Knigge decided to take a much more deliberate
approach. This time, aware of the difficulties he faced from the
Freemasonry upper levels, he decided that he would target men already in
positions of power. Whereas Weishaupt had favored impressionable
students who he could mold in his image, Knigge wanted men of power and
influence, especially those who were already wardens or masters within
existing Lodges. Once such people were recruited, it would place the entire
administrative capability of the Lodge under Illuminati control. Baron de
Witte, who was master of the Constancy Lodge in Aachen, was one such
recruit. After he was brought into the fold by Knigge, he succeeded in
turning every Freemason in his Lodge into an Illuminati member. This
change in strategy brought with it a rapid expansion, far quicker and of
greater quality than in the preceding years. After only a short time, it

seemed as though Knigge and his tactics were working. By the spring of
1782, the Illuminati found they had a foothold in Austrian Lodges, with
their numbers totaling around 300. Unlike the original recruits, only 20 or
so of the new wave were actually students.
 
Around this time, Weishaupt noticed that not all of the people in Lodge
Theodore were entirely on board with the Illuminati’s presence. Those who
had been Freemasons before the Illuminati had arrived or had joined under
the guise of Freemasonry were beginning to grumble. Weishaupt, sticking
to his principles despising despotism, offered the Lodge a deal. He would
willingly split the Lodge in two and allow those who wanted nothing to do
with the Illuminati to go their own way. Somewhat unexpectedly, few
people took him up on the offer and, quite quickly, Lodge Theodore was
entirely under the control of Weishaupt and the Illuminati.
 
Now that they had the full backing of their Lodge, a growing influence, and
greater numbers, the Illuminati felt justified in trying to exert their power.
The Order wrote to the Royal York and informed the Freemason authorities
that Lodge Theodore intended to “sever relations” with headquarters. As a
means of justifying their actions, the Illuminati listed their consistent and
dutiful paying of fees, for which they had not received greater insight into
the Masonic world, for which their own member (Costanzo) had been
poorly treated, and a general inability by the Royal York to provide support.
Lodge Theodore, they declared, was now to be considered entirely
independent and entirely autonomous.
 
At the time, the Freemasons themselves facing a great deal of internal
turmoil. Having existed for far longer than the Illuminati, they had
themselves succumb to many of the same problems. Schisms and internal
disagreements had led to the establishing of many different branches and
interpretations of Freemasonry. Just as with the Illuminati, the Freemasons
found themselves squabbling and unable to move forward. Unlike the
Illuminati, this was complicated by the fact that the Freemasons were an
international organization. Prince Carl of Södermanland, for example, was
ostensibly the leader of the Rite of Strict Observance. But he had been
accused of attempting to bring the Rite into the fold of the Swedish Rite, to

the annoyance of many members. The German Lodges began to look
elsewhere and depended on Duke Ferdinand (who was in charge of
Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel) for guidance. Duke Ferdinand disagreed with
Prince Carl, while many of the Freemasons disagreed with everyone else. In
the background, somewhat quietly, the Illuminati were happy that the
attentions were being diverted elsewhere. It allowed them the opportunity to
solidify their power base. While the Freemasons began to focus on what
would become the Convent of Wilhelmsbad, the Illuminati, led by Knigge
and Weishaupt, were overseeing increasing successes.
 
But therein lay the problem with suggesting that the Illuminati were in any
way a global concern, or that their influence today depends on an 18th
Century domination of political thought. Instead, the organization was only
able to control a small region in Germany and nearby. Rather than
influencing all of Europe, their rise was marked by the very same problems
that befell the Freemasons. Arguments, disagreements, and human nature.
As we will see in the next chapter, they would have to put these aside if
they were to take advantage of an amazing opportunity.


The Illuminati Were Just Lucky
 
Not all of the stories about the Illuminati position them as a clandestine
society behind every major event of the past three centuries. In some
versions of their history, they have been described as being simply lucky.
They chanced into an opportune moment, or so the story goes. In order to
remain both fair and impartial, efforts should be made to look at every side
of an argument. If we are quick to disprove that the Illuminati were one of
the world’s most secretly powerful organizations, we should just as easily
be able to prove that this was still a society built by intelligent men with
very firm ideas about how they were able to change the world. So, were the
Illuminati just lucky, or were they able to make some very intelligent moves
towards reorganizing the world in their own image? As ever, the truth lies
somewhere between the two positions.
 
It is certainly true that the Illuminati benefitted from timing. At a critical
juncture in their history, when they were hoping to expand and recruit a
greater number of more influential people, their chief rivals happened to be
going through something of a crisis. As it stood, the divisions and
arguments that had surfaced within the Freemasons meant that the
Illuminati were presented with an excellent opportunity to take advantage
of the chaos for their own benefit. In terms of providing the Illuminati with
an opportunity, few moments seemed as opportune as the Convent of
Wilhelmsbad. The very same Lodge that Weishaupt had joined some years
previous was now seemingly tearing itself apart. The schisms that emerged
within the Rite of the Strict Observance threatened to destroy Freemasonry
in Bavaria and beyond. But what exactly were they arguing about?
 
The matter was somewhat complicated, but it came to a head in the early
1780s. Having been originally planned for late 1781, the Wilhelmsbad
Convent was reorganized for July of 1782. It would prove to be the last
meeting of the Strict Observance as people knew it. Organized in the spa
town of Wilhelmsbad, the Convent was organized to determine the future of
the Strict Observance, and thus the future of the biggest and most influential

Masonic Lodge in the region. In simple terms, there were two sides to the
argument. On one side were those who favored the German approach to
Freemasonry that emphasized the Germanic and mystical elements of the
Masons. This group was led by Duke Ferdinand and Prince Charles. On the
other side of the argument were the Martinists, a branch of Christian
esoteric mysticism that focused on the fall from grace of mankind and how
the species could be reintegrated into this divine knowledge. Both sides
claimed to hold sway over the Freemason’s Lodges in the region, with their
chief disagreements concerning the ritualistic elements of the Masons. Both
sides differed on how they felt the ceremonies and rituals should be
organized, how they should be conducted, and which one was right. The
Martinists were led by Jean-Baptiste Willermoz. The two sides disagreed
over which route the Strict Observance should take.
 
But it should also be noted that there were certain voices at the gathering
that did not agree with either side. Johann Joachim Christoph Bode was one
such high ranking Mason, who seemed to be appalled by the prospect of the
Martinists and openly offered his dissent towards the mystical aspects of the
higher grades of the Freemasons. The real problem for Bode was that he did
not have an alternative solution to promote. Also opposed to both main
sides was Franz Dietrich von Ditfurth, the Master of a Lodge in Wetzlar
named the Joseph of the Three Helmets Lodge. Ditfurth was also a judge, a
respected and influential member of his local community. He was also a
member of the Illuminati. Acting as something of a representative for the
Order, he made his voice heard in public, calling for a back to basics
approach. Freemasonry should, he claimed, return to the three basic degrees
of Novice, Journeyman, and Master. All of the mystical elements distracted
from the work of the Freemasons. Despite the respect many held for
Ditfurth, the sheer numbers on the other sides meant that his proposal was
the least likely to be decided upon. As it stood, both mystical sides of the
argument held their own plans for reforming the upper grades of
Freemasonry, but neither could honestly claim that they were clear and well
thought out. Everyone knew they wanted change, but had very little idea of
what that change should be.
 

This was ideal for the Illuminati. As luck would have it, the divisions
between the Masons opened up in front of them and allowed the Order to
fill the void, presenting themselves as a credible alternative. Ditfurth was
the chief representative at the meetings, though he was ably assisted by
Knigge, who was working behind the scenes. Knigge had been given total
autonomy by the Illuminati leaders to act on their behalf, and he had come
up with a plan. The first option he suggested had been to try to broker an
alliance between all sides, with the Illuminati acting as the peacemakers.
This would, it was thought, increase trust in Knigge, Weishaupt, and the rest
of the Illuminati and provide them with a greater platform of power.
Weishaupt was quick to dash this theory, however, seeing little profitability
in being allied to what he saw as a dying institution. Seeing the Illuminati as
the future, he and Knigge developed a plan whereby they would kindle the
divisions between the Freemasons and then recruit those members whom
they liked best, being as they appeared the only credible party. This would
allow the Illuminati to turn the Freemasons’ divisions to their own
advantage, swelling their ranks with the best and brightest while ensuring
an influential and powerful crop of new recruits to act out Illuminati
policies.
 
The plan was put into action by Ditfurth, acting on the behalf of the others.
As Willermoz put forward ideas for the Martinists, and Prince Charles
attempted to explain the German mystics’ proposals, Ditfurth made moves
to block their actions. Such proposals could not be put into action, he
argued, without the full details of the ceremonies and rituals being revealed
to every single delegate. How else could they vote fairly without knowing
what they were voting for? As it stood, both the German mystics and the
Martinists wanted to institute new rituals, imbued with what they
considered to be ancient knowledge. But these rituals were only to be
learned once a member reached a high enough rank. The delegates in
attendance were not at such a rank and could therefore not be permitted to
see either of the proposals for higher grades. The frustration on both sides
was clear, but Ditfurth had easily convinced the delegates, prompted by
Knigge’s maneuvering.
 

Such was the annoyance on behalf of the German mystics that they showed
the first signs of being willing to compromise. The Illuminati – through
Ditfurth – had finally put together an alternative solution. All of the highest
grades would simply be scrapped. What had descended into a complex mix
of rites and ceremonies would be abandoned, and the highest tier would
simply be a fourth level, one which promised no revelations of ancient
knowledge and no source of mystical power. The German mystics could see
that this was far from what was being proposed and could identify the
Illuminati as an increasingly credible threat. They put forward Count
Kollowrat from their ranks to join up to the new Order, planting someone in
the Illuminati ranks who might be able to nurture an alliance in the coming
times.
 
But despite Ditfurth’s efforts to promote the Illuminati as a credible
alternative, his proposals fell on deaf ears. There was a clear intention at the
Covenant of Wilhelmsbad to clarify the mess that the higher ranks of the
Freemasons had become, but the Illuminati’s solution went too far. Though
it was simple and easy to understand, many felt that the esoteric mysticism
was an essential part of the Freemasons’ rituals and could not be so easily
abandoned. Ditfurth was quick to notice his failure to convince many
people. He left the venue ahead of schedule and dispatched a note to the
Areopagus informing them of his failure. Nothing good, he wrote, could be
expected to come of the gathering.
 
Though it appeared on the surface as though the illuminati had failed, the
real aftermath of the events at Wilhelmsbad were yet to be understood. The
Convent had been intended to repair the schisms that had appeared in the
Freemasons at this time. But, with everyone so keen to leave everyone
satisfied, the gathering had instead had the opposite effect. No one got what
they wanted. There were minor administrative changes made to the higher
grades of membership, though little in effect actually changed. Those who
had been in charge at the start of the assembly remained in power, meaning
that all of the political maneuvering and conniving was very much still
apparent. The same power struggle for dominance within the Bavarian
Freemasons remained in place, with each and every Lodge increasingly
convinced of both their own independence and their own superiority. This

was likely realized, as there was a concerted effort at the end of the
assembly to try and make it look as though changes had been made. A great
deal of noise was made regarding the numbering of the Lodges, changes in
etiquette, and the titles applied to certain positions. Though these could be
held up as products of the Convent, they actually made little difference and
did nothing to repair the damage that had been apparent at the start of the
meetings.
 
So even while Ditfurth had believed himself to have lost, he and the
Illuminati benefitted from the fact that no one else won. So little progress
was made that the Illuminati were able to stand by and watch as the Strict
Observance did nothing to save itself from inevitable collapse. The Strict
Observance made a number of key errors. They denounced and disowned
their own origin myth, as well as reorganizing the higher grades. This latter
change meant that their highest ranking members before the alterations
were now no longer bound to the Strict Observance. While the group had
been defined by (and had very much benefitted from) the strict control that
gave them their title, this was now seemingly abandoned, and the process of
power devolution undermined the central authority of the group. Many of
the additions to the rules and rituals were enough to appall certain members,
with people such as Bode being horrified by the addition of Martinist
principles. Almost immediately, Bode began talks with Knigge and was a
fully-fledged member of the Illuminati by January of 1783. Just a month
later, Charles of Hesse had been recruited in a similar fashion.
 
Without really doing anything, the Illuminati had strengthened themselves.
Their biggest rival and the blockage to their unfettered recruitment was
steadily imploding and seemingly unable to stop it. Rather than benefitting
from any single genius move or some great masterstroke from Knigge, the
Illuminati were fortunate that their rivals were so shortsighted. However,
they must be given some credit for positioning themselves into a place
where they benefited from such an implosion. More opportunistic than
Machiavellian, but more orchestrated than blind luck, there was a fine
balance to the politicking of the Illuminati. And it was not yet finished, as
the Illuminati still had one or two tricks up their sleeve.
 

Even though Knigge’s attempts at making an alliance with many of the
other German Lodges had failed, the Illuminati did not give up. These were
the perfect recruiting grounds, and being able to share resources with other
Masonic Lodges would be a huge boost to their ambitions. It fell on
Weishaupt to take over the process. Though Knigge was by this point the
driving force behind many of the Illuminati’s actions, Weishaupt still played
an important role in the organization. After all, he had founded the entire
Order. In the aftermath of the Convent of Wilhelmsbad, he proposed a
different alliance for the German Lodges, one which neatly sidestepped the
divisive issue. Under Weishaupt’s proposal, the Lodges would be allied
together in a kind of federation. Inside the federation, every Lodge would
practice a uniform, agreed-upon system across the first three (traditional)
degrees of Freemasonry. Once members reached the next tiers, it would be
down to the individual Lodges as to how they would proceed. In addition to
this, a member of any of the allied Lodges could pay a visit to any other
Lodge within the federation. Every Lodge master within the alliance was to
be promoted via an election, with no subscription fees to be paid at all to
any central authority (though Lodges could still charge local fees). To
oversee good behavior, there would be a representative council called the
Scottish Directorate that would be formed of people from many difference
Lodges. This council would be able to settle any disputes, check any
finances, and even authorize the founding of new Lodges. In addition to
these changes, there were many other slight alterations to the structure and
oversight of the Freemasons.
 
As it stood, Weishaupt’s proposed alliance was designed to alter an issue
which many people had with the Freemasons in Germany, in that the ideals
the groups supposedly believed in seemed to clash with the organization’s
practice. Any ideas of equality (a Masonic principle) were seemingly
forgotten once members moved past the three traditional ranks. Those in the
higher degrees were often only able to pursue their interests and continue
along the Masonic path based on their resources. Should a Mason hope to
practice alchemy or mysticism, then they would need money to do so. Only
by conducting these studies could the Freemasons hope to move into the
fourth degrees. To men like Knigge and Weishaupt, this seemed to be a
major issue and one which would be combated by the alliance. But the two

men had an alternative intention. As well as solving a seeming crisis within
the Freemasons, it would provide the Illuminati with a brilliant recruiting
platform. They would be able to spread their Order throughout the ranks of
German Freemasonry. It was not long before the edict was agreed upon and
circulated around the various Masonic halls. Few people knew of the
alliance’s true intentions.
 
Even the announcement that was sent around the Lodges was carefully
planned by the Illuminati. The document outlined the faults inherent in the
current system, chief among which related to whom the Freemasons were
recruiting. As the circular mentioned, many of those people who were
admitted into the Freemasons were actually ill-suited to the organization
and were only really present thanks to their wealth. This, they felt, was a
corruption that was also prone to occur in the wider society. It proved
convincing, and soon enough, Weishaupt’s proposals were being put into
practice.
 
Having helped draft the changes, the Illuminati themselves were among the
first to make changes to their structure. Lodge Theodore – still their
headquarters – began to change. As the regulations applied to many of the
higher grades of Freemasonry were removed, and each Lodge began to
construct their own fourth degrees, the Illuminati followed suit.
Establishing themselves as the Grand Lodge in their province, the Illuminati
(with Knigge acting on their behalf) wrote a letter that accused the Royal
York of decadence. To drive the point home, the Illuminati turned towards
one of their old enemies. They accused the Royal York of colluding with
and being corrupted by the Jesuits. Strict Observance (or what was left of it)
suffered from similar accusations, with the Illuminati claiming that the
group was “devoid of all moral virtue.” Elsewhere, they accused certain
rites of being in league with the Swedes, positioning the Illuminati and their
Lodge Theodore as the only true bastion of legitimate Freemasonry. The
Illuminati had seen their chance open up before them and they had taken it.
 
Or so it had seemed. What they had thought to be a devastating number of
accusations proved to have the opposite effect. Weishaupt, rather than
turning many Freemasons to his cause, had managed to alienate, annoy, and

offend many members. The plan of infiltrating the Freemasons and co-
opting their members seemed fundamentally flawed. Other Freemasons
such as the Grand Lodge of the Grand Orient of Warsaw (who ran the
Freemasons in Lithuania and Poland) might have been interested, but they
demanded independence in light of these accusations. They, like many
others, were suspicious of the Illuminati’s intentions. With many Lodges
happy to participate in the first three degrees of Freemasonry, the Illuminati
had trouble convincing others of the benefits of joining them in the higher
ranks. This was where the true power lay, and other Lodges were happy to
keep it for themselves. Nevertheless, the Illuminati had some success. By
the beginning of 1783, they had managed to gain full control of seven
Masonic Lodges.
 
It was not that surprising that the attempts of Weishaupt and Knigge were
met with relative failure. Though the Lodge Theodore was growing in size,
it was still very much a new arrival on the block. Many other Freemason
Lodges were much older and thus commanded much more respect. Though
the Illuminati had proved lucky in some areas and had managed to
capitalize on that, they were guilty of overreaching and attempting to move
too far ahead of their means. It was a clumsy approach, one that reflected a
lack of awareness of the sentiment towards their Lodge among the
Freemasons. What luck they had experienced, they were almost as quick to
squander. Furthermore, it helped to ostracize the very members whom the
Illuminati wanted to recruit. At this time, they were still very much
symbiotically attached to the Freemasons. Not yet strong enough to stand
on their own feet, they depended on the older organization as a means of
legitimizing themselves in the eyes of potential recruits. Ostensibly, to the
outward eye, they were just another Lodge. The truth of the Illuminati was
not yet public knowledge. Accordingly, those Freemasons who might agree
with the Illuminati’s distrust of mysticism and those who did not like the
Martinists might be ideal recruits. But they were people who were very
much invested in their own independence, something they did not want to
give up to the Illuminati. A good example of this was Ditfurth, who despite
representing the Illuminati at the Convent of Wilhelmsbad, had been keen
to pursue his own agenda and quick to give up.
 

Ditfurth’s own allegiance was quickly removed once he found something
more suited to his principles, revealing the difficulty the Illuminati faced.
Following the formation of the alliance, there began to emerge a second
gathering of Lodges, this time it would be a gather that grouped together the
non-mystical Lodges that were around Frankfurt. It was named the Eclectic
Alliance and seemed to be ideologically in line with exactly the kind of
group the Illuminati was striving toward. The only problem was that it was
not their idea. However, the lucky emergence of this Eclectic Alliance
provided the opportunity to steady the ship, and after a short discussion, the
Illuminati agreed that their Lodges should join. Furthermore, they were
welcomed to take seats on the committee and help to draft the statutes and
rules for the alliance. They were lucky enough to be trusted with this
amount of influence and responsibility, though there seemed to be little
tactical advantage that came from the alliance. The agreement did not
provide them with that much access to new recruits. In fact, when men such
as Ditfurth noticed that the other Lodges in the Eclectic Alliance were more
ideologically in line with his own philosophies, he began to distance
himself from the Illuminati. He was not alone. Indeed, so successful was the
Eclectic Alliance over the Illuminati’s federation – and so little control did
they have over the group – that it can actually be considered a hindrance to
their efforts. All of the subtle planning they had made when trying to place
themselves in an opportune moment seemed to be undone.
 
But the alliance did have one benefit: it kept them in the game. The real
luck of the Illuminati seems to have been that they were consistently able to
avoid irrelevancy. Time and time again, they hit issues in their plans. Either
they were not trusted enough, or they made mistakes, or events did not go
as planned. But every time, the group managed to pull through by cleverly
seizing on the opportunities that presented themselves. The traditional view
of the Illuminati seems to have them pulling the strings behind the world
stage, subtly manipulating global events. But in the 18th Century, they
struggled to keep a hold of the Freemasons in Bavaria and the surrounding
areas. They were lucky enough to be consistently presented with
opportunities to redeem themselves and to stay in the game, though were
often clever enough to jump on these opportunities in the perfect manner. It
was a delicate balancing act between luck, failure, success, and

opportunism. From it all, the Illuminati were steadily becoming more
powerful and more influential. As we will see in the next chapter, they were
about to get a lot closer to achieving their goals.


The Illuminati Changed the World
 
Throughout this book, our discussions of the Illuminati have been limited to
a small geographical area and have barely covered a decade. In terms of
European history, this is only a tiny window into the continent’s storied
past. Indeed, we have spent much time looking in detail at the Freemasons,
another society altogether. Now that we are roughly at the halfway point of
the book, you might find yourself asking just how such a famous society
was so confined to a brief moment in time. We made a promise at the
beginning of this book to examine the facts. There are many myths and
legends that exist about the Order, but there can be no doubting their
existence. We know what we know because of evidence, the documents
(often written by the men named in this book) that have been passed down
to our modern age and provide us with definitive evidence of their
existence. The Illuminati existed, but how exactly did such a seemingly
small group manage to change the world? To answer this question, we
should examine the society when they were at their administrative peak.
 
In the previous chapter, we witnessed the problems that the Illuminati were
facing. To expand as a secret society and to put their ideas into practice – to
have a demonstrable effect on the world – they would need to grow. In
order to grow, they would need to recruit. They had decided that the
Freemasons gave them a potential pool of talent, and they had worked to
ingratiate themselves into the competing organization, seemingly hoping to
take it apart from the inside. But due to poor judgement and poor luck, this
had not come to pass. Despite their lofty ambitions, the Illuminati had not
quite reached the heights they had strived to attain. But that is not to say
that they were not succeeding.
 
When we look at the recruitment of the Illuminati on a small scale – on a
person-to-person basis – it seems clear that they were actually moderately
successful. They might have planned to raid the Freemasons for the very
best and brightest, displacing the centuries-old society as the dominant
clandestine organization, but that was always something of an unrealistic

dream. Instead, their individual level recruitment had provided them with a
steadily growing list of members. Not only was the membership growing,
but the men coming into the group were of a high quality. People seemed to
be keen to believe in the principles laid out by the Illuminati, and it seemed
that there was certainly something appealing about how they envisaged the
world.
 
All around them, Bavaria was changing. In the short time since the
Illuminati had formed, the ruling party of the country had changed. Charles
Theodore – the man who lent his name to the Illuminati’s Masonic Lodge –
had ascended to power. Charles Theodore had been the man who had
originally outlawed secret societies, but his increasing amounts of power
had steadily led to a growing liberalism in the region. This was not
appreciated by everyone. Though a longstanding ruler of a number of
territories, Theodore was not strong-willed enough to drive his ideas
forward. Those whose positions seemed to be threatened by a liberalization
of the country – members of the court and the clergy – managed to cajole
and convince the ruler to reverse his stance. What had seemed like an age of
acceptance of liberal ideas was quickly turned around into quite the
opposite. Amid growing societal discord, Charles Theodore allowed his
powerful and privileged advisors to guard their own positions, at the
expense of the region’s more progressive thinkers. Across Bavaria, a brief
moment of accepted liberalism was dashed by a renewed clamp down on
such ideas.
 
Such a move seemed ideal for the Illuminati. They were founded on the
very ideas that Theodore was attempting to repress. Though their Lodge
might have been named for the man, the principles of the Illuminati who
operated under the guise of Freemasons could not have been further from
the ruler’s own. Across Bavaria, people were beginning to resent Charles
Theodore more and more, especially among the educated (though not
necessarily overly-privileged) classes. The situation was ideal for a
seemingly enlightened secret society who wanted to recruit new members.
With the stated aim of changing the world, the Illuminati began to escalate
their recruitment programs.
 

First to be brought into the group were a number of disaffected Freemasons
who had found the growing Martinist influence on the Prudence Lodge to
be distasteful. They found in the Lodge Theodore a group who were not
nearly as invested in the more esoteric aspects of the Freemason experience
and instead focused their attentions on contemporary philosophies and the
ideas that were being deemed unlawful by the ruling government. As
groups such as this defected to the Illuminati, the Areopagus and Weishaupt
realized that they would need somewhere to house their efforts. They chose
a mansion of their own, one surrounded by high walls and lush gardens, and
one with a library that they could fill with the kind of liberal literature that
drove their ideology.
 
The same kind of expansion was happening across Germany. In many
different regions, local Illuminati strongholds were beginning to emerge.
Though small at first, they represented a spreading influence that moved
across the country in reaction to changing government policies and
dissatisfaction with both the ruling elite and the practices of the
Freemasons. Attitudes were changing across the region, and the Illuminati
had come to represent that change. Numbers were still relatively low, but
they were growing well. The circle found in Mainz, for example, had seen
its numbers almost double in a short space of time. Where there had
previously been around 30 members, there were now 61. The state’s views
on Catholicism and stated anti-liberal stances only fueled the fire. Similar
growth was found in parts of Austria, as well as new branches of the group
springing up in places such as Warsaw and Bratislava, and as far away as
Milan, Tyrol, and Switzerland. The Illuminati were quickly becoming a
European concern, rather than simply a Bavarian group.
 
By the end of 1784, this seemed to have hit unprecedented heights.
Weishaupt, despite his efforts, could not have expected to see the
membership grow so smoothly. The accounts and records kept by the group
at the time show as many as 650 official members, though the
communications and private accounts by Weishaupt and others point
towards there having been potentially 2,500 Illuminati members during this
period. It is likely that the men were counting the other Freemasons who
were members of the Lodges under Illuminati control (though not actual

members at that time), but there is little reason to suspect that the real
number did not lie somewhere between the two estimates. For a group that
was started in a secretive university meeting, the growth in under a decade
was astonishing. It was less about the hard numbers and more to do with the
geographical spread of the influence. Twenty powerful and influential
members in Milan, for example, were a very valuable resource for a group
who saw themselves as a potentially internationally dominant organization.
In order to change the world, this level of influence was more important
than simple raw numbers.
 
This was perhaps due to one of the key changes that Knigge and the
Areopagus had implemented. While Weishaupt had been content to focus
on students and young men, there was a conscious decision to focus on the
more influential recruits. This meant that the newest members were
typically lawyers, doctors, men of the church, academics, and other
professional peoples. These were far more valuable to the organization than
students and men of little influence. But even more important were those
who could wield true power. Men such as Karl August and Ernest II were
both members, as were the Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach and the
Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg respectively. Ernest’s brother (and the man
who would eventually succeed him) August had joined, as had Karl von
Dalberg (the governor of Erfurt) and Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick-
Wolfenbüttel. Duke Ferdinand brought with him Johann Friedrich von
Schwarz from his Masonic connections. Count Metternich of Koblenz was
also a member. In all these were people with legitimate legislative power,
people who could affect real change in the world. In the Illuminati, they
happened to see something of real value.
 
here were even successes in other areas of Europe, recruiting quite
influential figures for what was still a relatively small society when
considered on the wider international stage. For example, in Vienna, the
Illuminati managed to recruit the following people:
 
The governor of Galicia (Count Brigido)
The chancellor of Bohemia (Count Leopold Kolowrat)
The vice-chancellor of Bohemia (Baron Kressel)

The chancellor of Hungary (Count Pálffy von Erdöd)
The governor of Transylvania (and also Grand Master of the local
Lodge, Count Banffy)
The ambassador to London (Count Stadion)
And the minister of public education (Baron von Swieten)
 
Even outside of their native regions, the Illuminati were succeeding in
recruiting people of real power, those who could not only influence
lawmakers and courts, but also those who could further the recruitment.
With such an illustrious list of people on their books, it is easy to see why
so many ensuing generations have been willing to believe that the Illuminati
control vast swathes of legislative power. For a brief period in the 18th
Century, they had a very real influence on the part of Central Europe where
they were based. Thanks to the works of Knigge, Weishaupt, and many
others, there had been a series of real successes in the world of recruitment.
 
But the Illuminati were not always successful. Despite their laudable
attempts to recruit people of real power, they were also marked by a number
of notable failures. One of the most famous was their attempt to bring
Johann Kaspar Lavater into the fold. Lavater was Swiss, famous for his
works in theology and poetry. A well-respected individual, he seemed an
ideal fit for the organization and exactly the kind of man they hoped to
recruit. But when Knigge offered membership to Lavater, it was summarily
rejected. According to the Swiss poet, the Illuminati’s stated aims – those of
rationalist and humanist principles being enacted in governments across
Europe – was not something that could be achieved by a secret society. Not
believing in their methods, he declined the invitation. Not only that, but the
failure left a lasting impact on Lavater. He let it be known that, in his
opinion, such a concerted recruitment drive would eventually be the
undoing of the society. As the Illuminati sought out increasingly powerful
and influential recruits, the poet believed that this would cause them to
forget the ideals and goals that had first inspired them.
 
Lavater was not alone. Christoph Friedrich Nicolai went further in his
investigations into what the Illuminati had to offer. A writer from Berlin, he
was another person who seemed to be ideally suited to the ideas the Order

were trying to promote. He went as far as to join up, but it was not long
before he became less than convinced by the Order’s capabilities.
Discussing why he eventually grew disillusioned with the group, he
described their aims as “chimeric” and believed that the group were using
similar tactics to those used by the Illuminati’s old enemies, the Jesuits,
something that he believed was dangerous. Though he technically remained
a member, he was not very active and was one of the few dissenting voices
we have from that time. Not willing to recruit other members and critical of
the group’s methods, Nicolai was a good indication that not everyone was
so seduced by the Illuminati’s approach.
 
At the start of this chapter, we set out to investigate whether the Illuminati
managed to change the world. It is one of the most enduring claims levelled
against them, though often it relates to an entirely different interpretation of
the Illuminati. What we have just seen, the period of history that we have
covered, relates to the high water mark of the Illuminati’s influence. During
this time, they managed to recruit a number of very influential people. They
had members in Great Britain, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, and
other countries. Not only that, but these were people of real importance. For
a society that had been formed less than ten years earlier, this is certainly
impressive.
 
But as we will see in coming chapters, the Illuminati did not manage to turn
this success in recruiting into palpable, real-world change. We know that
they had a defined ideology, one that promoted the ideas of the
Enlightenment and hoped to add a degree of rationalism to governance. But
they struggled to even make this change in their local government. They
were successful at the time because Bavaria was the exact opposite of what
they wanted. Repressive, reactionary, and all too keen to clamp down on
liberal ideas, the Illuminati’s home playing field was never really affected
by their presence. While they did well to recruit important people, they
failed to convert that recruitment success into real results. However, though
the Illuminati did not manage to affect any real change in 18th Century
politics, they certainly left a legacy. As we will see in the next chapter and
beyond, however, that legacy was not always entirely positive.
 


The Illuminati: Satanism, Witchcraft,
Rosicrucianism, and the Occult
 
It might not be a surprise to learn that the Illuminati were not the only secret
society competing in 18th Century Europe. We have already encountered the
Freemasons and their centuries-old society, one that was known across the
continent. But there were other groups as well, similarly outlawed and
perceived as being just as dangerous as the Illuminati. When discussing the
schism within the Freemasons, we briefly mentioned the rituals and
ceremonies that were used by the Masons. While many saw these as simple
traditions – and some went as far as to admit that they were invented for the
purpose – other secret societies focused far more heavily on the magic, the
occult, and the mystical. While the Illuminati were founded on rationalist,
seemingly scientific principles, there were other orders that were not nearly
as modern. In our modern age, many people have conflated the efforts of
such societies with the Illuminati. As such, Weishaupt’s order has been
accused of everything from Satanism to witchcraft. But were they really
involved in such practices? And how did they come to be tarred with the
reputation of other secret societies?
 

 
While we have been using the phrase “secret society” throughout this book,
it has quickly become clear that there were few secrets that were that well-
kept in 18th Century Europe. The entire premise of organizations such as the
Freemasons and the Illuminati relied upon revealing the secret to others in
order to recruit them. This created a strange balance between secrecy and
publicity. In essence, many people knew that these groups existed, even if
they did not entirely understand them. But alongside the two most famous
examples, there was a third major secret society, one which we have not
mentioned up until this point. The Rosicrucians, in many ways, seemed to
be the antithesis of everything the Illuminati stood for. It was only natural
that the two should come into conflict at some stage.
 
Before we go any further, we should pause to take a moment to learn more
about Rosicrucianism. As you might have guessed, the Rosicrucians were a
secret society, also founded in Germany. Dating from the medieval period,
they were founded by a man named Christian Rosenkreuz, whose name
means – quite literally – “rose cross” and lends the society its title. Like
many other secret societies, they claimed to possess “esoteric truths” that
had been passed down to them from ancient times. Part of their popularity
can be traced to two documents that began to circulate around 17th Century

Germany, which presented the Brotherhood of the Rosicrucians as being a
laudable Order who hoped to reform mankind. They were opposed to the
Roman Catholic religion, in which they were similar to the Illuminati in
their quest for a more empirical approach to life. But rather than
rationalism, they believed themselves to possess ancient secrets and
sciences perfected by Moorish philosophers hundreds of years previous.
These seemingly magical and mystical spells and teachings would inform
many 18th Century people. They have been named as the place from which
Freemasonry borrowed a great deal of ideas for their rituals and
ceremonies. This Rosicrucian mysticism, while perhaps not purporting to
practice magic as we might understand it today, certainly had a touch of the
occult about it. In that respect, they were very much the opposite of the
Illuminati’s calls for rationalism and modernism.
 
But the effect of the Rosicrucians on the Freemasons was palpable. Many of
their members were intertwined across both orders. It was not uncommon
for people to describe themselves as a blend between the two societies. In a
similar way to how the Illuminati had infiltrated the Freemasons during the
18th Century, the Rosicrucian Order had managed to do so a century before.
By the time Weishaupt first began to think about the Illuminati, the
Rosicrucians were already an established presence in the Lodges throughout
Germany. Knowing that the two groups would never be able to see eye to
eye on many matters, Weishaupt tried very hard to keep the existence of his
Illuminati from those who he knew to be Rosicrucians. While the two
groups were clearly Protestant in their teachings, the differences ran far
deeper. Where the Illuminati were anti-monarchy, the Rosicrucians were in
favor of the rule of kings. Where the Illuminati were against the clergy in
almost any form, the Rosicrucians believed it had a place in society. Where
the Illuminati favored the idea of the Enlightenment-orientated society that
was run by people like scientists and philosophers, the Rosicrucians whole-
heartedly disagreed.
 
With two competing secret societies operating within the larger secret
society, it was perhaps inevitable that there would be some kind of conflict
between the two smaller Orders. One of the factors that proved annoying to
various Illuminati members was the Rosicrucian practice of holding séances

and other mystical events. These events were described by various members
of the Illuminati as being fraudulent, something that seemed to widen the
chasm between the two groups. As more and more people became aware of
the existence of the Illuminati, it became increasingly more obvious that the
two societies would some come into direct conflict.
 
But that is not to say that the Illuminati did not have members who leaned
towards certain elements of mysticism. Perhaps the most famous was
Knigge, who had openly admitted to an interest in practices such as
alchemy. His knowledge of the occult had meant that he had been the one
trusted with drafting the rituals and ceremonies, seemingly the man who
was able to give them an authentic flavor. Increasingly, it seemed, a number
of Rosicrucians had been joining the Illuminati, the cross-pollination of the
two groups a growing trend. As well as Knigge, Kolowrat was actually a
member of the Rosicrucian Order, while many of Knigge’s direct recruits
certainly had mystic sympathies. Prince Charles of Hesse-Kassel was a
confirmed mystic and had, on a number of occasions, voiced his distrust of
some of the more ardent Illuminati rationalists.
 
The first blows in the conflict were launched by Johann Christoph von
Wöllner, who led the Prussian branch of the Rosicrucians in a sustained and
forceful attack against the Illuminati. Wöllner was known to possess a room
dedicated to mysticism. He would take doubting patrons inside and, once
locked in, convince them of the effectiveness of the magic that the
Rosicrucians were said to possess. The room had been specially engineered
exactly for this purpose, and though we do not know exactly how, it has
been heavily implied that Wöllner used a series of tricks and illusions to
convince patrons who would then become members of the Rosicrucian
Orders. Using methods such as these, Wöllner and his Order had managed
to gain control of one of the most important Masonic Lodges, the Three
Globes, as well as those smaller Lodges that served under it. Wöllner used
the Three Globes to launch a flurry of accusations at the Illuminati.
 
Via the mouthpiece of the Rosicrucian controlled Three Globes Grand
Lodge, Wöllner and his Order accused the Illuminati of crimes such as
atheism (still very much outlawed at the time) and suggested that they were

plotting revolutionary activities. This was compounded in April of 1783,
when Charles of Hesse was informed by fellow Freemason Frederick the
Great that the Lodges in Berlin had come into possession of documents that
showed that the Illuminati were to be suspected of atheism, being as the
documents contained “appalling materials.” Frederick the Great sought to
get more information from his Illuminati-aligned friend, asking whether he
had ever heard of any such things. To make matters worse, Wöllner and his
colleagues spread the word around all of the Berlin Lodges that the
Illuminati were not to be trusted, as the group hoped to undermine, corrupt,
and do away with all sorts of religion. Preying on the conservative members
of the Freemasons, they hoped to ward people off the Illuminati for good.
The campaign launched by Wöllner and his Rosicrucians went on
throughout the remainder of 1783 and well into 1784. By November of that
year, they refused even to accept that any Illuminati member could ever
describe himself as a Freemason. It was, in effect, a full scale propaganda
campaign.
 
It was not only limited to Lodges in Berlin. In parts of Austria, the
Rosicrucians were launching similar campaigns. They described their
Illuminati rivals as being responsible for a string of pamphlets that
denounced all sorts of religion. This turned into a surveillance mission, with
the Rosicrucians placing Illuminati members such as Joseph von Sonnenfels
under constant watch, waiting for the slightest slip-up. Their efforts proved
to be successful and even managed to completely close down any form of
Illuminati recruitment anywhere in Tyrol.
 
As well as the campaign from outside the Illuminati, those in the Order
found themselves undone by betrayals from within. Throughout the
Bavarian Illuminati Lodges, the Rosicrucians had been made aware of
many of the group’s actions thanks to a well-placed (though never named)
informant. This was made even worse when one of the Areopagus – a man
named Ferdinand Maria Baader – attempted to join the Rosicrucians.
Though his initial attempts seemed to be going well, the Rosicrucians were
quickly made aware of Baader’s position within the Illuminati. He was told,
quite bluntly, that he would not be allowed to join both groups. Baader
chose to remain loyal to the Illuminati and wrote the customary resignation

letter to the Rosicrucians. In doing so, he boldly claimed that the
Rosicrucians possessed no actual mystical knowledge and that they were
wrong to ignore those who were “truly illuminated.” While they were brash
words, he made the mistake of naming the Lodge Theodore, effectively
outing it as the headquarters of the Illuminati. It seemed to be a battle that
the Rosicrucians were set to win.
 
But the Illuminati seemed unable to respond. Why, when a band of mystical
Rosicrucians appeared to be waging a fierce campaign against the
Illuminati, did they appear to be doing so little? The answer is that they
were facing some far greater problems that began to originate from within.
Having already peaked in terms of their recruiting and their effectiveness,
the Illuminati had now begun to embark upon their decline. Choosing to
focus inwards, there was little time to respond to the Rosicrucians. But the
conflict between the two Orders provides us with an insight into exactly
why the Illuminati are viewed as they are today, and why they have so often
been accused of witchcraft, Satanism, and all sorts of mysticism.
 
First, the very existence of the Rosicrucians demonstrates to the modern
audience that secret societies that focused on magic and the occult did in
fact exist. These were not works of fiction, created to scare and intimidate.
While the Rosicrucians may not really have possessed ancient knowledge
and magical powers, people certainly believed that they did. Having existed
long before the Illuminati, Orders such as the Rosicrucians helped to create
the modern conception of what a secret society might be like; secret,
mystical, and conducting strange rituals. Though the Illuminati might have
been ideologically opposed to the mystics, it is easy to see why so many
people are willing to believe they might be capable of such practices. This
is especially true when you remember that the Illuminati themselves
conducted many of the rituals they lifted wholesale from the Freemasons
(which may in turn have been taken from the Rosicrucians). Simply
because they became the better known of the two Orders, the Illuminati
have since been burdened with the reputation of the Rosicrucians for
conducting all sorts of black magic.
 

So, while the Illuminati were almost definitively against the kind of
mysticism and occult that they might be perceived to have conducted, the
existence of the Rosicrucians propaganda campaign shows that they were
often targeted for misinformation campaigns. As a secret society, it is not
entirely possible to simply establish what you are and are not concerned
with. As the rumors and salacious lies began to spread among the
Freemasons and even the public, the Illuminati were quickly smeared.
Unable to fight back, they fell victim to bad publicity that had endured to
the modern day. It does not take long to look around the internet and find
discussions that link the Illuminati to devil worship, black magic, and
various other occult practices. As we have seen, this could hardly have been
further from the truth. While members such as Knigge might have dabbled
to some extent, the very founding principles of the Illuminati described
them as rational, empirical men. That there should still be so many
misconceptions demonstrates just how good a campaign the Rosicrucians
waged. But as their reputation was sullied, how could the Illuminati not be
fighting back? In the next chapter, we will look into the internal conflicts
and destructive tendencies that led to the fall of the Illuminati.


The Illuminati are Dead
 
If we are to believe the modern stories about the Illuminati, they are very
much active and very much alive. Still causing trouble around the world in
an unending pursuit of global domination, the Illuminati are behind many of
the most important world events we have seen in the last centuries. But that
tells a very different story from the history books. In the coming chapters,
we will begin to see the schism between the Bavarian Illuminati and the
modern idea of the Order as it exists today. In doing so, we will have to
answer the question: Are the Illuminati dead? If the answer is yes, then
what killed them?
 
In the previous chapter, we saw how difficult the world could become when
the Illuminati faced a threat that was as equally adept at moving within the
clandestine circles of secret societies. Though Weishaupt and Knigge had
done an incredible job in picking up a small group and raising it to the point
where they became a serious concern in many parts of Europe, they had not
done so without issues. At various points, both men had fallen out with the
council of the Illuminati, the so-called Areopagus. As the Illuminati grew
increasingly close to the Freemasons, and as they began to grow outside of
Bavaria, this council was deemed to be ineffective. Both Knigge and
Weishaupt agreed that it could do with a revamp. Rather than empowering
the Areopagus, however, they simply replaced it. Instead, there existed the
Council of Provincials, who were hampered by the lack of power.
 
Though they had replaced the Areopagus with an ineffective substitute, the
men who had sat on the Areopagus remained as Illuminati members, and
they began to make their voices heard. To this point in time, Knigge had
acted as the man who healed up relationships between the Areopagus and
Weishaupt. But as soon as Knigge left the immediate scene, the two sides
would go back to bickering and arguing. Rather than focusing on external
threats or progressing the society, they were content to fight amongst
themselves. We still have many of Weishaupt’s private letters and
communications in which he does not hold back in his distaste of many of

the Areopagites. These letters were written to those who supposedly trusted,
often about those who he supposedly considered his enemies. Such was the
collusion within the order, however, that Weishaupt was sometimes wrong
in his assumptions. Already, cracks were beginning to appear throughout
the structure of the Illuminati.
 
One of the most serious cracks appeared between Weishaupt and Knigge.
Though the two had considerably different principles, they had worked
together often for the betterment of the society. Weishaupt, however, had
succeeded in driving Knigge further and further away from the center of the
group, effectively alienating him within the Illuminati. It was an
acknowledged fact that the founder of the Illuminati had been forced to
cede a huge amount of control and power to Knigge, and he had never truly
forgotten this. Weishaupt wanted his power back. Though Knigge had been
trusted as the only man who had been able to construct and create the rituals
of the Illuminati – essential to give them the appearance of a credible secret
society like the Freemasons – Weishaupt was clearly resentful of what he
had lost in the trade. Knigge deserved a huge amount of credit for what he
had accomplished, however. Before he had become a member, Weishaupt
and his fellow Illuminati (the majority of whom were his students) were
limited in their scope and their abilities, if not their ambitions. Once Knigge
had been entrusted with the recruitment and the creation of many of the
society’s internal documents, they had almost instantly begun to grow.
Knigge had elevated the Illuminati to the point where a somewhat small and
fringe group held an international presence and was considered dangerous
enough to be attacked by other, more powerful, secret societies.
 
For his part, Knigge felt that the hard work he had put into the Illuminati
was not being acknowledged. Feeling as though he was underappreciated
by the founder of the group, the divisions between the two men’s beliefs
began to become more of an issue. One of the key issues proved to be
Weishaupt’s continued stance on clericalism and his absolute abhorrence of
the way in which religion was organized and practiced. Knigge perceived
this as clashing with his own beliefs in the mystical arts. When Knigge
began to recruit more and more people who shared his beliefs – men such
as Ditfurth – Weishaupt began to see this as a threat to the founding

principles of the Illuminati and an attempt to change the course of the
society.
 
The tension between the two finally erupted during ongoing talks regarding
some of Knigge’s work. The matter at hand was the grade of Priest, one of
the fourth-tier degrees that awaited those who rose through the ranks of the
Illuminati. Knigge had been entrusted with writing the materials for the
degree and tasked with making them sound suitably mystical so that future
members might believe them to be authentic. Not necessarily that they were
working, but rather that the new recruits were entering into a centuries-old
tradition. Many of the Illuminati of the higher ranks considered the work
that Knigge had done to not be his best. It had been described as “florid” by
some and “ill-conceived” by others. At its worst, some of the members felt,
the ritual made use of “puerile and expensive” regalia. This meant that
some of the Illuminati would outright refuse to use Knigge’s work, while
others only did so after editing it. Things truly became serious when
Weishaupt demanded that it be re-written and that Knigge face the critics.
 
This was not something Knigge wanted to hear. Having already completed
the work, he argued that it had been distributed to the Lodges a long time
ago. Hence, the people who had heard the rituals had been under the
impression that it was ancient. Furthermore, he had done this with
Weishaupt’s blessing as had been laid out in the original instructions. If the
rituals and ceremonies were edited now, then it would appear deeply
suspicious and would contravene the blessing Weishaupt had provided
some years earlier. Weishaupt did not care. He began to have loud
discussions with other Illuminati members about the Priest rituals,
describing how they were fundamentally flawed and how Knigge had
simply invented it all. Weishaupt was allowing his lack of mystical beliefs
to show.
 
To Knigge, this was deeply insulting. Having heard what Weishaupt was
doing, he went straight to the founder and threatened to reveal just how
much of the Illuminati’s ritual and practice he had simply invented. If
everyone found out that it had all been simply concocted by Knigge, then
there would be a serious blow to the trust placed in the Illuminati by its

recruits. They had all joined up under the impression that the entire thing
was genuine, not just the inventions of Knigge. But the two men failed to
come to an agreement and tensions between the two continued to simmer
and bubble.
 
As a means of fighting back, Knigge attempted to convene another council,
trying to put together a convention of the Areopagites who had provided
some counterbalance to Weishaupt’s whims. But it proved more difficult to
carry out than he had imagined, and the group failed to materialize. It soon
became clear that many members of the Areopagus trusted Knigge even
less than the founder of the Illuminati with whom he was fighting. As it
became clear that he was losing a battle for the hearts and minds of the
Illuminati members, Knigge finally bowed out of the fight with Weishaupt
and – in July of 1784 – tended his resignation. He left the council by mutual
agreement, handing back to them all of the papers and materials that he had
used during his time carrying out their wishes. As a response, Weishaupt
went out and wrote a retraction, taking back all of the slanders and
accusations that he had levelled against Knigge during their falling out.
Though it had appeared that he had won the war against Knigge, Weishaupt
had only succeeded in robbing the Illuminati of one of its most important
members. Much in line with the notion of “cutting off your nose to spite
your face,” Weishaupt had allowed his petty squabbles to undermine and
fracture the Illuminati. Not only had the arguments and disagreements been
disruptive, but Knigge’s exit meant that the Illuminati had now lost the man
who was considered the best recruiter, the best theoretician, and the man
who provided them with a bridge to the influence they truly craved.
Weishaupt had sounded the death knell of the Illuminati, and he had no
idea.
 
If the differences between Weishaupt and Knigge had signaled the
beginning of the end of the Illuminati, then the ripples were felt through
every level of the organization. With such clear disputes and differences at
the highest levels, it should not have been a surprise to see the lower-ranked
Illuminati members taking their cues from those above them. With the
Rosicrucians doing their best to damage the Illuminati name, the
government increasingly suspicious of liberal-minded secret societies, and

the upper echelons arguing among themselves, there was no one around to
notice the cracks that were starting to appear in the society.
 
One of the biggest issues was trying to remain secretive. Though
recruitment was essential for the growth of any secret society, there was a
decorum and a method behind the attempt to bring additional people in on
the secret. The majority of the recruitment – especially as it was handled by
Knigge – occurred in smoky rooms, hidden places where people would not
be overheard. Furthermore, only those who were considered genuine
Illuminati prospects were told about the potential existence of the anti-
monarchy, anti-clericalism society. But that was not how many of the
lower-ranked Illuminati members were conducting themselves. Despite the
secretive nature of their society, there was a great deal of loose talk
emanating from many members. This could come in many forms. They
might be drunken boasts of secret power made in Bavarian bars, or they
might have been a stinging criticism of the monarchy launched in a place
where such outlandish principles were never heard. Over dinner parties,
Illuminati members hinted about their secret organization’s plans to take
down the structures of society, to the point where their existence became
common knowledge amongst people who had little or nothing to do with
secret societies.
 
Perhaps more worryingly was that these loose lips would often give away
the names of those involved. With the principles behind the Illuminati often
seeming very threatening against those in power, the protection provided to
the group members came in the form of their secret nature. As long as no
one knew that you were a member of the radical organization, you were
likely safe. But as the information began to leak out of the increasingly
loquacious Illuminati members, even this veil of protection was lifted.
Soon, the names of the highest ranking members began to circulate among
the Bavarian society. For those who held onto powerful and influential
government positions, this could be a real problem. As the tide of public
opinion was turning against this little understood, clandestine threat, those
whose names were linked to the Illuminati (rightly or wrongly) found their
positions and their lives coming under growing scrutiny.
 

By this point in time, Knigge’s recruitment tactics had succeeded in filling
the Illuminati ranks with people from a wide range of civic and
governmental positions. Though Knigge himself had walked away from the
group, he left behind a legacy of increased influence. It seemed as though
the Illuminati were slowly infiltrating the ranks of government. Though
they might not have the people in the highest positions among their number,
they were more than stocked with the men who carried out the legislative
legwork. Should these men be promoted or rewarded with additional power
over time, then the Illuminati would feel their influence grow. Just as they
had done with the Freemasons, the plan seemed to be to infiltrate and guide
a much larger host body while striving to remain in the shadows.
 
Indeed, the Illuminati had been so successful at this that there was a period
when one’s relationship with the Illuminati could have a big influence over
interactions with the government. Take, for example, the idea of a legal
dispute that might need to be settled in court. With the increased Illuminati
presence on the judiciary, you would stand a far greater chance of a
favorable result if you were in good standing with the Order. Whether it
was judges, lawyers, or simply people who could apply influence, the
Illuminati had the members who could provide real assistance in these sort
of circumstances, or could deliver real misfortune if their opinion of you
was not quite so favorable.
 
It was this growing level of influence that was gradually noticed by the
general populace and steadily resented more and move. The rumors of the
Illuminati’s powers and influence grew and spread, far exceeding their
actual capabilities. While the Order itself was facing major issues on the
inside, unable to agree on their direction, the public and the government
only saw the looming specter of a very real threat. Unable to see the whole
picture, they seemed to vastly overestimate the potential of the Illuminati,
adding to the fear and worry that the Order was provoking. Even little
things began to get blamed on the Illuminati. When a number of anti-
religious leaflets were distributed across Bavaria, the Illuminati were the
ones who got the blame. Regardless of whether or not they created the
pamphlets (we’re not unsure), the fact that so many people were willing to
presume this to be true is a key moment in the history of the Illuminati. It

marks the moment when they began to take on the role of an urban legend,
the unseen bogey man who could be blamed for society’s ills. While one
version of the Illuminati was busy dying, the other, more modern version
was getting ready to rise up in their place.
 
That is not to say, however, that the public were wrong in their
presumptions. While there were clear motivations on behalf of the
Illuminati’s rivals to discredit and dissolve the Order, these vindictive
actions were often based at least partly on some element of the truth. The
reason, for example, that so many people were willing to believe that the
Illuminati might have distributed the anti-religious pamphlets is because
this was perfectly in line with many of the ideas the Illuminati wanted to
promote. Even if they had not made the pamphlets themselves, the
Illuminati likely did not disagree too strongly with the content. Indeed, such
was their influence in the government that it was almost an open secret that
the Illuminati’s influence in the courts could provide people with
preferential treatment. The elected treasurer in Bavaria was a good
example, with his position being confirmed by two men who stood on the
Ecclesiastical Council, who made a lot of noise to ensure the appointment.
All three were Illuminati men. Similarly, the Illuminati campaign against
the Jesuits had always rumbled on. As their influence increased, a number
of notable Jesuit institutions had been outlawed and banned, with the Jesuits
themselves losing their grip on a number of academic institutions and
positions within the Church. In the University of Ingolstadt, the once Jesuit-
dominated teaching positions were put under pressure, with Illuminati
members taking their place. It was almost inevitable that this level of
influence would eventually result in jealousy and distrust among not only
the Illuminati’s rivals, but those who did not align with their beliefs.
 
To the public, it seemed as though the Illuminati were taking over the
country. As we have seen, behind the scenes, things were far from perfect.
But thanks to the nature of the secret society, only the tip of the iceberg was
visible to the general public. While the visible elements of the Illuminati
seemed to be a genuine concern, the members themselves were often
arguing and in disagreement over what they should be doing in their pursuit
of power. Such was the discord among the public that the authorities finally

began to take notice of the growing Illuminati problem. The issue arrived at
the feet of Karl Theodore, the person in charge of Bavaria. Facing
increasing amounts of pressure, he was forced into actions.
 
His first move was to reinforce the ban on all of the secret societies. Though
this had already been in place, the very existence of three difference groups
(the Illuminati, the Freemasons, and the Rosicrucians, as well as many
others) demonstrates that it was not rigorously enforced. As the tide of
public opinion turned against the Illuminati, the order was given to clamp
down on such groups, with special attention paid to the Illuminati. It was
considered by some historians to be a “deathblow” to the Illuminati, with
the Order unable to cope with the increased amount of attention and
scrutiny that the government was placing on them. An edict, issued by the
government and dated to the 2nd of March, 1785, made it clear that the
Illuminati were specifically considered illegal.
 
The leading members within the Order could see quite clearly that they
were not wanted. Though Bavaria had been their base of operations and the
area from which they had risen up to their current position, many of the
highest-ranking Illuminati men decided to flee. Weishaupt was one of the
first, taking with him all of the documents, internal communications, letters,
correspondence, and anything else he possessed that related to the secret
society. However, these were seized in a number of operations between
1786 and 1787, and then they were published by the government in the
same year. It provided a huge amount of insight into the formation of the
Illuminati and can demonstrate to us the rise and fall of the Order as seen
through its founder. But Weishaupt was not alone. A similar fate befell Von
Zwack, who had his home raided and his documents seized. These were
also published. Eventually, enough materials were gathered as to provide a
good indication of exactly how the Illuminati had come into being.
 
The publishing of the internal communications can be read as the final
death of the Illuminati. Though other events – Knigge leaving, the
government edict – certainly signaled the end, it was the publishing of these
materials that signaled the transition from secret society to strange relic of
the past. The Illuminati’s defining characteristic that they were a shadowy,

secretive order was ripped away from them. The edifice of their abilities
was torn down and the truth about their organization was made available for
all to see. As well as making the communications visible for all to see, the
publication had the effect of revealing many of the men who counted
themselves as members of the Illuminati. Ferdinand of Brunswick was one
such powerful figure, while Von Zwack was an important diplomat at the
time as well as being the second in command of the Illuminati. In addition,
even famed artists and writers were implicated, including Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, the rulers of Gotha and Weimar, and Johann Gottfried Herder.
It was more than enough to cause a scandal in Bavaria.
 
As the leaders of the organization fled the scene and the authorities
systematically took apart the structure of the Illuminati, very little was left
behind. Such was the perceived threat to the authorities that no stone was
left unturned in the pursuit of the Order. Accordingly, the move essentially
finished the Illuminati as a functioning, ambitious secret society. Though
there might have been pockets of men who held out in the face of the
Bavarians attempts to destroy the group, they were robbed of their ability to
do very much at all. Groups such as the Freemasons began to look inwards
and consider how the Illuminati had so easily infiltrated their Lodges. The
governments began to scrutinize each and every influential position to a far
greater level. Even though the Illuminati had succeeded in very little, their
ability to rise up and become a threatening force in roughly a decade served
as a wakeup call to those in power. While the Illuminati had died, their
influence lived on.
 
But the real legacy of the Illuminati was much more difficult to grasp.
Though the physical structures of the organization had been dismantled and
all of their major players had fled, the name of the Illuminati lived on. Not
only did it become famous in 18th Century Bavaria, but even today many
people know the name. Ask anyone about a secret society and chances are
the Illuminati will be one of the first names they mention. While the actual
organization itself had died, the ghost of the Illuminati live on. In the next
chapter, we will discuss how the ghost of such an organization could
become such an influential and powerful name throughout the 18th, 19th,
20th, and even the 21st centuries.


The Illuminati Caused the
French Revolution
 
After the fall of the Illuminati, the name lived on. Despite Weishaupt and
his cohorts being forced to flee the scene and the entire organization being
taken apart by the authorities, their reputation was such that they could
easily be blamed for some of the more important events that were taking
place around the world at this time. Locally, in Bavaria, many people were
quick to attribute events that were slightly out of the ordinary on the
Illuminati. Rulings in a court or changes in state policy would be
accompanied by mutterings that perhaps some secret society was behind
everything. As the disgraced organization that had been chased out of the
country, the Illuminati were the logical choice on which to pin any kind of
blame.
 
 
This is something which has continued to the modern day. Nowadays, there
is a tendency to ascribe motivations to the most random of events. The rise
of the conspiracy theorist has provided a subculture that questions every

aspect of any event around the world. From the Moon landing to the events
of September the 11th, 2001, there is always an alternative explanation.
Typically, these involve shadowy conspiracies lurking in the background. In
most circumstances, the name ‘Illuminati’ is well known enough to provide
a suitable title for such a conspiracy. Even though we know the Bavarian
Illuminati of Weishaupt is dead and gone, the name exists as a kind of go-to
title for any makeshift conspiracy.
 
But this is not a new phenomenon. Shortly after the death of the Illuminati
organization in Bavaria, events in France would have a huge impact on the
world. The French Revolution was one of the single most important
manifestations in Western history, leaving a legacy that can be said to
include the rise of Napoleon, the First and Second World Wars, the Cold
War, and everything we experience in our society today. In many ways, the
slogan of “liberté, égalité, fraternité” came to embody the ideals that would
drive the history of the next two centuries. In no short time at all, people
noticed that the aims of the French Revolution were remarkably similar to
the goals of the Illuminati and men like Weishaupt. It was barely any time
at all before people were beginning to suggest that the Illuminati might
have been responsible for events in France. But how did the organization
come to be blamed for such a major moment in history?
 
The dates given for the French Revolution are typically between 1789 and
1799. During this period, civil unrest in France manifested itself in such a
way as to encourage the people of France to rise up against the established
order and overthrow the ruling aristocracy. The monarchy was dismantled, a
French Republic established, and the groundwork eventually laid for a man
named Napoleon to rise up and seize power. All of this was done under the
banner of Enlightenment ideals. The liberal, somewhat radical views of
men like Voltaire, combined with years of bad harvests, heavy taxation, and
resentment of the clergy and aristocracy, led to an unprecedented uprising
that shook the pillars of the European ruling classes. Built on
Enlightenment ideas, it is possible to look at the views and opinions of
Weishaupt and quietly assume the French Revolution must have been
entirely to his liking.
 

This is exactly what seemed to have crossed the minds of a number of
writers in Europe. In fact, two significant texts were published that
suggested the Illuminati had not gone away. Instead, they had only appeared
to do so and were, in fact, responsible for many world changing events,
such as those seen in France. The books were Proofs of a Conspiracy,
which was written by John Robison, and Augustin Barruel’s book, titled
Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, published in 1798 and 1797
respectively. Though it’s clear from the title alone that Robinson’s book is
hard at work in establishing a secret organization, Barruel’s work
functioned along very similar lines. Hardly a decade after the fall of the
Illuminati, their name was essentially fair game to anyone who wanted to
suggest the existence of a dangerous secret society. As the word Illuminati
still carried some cultural cache, but the publication of the books were
distant enough from the actual events, the authors were pretty much free to
say whatever they pleased about the supposedly survival of the Illuminati.
 
Across both works, there is a conviction that the Illuminati never died.
Ignoring the evidence of men such as Weishaupt and the events leading up
to the disbanding of the organization, the two authors follow very similar
paths in detailing the secret society. Both seem in agreement that the
Illuminati simply withdrew from the public eye. Already a secret society,
they seem to suggest that the Illuminati became a very secret society. From
this positions way back in the shadows, the authors suggest that the group
could organize events such as the French Revolution.
 
That both of the books sold well demonstrates the need people have to
explain events in a simple, reductionist manner. Hundreds, possibly
thousands of books have been written on the causes of the French
Revolution. Historians and academics have long argued over what caused
the uprising, providing Marxist readings of events, Psychoanalytic
interpretations, and economic reasons why a group of disenfranchised
people should fight against their overlords. But while modern
historiography is more than capable of providing detailed reasoning behind
events, it is a great deal easier to simply suggest that the Illuminati were
behind everything. As the works of Robison and Barruel grew increasingly
popular and the books were reprinted again and again, we can see for the

first time how quickly people choose to accept the countercultural (and
often easy) explanation rather than examining anything in great detail.
 
The two books inspired a wave of conspiracy related literature. For a while,
many events were being blamed on the Illuminati, as well as other secret
societies whose names have often been forgotten. As the French Revolution
left a massive cultural impact on the Western world, there was an attempt to
explain everything with a simple truth. Rather than believing that history
could be a complex web of competing motivations and human emotions,
the idea that a clandestine organization was in fact pulling the strings served
to reduce everything to a very simple (though perhaps not desirable)
explanation. It also had the effect of restoring order to a chaotic world. For
those reading conspiracy literature at the time, the idea of events like the
French Revolution occurring all over the world might seem worrisome. The
French Revolution destroyed the working order, the established way of life.
For those who were doing well for themselves, this kind of chaos was a
threat. Having a shadowy group secretly pulling the strings applied a kind
of rationale and order to the randomness of the French Revolution. Though
they might not have agreed with the Illuminati’s actions, there was some
comfort to be found in the knowledge that someone, somewhere held the
reins to this furious beast. In that respect, the idea of the Illuminati became
much more important than the living organization had ever been.
 
But there were people at the time who were more than happy to dispel
notions of a giant conspiracy across Europe. Some people happily bought
into the idea and men such as Reverend Seth Payson wrote books like
Proofs of the Real Existence, and Dangerous Tendency, Of Illuminism
which purposefully described an Illuminati conspiracy. But the problem
was, Payson and his like had no evidence. While they might have suggested
that the Illuminati existed, there was little they could offer to back up their
statements. This provided ample fodder for men like Jean-Joseph Mounier,
who wrote a book titled On the Influence Attributed to Philosophers, Free-
Masons, and to the Illuminati on the Revolution of France. Inside, he
provided criticism of the ideas of the Illuminati conspiracy and was more
than happy to dissuade people from this belief.
 

But such was the popularity of the idea that men like Barruel and Robison
were able to make a large amount of money from the premise of a global
conspiracy. They were able to travel to the newly formed country of
America and give lectures and talks on how the Illuminati were influencing
events. Much like Payson, they rarely had little in the way of definitive
evidence. But it seemed not to matter. They were well paid for their writing
and well paid for their work. They managed to influence others and,
gradually, people like Jedidiah Morse (a priest) began to use the material as
the foundation of his own ideas. These ideas were also printed, circulated,
and built upon. Slowly, an entire genre of conspiratorial, speculative non-
fiction began to spread across the world. At the heart of it all was the idea
that groups such as the nominally defunct Illuminati were actually
controlling global events.
 
But many of the salient facts got lost along the way. Much like a children’s
parlor game, in which a sentence is whispered into a series of ears until it
metamorphoses into something entirely different, this idea of the Illuminati
moved further and further away from the truth. While the initial books had
succeeded in outlining the similarities between the principles of the French
Revolution and the principles of the Illuminati, the derivative work became
increasingly tenuous. Soon, the ideological foundations of such
conspiracies vanished. In their stead was the modern interpretation of the
Illuminati we see before us today. Rather than the liberal, radical group who
sought to overthrow the monarchy and the church, the modern version of
the Illuminati has become so twisted that these ideals are never mentioned.
Instead, the Illuminati are a ruling elite, or focused on enslaving humanity,
or hoping to use Israel to topple the world, or they are behind the global
banking crises. With very little effort, it is possible to find someone who has
attributed almost any political event from the last century to the work of the
Illuminati.
 
So while the Illuminati in no way were responsible for the French
Revolution, the possibility that they might have guided events has become
one of the most important moments in the organization’s history. These
days, the ghost of the Illuminati is an entirely different beast. As we will see
in the final chapter, the modern Illuminati can be traced back to the

conspiracy theories that plagued the French Revolution. Soon enough, we’ll
find the final truth behind the Illuminati myth.
 


The Illuminati in Modern Society
 
These days, the word “Illuminati” is basically a brand name. Utterly
divorced from the secret society origins that rose up in Bavaria in the 18th
Century, the group have been co-opted by everyone from college
fraternities to fiction writers, from internet conspiracy theorists to video
game creators. Through all of these iterations, the true history of the
organization is often lost, forgotten, or simply ignored completely. If we
want to question the idea of the Illuminati in the modern day, then we need
to understand that the meaning of the word is entirely different. While we
have looked in depth at the Bavarian origins of the Illuminati, this
understanding shows us just how separate from the truth the contemporary
uses of the group have become.
 
It is not uncommon to see the Illuminati inspire those who are looking to set
up their own secret society. Having become the default title for any kind of
shadowy organization, many organizations that are keen to emphasize their
own importance will take the Illuminati as a starting point. Whether this
means adding some variation of the name – the Illuminated, Illumination,
Illuminate, and so on – or even borrowing some of the Order’s iconography
– the Minerval owl, for example – there are many examples of people who
hope to give their own group credibility by invoking the Illuminati. These
might be Masonic sects, college fraternities, or just curious people getting
together to meet in private. All of them are aware, at least on some level, of
what the name Illuminati means. They are very rarely aware, however, of
what the Order stood for.
 
In a similar vein, there are many works of fiction that choose to use the
Illuminati as a plot device. Established fiction authors such as Dan Brown
(author of the Da Vinci Code and Angels and Demons) and Umberto Eco
(Foucault’s Pendulum) have both sold a great many novels while featuring
characters who were in some way related to the Illuminati. Across
everything from children’s books, to movies, to video games, the Illuminati
can be a very useful plot device. Thanks to their reputation, they spark a

kind of instant familiarity, especially useful as the authors can adjust the
group’s motivations depending on the particular story. These days, many
people’s first exposure to the word ‘Illuminati’ will come from works of
fiction such as these, created by writers whose research can vary from the
incredibly in-depth to the casual and cursory. With so many different forms
of media depicting the Illuminati, the ghost of the Bavarian secret society
has taken on a new life as a recurring organization in fiction, much like the
United Nations or NASA.
 
The prevalence of the Illuminati across many forms of fiction can often
form the starting point for people’s understanding of the group, but it is
very rarely the ending point. Once people hear the name, they often have
their interests piqued and become curious about what the group is about.
Inevitably, they will take to the internet. Simply typing the word
“Illuminati” into a search engine will provide the user with 25,000,000
results. On twenty-five million webpages, all across the internet, someone
has mentioned the Illuminati. Giving a quick glance down the first page of
results, the authenticity of the research quickly becomes questionable. Very
soon, the questions move away from historical and verifiable facts and
towards questions of whether the Illuminati control the music industry, of
whether they influence celebrities, or whether their logo is featured on
American currency. Such matters are as entirely divorced from the original
Illuminati as to be something else entirely.
 
Take, for example, the myth that the Illuminati feature on the one dollar bill
of the United States of America. According to the legend, the following can
be found on the note:
 
The Illuminated eye floating atop the pyramid, which is said to
represent Lucifer the Great Architect. The eye was never a symbol of
the Illuminati, and their relation to the occult and the mystical was
inconsistent at best, far from their reputation as devil worshipers.
The pyramid features 13 layers of bricks, which represent the original
13 colonies of America and 72 bricks to represent the 72 powers of
the Kabbalistic name of God. The Illuminati had no presence in
America, certainly not during the founding of the country, and any

kind of belief in Jewish mysticism can be considered ridiculous, as
Jews were barred from joining.
The date MDCCLXXVI, which represents the day the Illuminati were
formed – ignoring the auspicious nature of that date in term of
American history, the Illuminati name was not invented for an
additional two years.
The prevalence of the number 13, connected to paganism and power
over the thirteen colonies – paganism was at odds with the rational
nature of the Illuminati mindset.
 
 
There are many more websites that claim that almost every aspect of the
one dollar bill (and others) hints at the Illuminati and how they secretly
control America. Conspiracy theories such as this are not only the most
common use of the word Illuminati in the modern age, but they represent an
ill-informed and often purposefully ignorant interpretation of the history of
the Order. Even the most cursory research can eliminate the minor details
and suggestions put forward by these websites. What’s more, few of the
theorists are able to answer the question as to why a secret society would
declare their existence on one of the most common items in the country. If
the Illuminati wanted to keep their existence a secret, then it is unlikely that
they would advertise on the country’s currency. Furthermore, if they did
indeed leave coded messages, their codes could likely stand up to a greater
amount of scrutiny that making vague associations.
 
Instead, these websites perform the essential modern function of the
Illuminati in our culture. The millions of sites that claim to possess
knowledge of the conspiratorial trends of a modern Illuminati simply trade

on the famous nature of the name in return for attention. It can help to think
of the usage of the name like a franchise. Just like with a fast food chain, a
person takes the name and puts it above their door. The name carries certain
connotations for the viewer, who knows what they can expect when they go
inside. Just as a fast food customer can expect the same kind of burgers
across the country, those who wander into the more dubious areas of the
internet which fix the word Illuminati above their door know what to
expect. And just like in fast food restaurants, the people cooking the food
are entirely different. While it might be the same name above the door, the
people inside are far from the original workers. Today, the Illuminati name
carries a certain cultural meaning but very little else.
 
So why does the name remain important? As well as the fascination some
people have with the idea of conspiracy theories, one of the most important
explanations for the popularity of the Illuminati is simple. Money. By
putting the word Illuminati in the title of a book, one can expect to sell
more copies. Put the organization into a film or video game and people will
know what to expect. Mention it on the internet and people will eventually
arrive at your site. Rather than a global conspiracy, the popularity of the
Illuminati in the modern age can typically be attributed to cold, hard cash.
 
It is telling that men such as Mark Dice or David Icke are able to trade so
freely on the Illuminati name. Often paying very little attention to the
organization’s Bavarian origins, they play on the modern conception of the
Order. There is a huge amount of money to be made from people’s
inquisitive natures. The audience wants to know the secret, the solution, the
key to how everything works. While the real answers to these questions are
often infinitesimally correct, packaging up a simple answer can be
immensely profitable. By claiming that the Illuminati are some modern
global puppet masters, it is possible to provide an alternative explanation
that is ever so slightly plausible, much easier to comprehend, and almost
impossible to prove right or wrong. Just as the Illuminati have become a
brand name for bland conspiracy theories, they have become a profitable
venture. Read almost any text on the subject and there will be little mention
of the original Enlightenment ideals behind the group, or the discussions
between Knigge and Weishaupt. Instead, discussion drifts to celebrity

encounters, 
half-hearted 
iconographic 
explanations, 
and 
thorough
misinterpretations of actual history. Evidence is ignored, and in its place is a
titillating, tempting alternative. A truth that could be true, but that will
never be proved. Today, the Illuminati are dead and gone. In their place, a
modern ghost of the Order has risen up and become a profitable,
entertaining option for anyone who wants to believe in the possibility of a
conspiracy.


Conclusion
 
Many people will pick up a book on the Illuminati with the hope that it will
explain any number of conspiracy theories. Did they assassinate JFK? Did
they organize the Bolshevik revolution? Were they behind any number of
terrorist attacks, horrible accidents, and other world changing events? The
answer is almost invariably “no.” In this book, we have attempted to
explain why.
 
There exists two very different versions of the Illuminati. The is the factual
version, the secret society that was founded in 18th Century Bavaria, that
has left a legacy of evidence, materials, and historical provable facts. And
there is the fiction, the ensuing interpretation of the Illuminati that makes
them both everything and nothing. They are simultaneously responsible for
the greatest conspiracy every put into practice, while clandestine enough to
leave no evidence whatsoever. The modern version is a ghost story, built
from the blocks of the historical Order than crumbled under its own
failings.
 
The real Illuminati was an ambitious, radical, and liberal organization. It
was eventually torn apart by very human failings and the age-old inability
of individuals to reach a consensus. It’s possible to see very normal,
sympathetic traits in the history of the Bavarian Illuminati. But the modern
version provides us with an equal insight into the human condition. The
Illuminati as we know them today offer answers in a world full of
questions. They offer some semblance of explanation when the facts desert
us. For those who believe in their actions, the Illuminati become a way to
explain the inexplicable. While this does not make the stories true, it at least
explains why the Illuminati continue to exist and will carry on existing for
the foreseeable future.


Further Readings
 
Black, J. (2010). The secret history of the world. London: Quercus.
Dice, M. (n.d.). Inside the Illuminati.
Illuminati in the Music Industry. (2013). Createspace Independent Pub.
Illuminatiam. (n.d.). .
Jackson, J. (2015).  The World's Most Dangerous Secret Societies.
Createspace.
Makow, H. (2009). Illuminati. Winnipeg, MB: Silas Green.
Satanic Possession. (2014). Createspace Independent Pub.
The 66 laws of the Illuminati. (n.d.). .
White, F. (n.d.). Who are the Illuminati?.
Zagami, L. (2016). Confessions of an illuminati. [Place of publication not
identified]: Ccc Pub.


Volume 6
 



Contents
 
Introduction
A Brief History of the Order of the Skull and Bones
William Russell
The Russell Trust Association
A Yale Society
Fact and Fiction
A Fascinating Society
Buildings, Branding, and Borrowed Signs
Yale
A Need for Secrecy
Russell’s Version
The Tomb
The Traditions
A Legitimate Branch
American University Life
The Inner Temple
Other Locations
Rites, Rituals, and Initiation
Rituals and Rumors
Rosenbaum
An Alternate Story
Recruitment
Tapping as a Competition
A Public Affair
Recruiting Traditions
The Initiation Ceremony
A More Modern Ceremony
The Initiation Night
Minor Rituals
The Network of the Bonesmen
The Bush Legacy
Networking
Family Histories

Pre-University Days
Loading the Deck
The Legends of the Order
Face to Face
Crooking
The Skull of Geronimo
The Real Secrets?
Further Readings
Conclusion


Introduction
 
Nobody likes the idea that there are hugely influential powers operating
behind closed doors. For centuries, there have been stories about secret
societies that control everything we do and dominate the highest echelons
of politics and business. Whether it’s the Illuminati, the Masons, or the
Knights Templar, it’s not uncommon for people to believe that there might
be a cabal of people who conspire together for their own nefarious
purposes. But while these earlier societies might be clouded in mystery and
intrigue, there are modern equivalents of which we know much, much
more.
 
One of these mysterious societies is known simply as Skull and Bones. A
clandestine group who gather at one of the world’s top universities, they are
made up of some of the cleverest, brightest, and most privileged members
of their generation. In addition to this, their members have gone on to be
CEOs, moguls, and even Presidents. Their alumni hold some of the most
important positions within society, and for the majority, their membership
of this secret club is a closely guarded secret.
 
Whether it’s generations of the Bush family, members of the Taft family,
Rockefellers, CIA officers, Presidents, publishers, judges, lawyers,
Olympians, ambassadors, congressmen, governors, senators, authors,
diplomats, or musicians, there seems no limit on who might be a members.
With their suggested involvement in thefts, rituals, and even more hidden
power politics, the members of Skull and Bones are part of one of the
seemingly most powerful groups in the world. In this book we will examine
their history, their practices, their members, and their legacy. By the end,
you should have a much clearer idea of what it means to be a member of
one of Yale’s most exclusive groups: Skull and Bones.


A Brief History of the Order of
the Skull and Bones
 
The history of Skull and Bones might seem simple, but as with many secret
societies, attempting to untangle the web of stories, myths, and legends can
be incredibly difficult. As such, it is perhaps best to start with a brief
overview in which we can examine the commonly accepted narrative,
before plunging into greater depth. The theories relating to the history of
Skull and Bones are almost as old as the group itself, ensuring that
whenever research into the society’s history is attempted, one must navigate
the murky waters. The society itself has no reason why it should attempt to
clarify any part of its history. For them, a murky, confused narrative filled
with mistruths simply adds to the aura of the group and distracts from the
more truthful elements of what we think we know. By keeping their history
conspicuously obscure, Skull and Bones becomes even more of a vague
concept. If we want to establish the accepted truth behind the group’s
history, it can help to turn to an article from Time magazine published in
2009.
 
As stated in the article in Time magazine, Skull and Bones and its members
have been blamed for everything from the Kennedy assassination to the
invention of the atomic bomb. The society has been portrayed in negative
and positive lights in all sorts of media and has even made an appearance
being satirized on the Simpsons. Their involvement in a number of high
profile court cases and crimes has bought the group to unexpected levels of
attention, prompting a surge in interest. As a response to this, people have
tried to assemble as much information as possible on the group. One of the
best examples of the group’s influence is the election for President of the
United States of America that took place in 2004. The election was held
between George W. Bush, Republican, and John Kerry, Democrat. As
chance would have it, both men were graduates of Yale, and both had been
inducted into the secret society. Whichever man ended up taking the White
House, America was guaranteed to be overseen by a Bonesman (the name

given to the group’s members.) Later in this book, we will look into this
event in even greater detail.
 
William Russell
 
Skull and Bones, as the legends go, was founded by a man named William
Russell. Russell, a student at Yale, class of 1833, spent a year in Germany.
He found himself wandering between the clandestine and mystical
organizations that one might have encountered in 19th Century European
high society. These mysterious clubs organized by the elite and the
aristocracy would often imitate and replicate legendary organizations such
as the Illuminati and the Priory of Scion. Fascinated and enthralled by such
a society, Russell took what he had learned from the secretive Germans and
brought it back with him to the academic environment of one of America’s
oldest educational institutions, Yale University. After a supposed falling out
between a number of debating societies at the university – Brothers in
Unity, the Calliopean Society, and Linonia – who had been arguing about
the Phi Beta Kappa ceremony for dishing out the awards, Russell decided
that the American institution needed to take the lead from the Germans he
had encountered. Teaming with a man named Alphonso Taft, in 1832 the
pair founded a group they named as the “Order of the Skull and Bones.”
 
It was not long before the group began to establish its own mythology. The
process of inviting someone into the society was in the fashion of similar
American university groups. It involved a person being “tapped.” This
recruitment process was conducted, and with great foresight,   Russell
managed to foster a spirit of mysterious elitism. Take, for example, the first
recruit for the so-called Brotherhood of Death. Alphonso Taft was set to
hold an important role in American history, if only for being the father of
William H. Taft, the future President of the United States. As the group’s
first charters indicate, the original name was the “Order of the Scull and
Bones,” though this common alternative spelling was later corrected.
 
One of the first legends that was passed down about the activities of the
members of Skull and Bones was that they were involved in pagan worship.

There were rumors that the group devoted themselves to the goddess
Eulogia, an invented creation who was said to represent eloquence. In
addition to this, the name was supposed to represent the Order’s worship of
pirates and other criminals, while they hatched dastardly plans in which
world domination was always the end goal. Right from the start, there was
an element of the conspiracy theory about what really went on behind the
doors of Russell’s secret society.
 
The Russell Trust Association
 
In recognition of the group’s founder, the assets of Skull and Bones are now
managed by what is known as the Russell Trust Association. Founded in
1856, the group had been operating for nearly two decades before it was
decided that the trust would be required. By this point, the original
members had long since graduated, but that did not stop them from taking
an active interest. The group ensured that each and every year, a fresh wave
of inductees would be tapped, chosen for their reputations on campus and
their reputations in the wider world. The Russell Trust Association, founded
by both Russell and another Bonesman, Daniel Coit Gilman, was created to
ensure that the group’s members had a network that existed after their
graduation. It would be one in which they could monitor, nurture, and
preserve the group from outside the confines of the university system.
Gilman himself would prove to be an important man, eventually becoming
president of both John Hopkins University and the University of California.
He was also one of the founders of the Carnegie Institution. He was
perfectly placed to oversee one of the country’s most important academic
societies.
 
Looking through the records, one of the first appearances or
acknowledgements of the existence of the Skull and Bones outside of their
own members can be found in a book by Lyman Bagg. Four Years at Yale,
published in 1871, tells the story of Bagg’s own experiences at the
university. While not a member of S&B, and not aware of many of the
group’s internal machinations, the account demonstrates that in the fifty
years following the founding of the group, their reputation and mystery had

become part of the Yale folklore. Bagg’s book barely mentions Skull and
Bones, suggesting instead that the mystery behind the group is a hot bit of
gossip among student circles. Though not delving into his own
explanations, he notes that many people are fascinated by the group.
Without mentioning anything specific, this tells us a number of things about
Skull and Bones. First, in just fifty years, their reputation had been
cemented among the student body. Second, that the enigmatic qualities of
the society were as fascinating then as they are today. Third, Bagg’s
suggestion that the students “never tire” of dwelling on the group’s
mysteries tells us that, much like today, a great deal of information
regarding Skull and Bones was kept firmly under wraps by all involved.
Finally, the lack of background information given by the author indicates
the extent to which rumors were commonplace on campus. Bagg never felt
the need to go into great detail simply because the amount of speculation
that swirled around the society, it seemed, was completely commonplace.
 
A Yale Society
 
But why did the group become such a center of attention? There are other
groups, societies, and organizations at Yale that offer much of a similar
social experience – at least on the surface. Skull and Bones had begun life
as a replication of European counterparts, in response to a disagreement
among those societies that already existed on campus. The only factors that
seemed to differentiate the Order of the Skull and Bones from others were
their morbid name, their well-kept secrecy, and the importance and
influence of their members. When added together, it seemed as though their
very existence was ripe for rumor.
 
According to Brooks Mather Kelley, the reason behind the interest in Yale’s
secret societies was simply due to the way in which university life was
structured. Due to the recruiting policies of these groups, it was accepted
that those who had been at the university a longer amount of time would
pass on rumors and stories to the next generation. Like a children’s game,
these stories might evolve and change as they were being passed around,
their features exaggerated for effect or to make the teller seem more

knowledgeable or important. With students keen to discover more about life
away from their studies, the Order of the Skull and Bones provided them
with a mystery that was right on their doorstep, a feature of the very
institution they were now a part of. The seniors who then graduated from
college, being possessed of more information, would look back over the
initiation rituals and the rumors that surrounded such societies and perhaps
fuel the fire of salacious stories that spread across campus. In fact, the very
nature of Skull and Bones as a secret society meant that they were soon the
most talked-about organization on campus. With people desperate to find
out more about who they were and what they did, myths and legends began
to spring up everywhere. This thought might well have pleased Russell,
who intended for his organization to have the same reputation as its
European forebears. But more significantly, it meant that – on those times
when a morsel of truth did slip into the public domain – it was impossible to
separate the truth from the rumor. The lies and stories that grew up around
Skull and Bones were their best protection and best recruiting tool. Those
who were tapped found themselves keen to learn more, while those who
remained on the outside could only guess at what happened within the
walls. Accordingly, much of the gossip on campus centered on the Skull
and Bones without much real information ever leaving the confines of the
Order’s own building.
 
Since these early, mysterious days, Skull and Bones has become known
across the country and now the world. Over the centuries, the stories about
the group have not just been limited to their role in the university. There
have been rumors that they regularly partake in a ritual whereupon they
steal the skulls of famous people. Perhaps the most notorious of these is the
skull of Native American leader Geronimo, whose missing cranium has
been the subject of much speculation. This practice – known as “crooking”
– will be covered later in the book, but it seems like one of the many
theories that make up a tapestry of rumors surrounding the Order. Over
time, the persistence of such stories has meant that the practice is now part
of Skull and Bones law.
 
In a similar manner, the lack of concrete information about the Order has
led many people to try to fill in the gaps themselves. The Internet has

become one of the greatest tools in the world for uncovering information
about previously hidden matters. One need only look at the leaks of
government material by Edward Snowden or organizations such as
WikiLeaks to see that there is a means of distributing information about the
previously clandestine. But along with the massive resources that we now
have at our disposal, there is also a more debilitating side to the Internet that
can hinder investigations. It can be tough to uncover correct and legitimate
findings when so many websites are content to post unproven and
speculative pieces regarding organizations such as Skull and Bones. Often,
these conspiracy websites will be happy to distribute unverified and often
untrue information simply to further theories and agendas. Information such
as this must be separated and quarantined when conducting investigations
into real-life matters. In truth, the emergence of the Internet has meant that
the Order’s collegiate reputation has grown. Just as rumors and
misinformation spread across a 19th Century College campus adding to the
notorious legend of the Order, the details that are circulated on the Internet
fulfil much the same purpose. In this regard, trying to learn about the Order
of Skull and Bones is just as difficult now as it was one hundred years ago.
 
Fact and Fiction
 
So then, that leaves us with one particularly tricky question: if we are to
examine the history of the Order of the Skull and Bones, how can we
separate fact from fiction? One of the best and most popular ways is to rely
on the accounts given by the members themselves. If there is anything in
which we can put greater amounts of trust regarding the Order, it is their
members. The membership list of the group is one of the worst-kept secrets
around. This is based on a number of reasons. First, no members really
make any effort to hide their involvement from the public eye. As
mentioned previously, a number of Bonesmen have held the highest office
in American politics. While we know that Presidents have been members
and have admitted to being involved, they very rarely actually discuss what
happened within the confines of the Order.
 

Second, the involvement of people within societies on the Yale campus is
often public knowledge. As well as the 19th Century societies we have
already mentioned, there are a number of organizations that have sprung up
in the wake of Skull and Bones replicating their secret stylings. Wolf's
Head, the Scroll and Key, Book and Snake, and Berzelius have all risen at
some point during the Order’s history. One of the chief concerns shared
among these groups is keeping information on who is involved in which
society. It’s been well known that the societies keep tabs on one another’s
members, often documenting in a charter or log book just who belongs to
which society. Once a prospect is tapped, they can begin a long journey
during which they are often observed at every step.
 
Finally, one of the most obvious reasons as to why the membership of the
Order of the Skull and Bones is not too secret is simply because it is
common knowledge which buildings they own. For years, the society has
used many of the same meeting halls and congregation points. It would take
an interested party arriving at these locations in any given year to write
down who arrives at the door and who is allowed admittance. Added to this,
thanks to the Russell Trust Association, we can look into the properties
owned by the group and learn about those involved by following the paper
trial.
 
As such, we can take it for granted that the membership itself into the group
is not hidden. This is why so many histories of the Skull and Bones
organization depend upon the membership lists for their starting point and
seek to extrapolate information from there. However, this can be a
dangerous practice and – as we will see later in this book – the actual details
of the history of the members is far more interesting than people realize.
There is a strict selection criteria that must be observed when the Order is
tapping new recruits, and it is these people who form the bulk of the
members.
 
A Fascinating Society
 

So then, if the information about who is able to join this secret society is so
public, what makes the membership of the Order of the Skull and Bones so
fascinating? Put simply, it is the information that we do not know which is
typically the most tantalizing. There have been rumors, hints, and
admissions about the variety of practices that are involved in the group.
Tales of the occult, of strange initiation rituals, of extreme financial power,
and influence beyond the grave have pervaded the legacy of the Order.
Involvement in the group by so many powerful people over the years is,
quite simply, not a coincidence. Instead, trying to determine what it is about
the Order that imbues its members with such power, wealth, and influence
becomes the chief point of interest for many people. As we look through the
strict rules of the Order, their exploits, and the stories from their ex-
members, and the conspiracies that surround them, we will begin to see just
what it is that makes the prospect of the Skull and Bones such as thrilling
proposition for so many people. As we break further from the known
history of the group and delve deeper into the muddy waters, you might
well be shocked and appalled by what we discover within. Now that we’ve
given a brief outline of the group’s existence, it’s time to uncover more
about the Order of the Skull and Bones.


Buildings, Branding, and Borrowed Signs
 
It might seem strange to some that a university society should own and
operate a number of buildings and facilities. While the majority of
organizations that gather in academic buildings can rely upon renting the
odd hall or room or choose to meet in public places, the means by which
Skull and Bones is able to make use of their own facilities is slightly
different. They are not a fraternity, nor do they offer living quarters to those
who become members. Instead, the buildings that are under their realm of
influence are typically used once or twice a week, usually for a few hours.
It might seem odd then, that such a group should own and operate a number
of premises purely for the purpose of conducting their secret meetings. But
when you realize the depth of wealth that is available to the former
Bonesmen, as well as the close connections many alumni bear to the
society, it should come as no surprise to see that so many people are willing
to fund the facilities that allow the Order of the Skull and Bones to function
in continued secrecy.
 
Yale
 
In order to get the best perspective on the history of the Order’s use of
buildings on campus, it is important to journey back through the history of
societies on the Yale campus and understand the precedents that dictated
how and when Russell’s Order would meet. For the best example, we
should look at Phi Beta Kappa, a chapter of which formed at Yale in 1780.
Loosely standing (in Latin) for Philosophia Biou Kybernetes (or Love of
Wisdom, the Guide of Life), the group sought to promote and endorse
literature and friendly interchanges between the scholars at Yale, meeting
and discussing topics such as politics, philosophy, ethics, and religion.
There were other, similar groups at Yale from these times, including the
Brothers in Unity and Linonia, centuries-old societies that focused on
scholarly issues. Unlike these two groups, however, Phi Beta Kappa (or
PBK) was designed to keep its activities a secret. For those on the outside,
the membership of PBK and the occurrences within the confines of the

society were a mystery. With a membership composed of supposedly the
best students at the university (plus a number of their less scholarly
associates who were allowed in by merits of their acquaintances), the secret
group was the forebear of the secret societies that would come later. They
seemed to have the endorsement of the establishment, to the extent that they
knew which members to recruit thanks to information gathered from the
faculty.
 
The meeting practices of PBK formed the foundation for later secret
societies at the university. Meetings were regular but not too often. At first,
the group met once every two weeks, though this was eventually reduced to
once a month. Their choice of location for these meetings was a building
that was known to belong to another strange organization, the Freemasons.
For anyone who has done their research into secret societies around the
world, the Freemasons are a group whose name appears often and in many
places. Loosely thought to be a social endeavor with knowledge and
involvement ramping up as one moves higher through the ranks of the
Order, many important people and many unimportant people have had some
degree of involvement with the Freemasons. That one of Yale’s first secret
societies should share their meeting hall speaks of a close connection
between the two and establishes a precedent of intimate knowledge that will
echo along the annals of the university’s history.
 
These sessions, meeting in the Freemasons hall, were scheduled for 6:30pm
and would start on the dot. At each, there was typically a speech given by
one of the members, and then a debate was held in which some of the most
pressing matters of ethics or philosophy were bandied back and forth. For
members who arrived late, there was a fine of sixpence, while those PBK
members who skipped the meeting entirely were fined ten dollars, a not
inconsequential sum at the time. That there should be a ten dollar fine tells
of the importance of the meetings and of the resources of the members. For
those members who were considered to have “flunked an appointment,” the
fine was doubled to twenty dollars. Once a year, around Christmas time,
there would be a large dinner held for the PBK members. At these dinners,
a graduated former member would deliver a speech, and then the officers
for the next year would be elected. From what we know of what happened

during these meetings, the PBK organization was not involved in a great
deal of mysterious activity. What drove the intrigue into the organization
derived simply from their insistence on secrecy. Those who found
themselves on the outside of the PBK circle were desperate to know what
their fellow students were doing. This escalated to the point, when in 1786,
three senior students knocked down the door of the secretary of the PBK
and stole the society’s secret papers that had been hidden in a trunk. It is not
known what they uncovered, as a team of PBK members tracked down the
guilty parties and sat them before a PBK council. In front of the council, the
three seniors were compelled to sign written confessions – purely voluntary,
of course – in which they promised never to tell anyone what they had
learned from the papers (if there had even been anything at all.) The
intrigue surrounding the event escalated even further, to the point where the
trunk was stolen again just a year and half later.
 
A Need for Secrecy
 
But secrecy among Yale societies would become a bone of contention, not
just among the students, but among the United States as a whole. It’s
possible to look at the events surrounding PBK in the 1830s to see just how
suspicious people were becoming of the Masons and their influence, with
the PBK on the Yale campus becoming a microcosm of this attitude. The
first hints of rebellion came in 1830, when something called the Great
Conic Sections Rebellion took place. Yale of the 19th Century was very
different to that of today. One of the requisites for a Yale education was the
ability to recite what was known as the conic sections. These were
mathematical formulae and figures relating to the geometric curves that
might be found in circles and ellipses. As part of their education, Yale
students were expected to be able to recite these conic sections and were
tested accordingly. Fury was sparked when some students accused their
more privileged counterparts of being allowed to depend on books and
resources during the test. They wanted the same opportunity. When faced
with their examinations, they steadfastly refused to listen to the faculty.
 

The university was furious. They took action against the students, claiming
that they had formed a “combination to resist the government.” After this,
all Yale classes were suspended and students were forced to sign a
document that ensured that they agreed to obey the rules and laws of the
institution. Nearly half of the 1832 class refused to sign and were forcibly
expelled from Yale. Their names were placed on a blacklist, and they were
never allowed to attend another university. These events occurred against
the backdrop of a widespread anti-masonic movement in the United States.
People were beginning to grow distrustful of the extent to which this secret
society could influence the government. A presidential candidate emerged
with the promise of dispelling America’s secret societies, echoing the same
resentment of privilege that had compelled the Yale students to stand up. At
the university, this growing distrust of secret societies meant that PBK was
forced to abandon their more secretive policies. Already the most suspected
group on campus, their fondness for clandestine meetings in Freemason
halls meant that they were at the center of the masonic scandal running
through America.
 
As a response, many of PBK’s secrets were published. The secret
handshakes they used and the signs they had invented were made public
knowledge. All of their secret ceremonies were banned. Soon it seemed that
as the secrecy was stripped from PBK, they lost their allure. Without the
secrecy that had intrigued so many, few people were that interested in
another, run-of-the-mill Yale society. PBK lost many of its members to the
scandal and eventually closed their doors for many decades. The Order of
the Skull and Bones was founded in the aftermath of the PBK scandal. As
Phi Beta Kappa diminished in popularity, a far more secretive and
clandestine group took their place. They learned lessons from PBK, and it
seems that one of the key factors that Russell incorporated into the
establishing of the Order was the need for their own private quarters, one
which would not associate them with the Freemasons and tar them with the
same brush that had led to the downfall of one of Yale’s premier secret
organizations.
 
Russell’s Version

 
In fact, the emergence of Russell’s group bears closer bonds to the fall of
PBK than you might expect. It was in the academic year of 1832 to 1833
that a man named William Russell, the valedictorian of the 1833 class, was
elected secretary of the Yale PBK chapter. As secretary, he was included in
the process of electing the next wave of PBK officers and was shocked to
discover that one of those he felt best suited to the positions – Eleazar
Kingsbury Foster – had been purposefully left of the election slate.
Apoplectic, he came out and openly condemned the PBK, and by December
of 1832, had colluded with Foster to recruit 13 other students, among them
Alfonso Taft, to take what they had learned from the PBK downfall and
begin a brand new secret society, the Order of the Skull and Bones. Russell
had been an elected secretary of Phi Beta Kappa. Few knew better how the
organization was run and how it related to the Yale establishment. It is clear
that Russell learned the essentials of the American secret academic society
and combined it with his knowledge of the European models that he had
been exposed to. Thanks to the anti-masonic scandal, Russell knew that the
meeting of the upper-echelons of the student body must be more secret than
ever before. As such, the need for secrecy in Skull and Bones was
paramount. While PBK had used their mysterious operations to build up a
reputation, Skull and Bones were forced to be secret if they wanted to
continue to meet. Had they been discovered, they would have been expelled
and blacklisted.
 
The combination of European and American models of the secret society
can be seen in the way in which Skull and Bones first began to brand
themselves. It is thought that the obsession with death- and bone-orientated
imagery is a reflection of an unnamed society that Russell discovered when
touring through Germany. He brought back this morbid branding, combined
it with the structural organization and practices of his PBK experiences, and
began to build a secret society that fused together the best of both
continents. There is some evidence to suggest that Skull and Bones is, in
fact, just another chapter in just another, much older organization.
Documents have been discovered from within the halls which seem to
suggest there were jubilee and anniversary celebrations of the establishing
of an “American chapter.” Another document, taken from 1933, celebrates

the anniversary of the society’s “Yale chapter.” When considering these
theories, there is a huge lack of evidence, chiefly the name of the parent
organization. Skull and Bones contains many features and practices that are
somewhat unique to the American interpretation of a secret society.
However, it is likely that William Russell wished to lend credence to his
nascent organization by tying its history together with more celebrated
predecessors. Rather than a chapter, it could well be the spiritual continuity
of the older European models that are so celebrated by the group. Rather
than attempting to trace the group’s history back to the ancient orders in
Europe – which is slightly disingenuous – we can instead recognize the
emergence of the Order of the Skull and Bones as the establishment of a
brand new superpower among American secret societies. In order to build
their foundations of credibility, Russell borrowed heavily from the
European influence, likely wished to suggest a common heritage with many
of these groups, and nowhere is this more evident than in the buildings
themselves.
 
The Tomb
 
Ask anyone about buildings belonging to the Order of Skull and Bones and
the most common response will be about the Tomb. A morbid name, it
certainly ties in with the ideas of death that surrounded so much of the
group’s branding and symbolism. However, the Tomb, while being the most
notorious home of the Order, was only built some two decades after the
founding of the organization. Construction of the first wing of the building
began in 1856, while additional sections were added later. In 1903, for
example, a second wing was added onto the structure, while a set of Neo-
Gothic towers were erected in the garden in the rear of the building in 1912.
The architectural decisions hearken back to Europe and the Old World,
using an Egypto-Doric blend that calls to mind Greek architecture. Suitable
for a society established on the basis of ancient philosophy and ethics, the
columns at the rear are both a throwback to this European heritage and help
form an enclosed space around the rear of the building. To look at it, the
Tomb is both intimidating and almost unremarkable. There is very little of
note, which is in itself noteworthy. Designed to be both inconspicuous and

imposing at the same time, it offers no answers about what happens inside
and provide little other than clues as to its intended purpose. Many of the
architects involved with the developing building have either been
Bonesmen themselves or have been related to members. Accordingly, every
addition is a carefully considered extension of the group’s ideology.
 
When stepping inside, the link to Europe’s secret societies is apparent. Not
much has changed in the years since the Tomb was first constructed and
decorated, and many of the accounts we have of its interior remain
consistent to this day. A number of German artifacts – coats of arms,
artworks – can be found hanging from the walls, while there is a repeated
use of German-language mottos written across the walls. One picture, as
described by a witness, features a number of imagery-heavy additions. The
composition is of a burial vault left deliberately open. Around the vault are
four human skulls, arranged on the stone slab to surround a jester’s hat.
There is also a book left open, a number of mathematical instruments, a
beggar’s cup, and an abandoned crown. Written in German is a riddle. The
riddle asks the audience which man was the wise one and which one the
fool, asking them to choose between the beggar and the king. Finally,
inscribed beneath – again in German – is a motto proclaiming that both the
rich and the poor are equal in death. The picture is a fine example of the
aesthetic form within the Tomb and the eye is drawn to a small card
positioned next to the picture, which says that the painting was a gift from
the Order’s “German chapter.”
 
Elsewhere on the walls are five photographs of typical scenes from the day-
to-day life of German students. The photographs are clearly quite old,
though the legend bears no indication as to whom they might be portraying
or which German society they depict. It’s not just pictures that represent the
adoption of German student culture throughout the halls of the Tomb. If you
happen to arrive on one of the busier nights in the social calendar, you
might well hear the refrains of the members as they sing a selection of the
Skull and Bones songs that have been conjured especially for the society.
Though most are unknown, it has been confirmed by at least one source that
the original tune for one of the hymns is “Deutschland Uber Alles,” a famed
German anthem written by the composer Haydn. Experts on the society’s

history have made a point to separate the pars of the organization from the
present. There was a time, they point out, when the society owed a great
debt to the existence of its European equivalents and strove to replicate
itself after their customs and aesthetics. Though many of the aesthetics still
remain, they are largely decorative now, and any channels of
communication that might have existed between Skull and Bones and
German societies is now restricted or at least kept a secret to the majority of
members. Instead, the influence and power of the modern members is
enough to elevate Skull and Bones to one of the most important
organizations worldwide. While Germany might have been a leading world
superpower in the 19th Century, there is no doubt that today the United
States occupies that position.
 
The Traditions
 
This changing adherence to traditions might strike some as odd. For many,
the expected behavior of a secret society is that it would demand absolute
knowledge of the society’s past by its members and a reverence for what
has come before. But the Order of Skull and Bones is different. For an
excellent example of why this is the case, we need only turn to a pamphlet
produced in 1933 and given to new members. Produced on the centenary of
the group’s founding and designed to provide a “continuation of the history
of our order,” the pamphlet declares quite emphatically that there is “no
History of the Bones.” Phrased as a confession on behalf of the reader,
those who are exposed to the pamphlet are compelled to agree that there is
nothing else but the Order itself. Rather than having a set of traditions, it
states that the “heavy thinkers of the barbarian 20th century” might be
perplexed by such problems, but true Bonesmen know that there is nothing
of worth other than the Order, and as such, the history of the European ties
and the founding of Skull and Bones is simply an afterthought. What is
important is the present and how it can affect the current members.
 
At first, however, the Tomb was not available to the members of the Order
of the Skull and Bones. During the early days, there was still a sense of
danger and secrecy that demanded the group hide themselves from the Yale

authorities. As such, they started with an unassuming name. Titled the
Eulogian Club, the group could seem to pass for any other generic society
or even church organization should the authorities even investigate further.
Still keeping itself from the public eye, the bland name acted as a shield
against prying eyes and offered members the chance to pass off their
whereabouts and actions without implicating other Bonesmen. At first,
many of the recruits were picked from members of a more traditional
society, those who Russell and his friends felt fit the template. Together,
they began to gather in meetings, and the Order of the Skull and Bones
began to take on a more familiar aesthetic. It was a year before the sign of
the Skull and Bones began to appear around campus. The group would
often meet in a chapel, far away from the Freemason hall that might raise
suspicion.
 
The first record of any sort of recognition from the faculty towards the new
society came in 1833. As far as we can tell, the Yale authorities were alerted
to a meeting that had gotten particularly out of hand. They called an
emergency meeting on Christmas Day to look into the group. After a short
discussion, it was decided that nine members of the new society would
receive letters warning them to cease their actions and another letter would
be sent to their parents. Among those who received the letters were the
future treasurer of Yale, a man who would become a congressman, and a
person destined to sit on the Supreme Court of Louisiana. After the letters
were sent out, the group pulled back further from public view and began to
guard their actions with greater efficiency.
 
Another important piece of Skull and Bones branding would arrive shortly
after. Along with the name – as well as the cover name, the Eulogian Club,
supposedly in reference to the invented god of eloquence – there was a
marked increase in the use of a specific number. Early on in the society’s
life, the number “322” begins to appear more and more frequently. There
have been many theories as to why this exact number was chosen. Some
have suggested that it might tie into numerology or the ancient Jewish
mysticism, Kabbalah. Other people have pointed out that the renowned
Greek philosopher Demosthenes died in the year 322 BC. There have been
suggestions in the laws and histories of the Skull and Bones that the year

322 BC is given as the day on which Eulogia (their invented goddess)
ascended up unto heaven, set to return in the year 1832 with the founding of
the society. This is certainly the cover story given for the use of the number
322, which is used by every member when signing official, relevant
documents. When communicating with another Bonesman, for example, it
is common to see the phrase “yours in 322” appear alongside the signatures.
However, the story is only given certain amounts of credence among some
scholars, who suspect that it is simply a convenient explanation for
something more complex and potentially controversial. Until we are able to
uncover more specific information, we can only report the theories. With
the explanation likely being one of the most closely guarded secrets,
however, this particular piece of Bones lore and branding will remain a
mystery for the foreseeable future.
 
While we might not know the reason for the repeated use of 322 among the
Bonesmen, our investigations note that it is not something that is forgotten
upon leaving Yale. One of the most commonly cited examples is the
donation that was made to the society anonymously when George W. Bush
became a member in 1967, with a check issued to the tune of $322,000.
Another example is the office extension number of a man named David
Thorne. Thorne is not only the former brother-in-law of John Kerry (a
Bonesman), but was his campaign manager and friend, himself a member of
the Order during the 1960s. Thorne, when selecting the extension number
for his office phone, personally requested number 322.
 
A Legitimate Branch
 
Things changed slightly in 1856, when the Russell Trust Association
became an actual extension of the society. Following this move, the Order
could stop their scattered meetings across campus. Nearly two decades after
the original founding of the group, there were now enough alumni to gather
together the funds for a permanent home. Inside, the Bonesmen could
decorate and detail in their idiosyncratic manner. Rather than having to
move constantly around campus, hanging up Skull and Bones signs and
leaving their 322 mark wherever they met, the Russell Trust Association

meant that they could meet up and conduct their business away from prying
eyes. Following the persecution of secret societies during the early days, the
furor had died down and once again there was a place on the Yale campus
for a secret society who wanted to gather together the very best the
university had to offer but away from the constant gaze attached to many,
more mainstream groups.
 
At the time of construction, the Tomb cost the Order between $7,000 and
$8,000. This was not an inconsequential sum for the time and speaks of the
amount of investment and resources that were at the disposal of those who
had an active interest in the group. According to the documents we have
been able to recover, $5,300 was designated for the wall, foundations, and
the structure of the building, while the remainder was spent on furnishing
the property. The brown sandstone walls give nothing away to the casual
observer, creating a depth of color that seems to draw in anything of interest
without revealing anything about the contents of the building. Similarly, the
dark glass used means that the windows allow in only a small amount of
light and prevent those on the outside from catching a glimpse of what
might happen on the inside. Of course, with the property designed to host
functions and celebrations, there must be a kitchen and servants’ quarters.
These are contained in the depths of the building and are found near the
heavy iron emergency exit. All around the building, as is typical for New
Haven, there are thin, spindly trees. During the long winter months, these
bare trunks look like the bones which lend the society its morbid name.
 
In all, the Tomb is three stories high, with an attic space located at the top of
the building. While the construction work itself has interested many who
have attempted to read secrets into the design decisions that have been
made through the ages, often the best way in which to get an insight into the
ethos of the society is to consider the number of possessions that line the
walls. As we will discover later in the book, the way in which the Order
chose to decorate the property (and in particular, the items they acquired)
holds great sway in how they present themselves. There are examples of
ancient taxidermy, flickering candles, suited knights in ancient armor, flags
from boats and ships, traditional blankets from around the world hidden
inside old trunks, tributes to Buddha who rides atop an elephant, and – with

another link to 322 BC – statues of Demosthenes. These items have been
accumulated throughout the society’s long history, each one speaking to one
aspect of the group’s mysterious ideology. The overall effect, however, is
eerily intimidating. The sheer volume of paraphernalia can overwhelm,
while the low lighting and morbid quality of many pieces can put many
people on edge.
 
The large majority of these items are gifts from former members. As well as
these curiosities, a common donation from ex-members are pieces of art.
Over the time in which the Order has been active, they have received a
number of paintings from their alumni, all fitting a similar theme. Those
most befitting of the Skull and Bones moniker are pieces such as the one
donated by Russell Cheney, an oil painting of dancing skeletons gathered in
a garden. The majority of the modern decoration was handled by John
Walter Cross, an architect who was part of the Order during the turn of the
19th Century. The skeletal figures are common and skulls litter many nooks
and crannies. Elsewhere in the house, donations such as the complete works
of Demosthenes and a first edition of the experimental novel The Life and
Opinons of Tristram Shandy demonstrate the importance of considered
literature and philosophy. It might seem, when entering the Tomb, that there
one is entering a Victorian menagerie. But in truth, each item is considered
and chosen for the effect it imparts on the unassuming observer.
 
American University Life
 
But, as we have mentioned, there is always an indication within the Skull
and Bones that it is an American society. Nothing says this better than the
tribute to America’s game, baseball. A fitting tribute to the Order’s loyalty
to their academic institute can be found stored in a glass case in a distant
corner of the building. Behind this glass are a number of gilded baseballs,
each taken from games involving the Yale team. Written nearby are the
dates and names of the games in which they were used, remembering the
university’s history, commemorating the country’s most popular sport, and
demonstrating the wealth and importance of the society in one fell swoop.
 

There have been recent reports from certain modern members that the
interior of the Tomb is not quite as grand as it might once have been.
Though the Order is still an important and wealthy society on campus, the
sheer amount of donated items and gifts they have received has meant that
the inside has become crowded, and certain items have been difficult to
maintain. Still used as much as it ever was, the Tomb suffers from being a
strange combination of museum, political statement, and functioning
society hall all at once.
 
As you might expect from a society named Skull and Bones, there is a
consistent emphasis on death. War and its tumultuous effects are a constant
theme, with many of the Bonesmen being involved in conflicts at home and
abroad. Everything from Civil War rifles to the boots from World War II
serve to remind the members of the constancy of death, as well as German
helmets and machine guns that are found along various passageways. A
little hint at the morbid humor can be found in one Latin inscription,
“tempus fugit,” which translates as “time flies.” Added to this, there are
skeletons, skulls, and bones of both humans and animals. The crockery, the
cutlery, and the painted panels on the wall are all emblazoned with the
group’s familiar skull imagery, while cups and mugs are fashioned in the
shape of skulls. Throughout the entire building, death is not only presented
as a threatening image, but it is also celebrated and cherished. This is
exemplified by the tablet laid down in the main foyer that bears a dedication
to “the departed Bones,” warning the living that they should remember that
“you must die.”
 
When discussing why the Order of the Skull and Bones is seemingly
obsessed with death, a former member of the society suggested that it was a
deliberate decision to remind the current members of their place within the
world. The purpose of the décor is to offer up a self-aggrandizing message
to those who are walking the halls. Despite the large amount of power and
influence that many Bonesmen already (and/or will eventually) wield, they
should remember that are at the mercy of mortality as much as the next
man. The skull of a king, members are constantly reminded, looks just like
that of a pauper. While this message might be popular among the Bonesmen
and something the society holds aloft, it certainly is increasing the attention

that the group receives from elsewhere. Indeed, the imagery of the Order of
the Skull and Bones society is certainly eye-catching and leads many people
to believe that there’s an ulterior, sinister motive to all of their actions.
 
The Inner Temple
 
At the center of the Tomb, however, there is one room that is a little bit
different. Named the Inner Temple, or simply Room 322, it is the most
private part of the property and the place where the most secret of rituals
take place. Getting in is difficult. The door is huge, a locked and bolted iron
slab that has held firm against a number of break-ins that have taken place
over the years. The room inside is a rough square, with each side measuring
close to fourteen feet. Wainscoting rises up the first four feet of the walls
above which are hung the most cherished oil paintings in the building.
Other than the door, the only other interruption is the black marble
fireplace. As you step in, you immediately cross over a mosaic that depicts,
once again, the number 322. Look up and you’ll see an engraving on the far
wall, with the number again emblazoned, this time beneath the name
Demosthenes. Skull and Bones imagery is everywhere in the minutest of
details. The roof is something unexpected, however, opening up to a sky
blue dome with a small skylight placed right in the center. The light shines
down onto a table that is permanently set up in the room, which holds the
same items every single day: a skull balanced carefully on a cushion, and an
hourglass filled with sand that will measure out exactly five minutes.
 
This is the room where a number of strange rituals and ceremonies are
performed. These will be covered later in the book, though it can be
important to note that there is a small tocsin (the type of bell one might
normally find in a church) that is rung during these occasions. There are
rumors that this is the same bell that belonged to Yale University during its
early years, which was sounded to signify events on campus. There is also a
large grandfather clock of unknown origin, made identifiable by the skull
and crossbones written across its face. Situated beneath an ancient Yale
flag, the clock has been featured in photos we have of members posing
inside the society walls. Scattered across the room are further items of

significance to the organization, whether they are skulls or a pair of
spectacles that are rumored to belong to a former president of the university.
 
The feature of the Inner Temple that most catches the eye, however, is the
looming specter of a large case, within which is placed a human skeleton.
Known among the Bonesmen as “the Madame,” due to the fact that many
believed the bones to belong to Madame de Pompadour (a mistress of the
French King Louis XV.) Sections of the case to the sides of the skeleton
hold some of the Order’s most valuable and treasured possessions, while a
child-sized coffin is placed at the feet of the Madame. The coffin’s former
occupant, suitably smaller, can be found hanged just above the mantelpiece.
Beneath the child skeleton is a small gilded frame that features a small gold
door. Reaching behind this will reveal a small switch, that when pressed,
opens a secret compartment, in which is hidden a wooden engraving of the
goddess Eulogia.
 
In order to gain access to the Inner Temple, one will need to procure the
skeleton key. This is hidden away in a separate room named the Nest. Aside
from the Nest and the Inner Temple, the other most secure place in the
building is found in the northwest part of the Tomb. There is a single
wooden step that leads up to a walk-in vault, decorated in black. To get in,
one must know the combination lock that is changed on a regular basis. The
contents are not public knowledge, but it has been theorized that this is the
place where the society keeps their most important pieces. This could be
information about the members, details of their finances, information they
have regarding other societies on campus or around the world, data
gathered about the faculty and the rest of Yale, and anything else they deem
too valuable to risk exposing to those who gain entry to the main building.
As well as this, the room next to the vault is a striking contrast. Just as the
reminders of the mortality of both rich and poor are spread through the
building, the most valuable items are kept next to what seems to be a junk
room. Whereas the vault contains the most important items, right next door
is the storage room for anything not deemed worthy of being put out in the
house, including rumors of broken skulls and even a fake head of a gorilla.
Though the contrast might seem striking, there are one or two people who
claim that this apparent junk room is simply another disguise, and that some

of the most valuable items are hidden among the junk, secreted away in
plain view.
 
Other Locations
 
But the Tomb is not the only place that Skull and Bones has used to house
its affairs. There may be many properties that come under the banner of the
Russell Trust Association or various shell companies, but the only other
place we can be sure that it has used in the past is much more secluded than
their regular meeting places. Found in the middle of the St. Lawrence River,
Deer Island is a retreat owned and operated by the Order of the Skull and
Bones. Covering close to forty acres, it has been closely detailed by many
people who have somehow gained access to the island. Intended to offer
somewhere quiet where Bonesmen can gather together and rekindle their
friendships, it has seen a great deal of development over the years, though
less attention has been paid to it recently.
 
Around a century ago, Deer Island featured many of the luxurious trappings
of the rich and powerful. There were supposedly a number of tennis courts
and even a softball field. The surrounding plant life includes gooseberry
bushes and rhubarb, though those in search of a real meal are catered to by
the servants and chefs who arrive by the catboats situated all over the river.
It was common for elegant and ostentatious dinner parties and gatherings to
be held on the island, which is far from the public view and the prying eyes
of the university authorities. It is tradition that each and every new recruit
into the Order must visit the island at one point or another, though it is
commonly accepted that the location has fallen into a state of disrepair as
the society has lost interest in using it as a retreat. Whether this means that
they now go elsewhere or whether there is genuinely no need for such a
location, it is still owned by the Russell Trust Association and will continue
to be regarded as one of the Bonesmen’s most important sites. There have
even been reports of fires on the island, which seems to imply burned out
houses and abandoned buildings, having been described as being “basically
ruins” these days.
 

It seems as though Deer Island was more geared towards the legacy aspects
of the Skull and Bones experience. While the Tomb was the designated
gathering point for those who were still attending Yale, it would not suffice
for welcoming home those who had graduated and wished to reminisce over
their university days. Due to the high profile of many of their alumni, the
secrecy offered by Deer Island in the 19th and early 20th Centuries meant
that the rich and powerful could arrive there to meet without having their
privacy compromised. But in this age of telephoto lenses and drone aircraft,
Deer Island does not offer the same promise of isolation that it once did.
Couple that with the fact that it is now one of the best-known parts of the
Skull and Bones mythos, it should be no surprise to see that the island has
fallen out of favor as a meeting place.
 
Instead, the best place for Bonesmen who require a bit of privacy might
well be back on the campus of Yale University. While it might seem
counterintuitive to think that the most hidden of places is the one so closely
associated with the Order, there is more to their property than meets the eye.
It is commonly accepted that the Tomb has at least one secret tunnel.
Though there may be more, the only one which has been confirmed offers
Bonesmen a direct route from the Tomb to a tiny hidden garden. The tunnel
itself it lit by candle light and painted in a blood-red hue. A winding spiral
staircase leads travelers through the gloom and towards the gothic towers.
From here, the Bonesmen can survey the entire campus (jokingly referred
to as “the realm,” tellingly) and can hide from those who might be keeping
the front entrance under close guard. Between the two towers is an enclosed
courtyard that resembles something from a medieval monastery. Featuring a
mosaic, a patio, a set of sculptures, and a bench, it was constructed in 1872
by Theodore Woolsey and intended to offer solitude and quiet to society
members. Capable of fitting around fifteen people, it is perfect for those
most private of gatherings that must be kept under wraps at all costs. With
hidden spaces such as these, and the ongoing penchant for morbid branding,
it should not be a surprise to learn that so many people tie the Order of the
Skull and Bones to nefarious purposes.
 
Rites, Rituals, and Initiation

 
Think about any campus-based society or fraternity, and one of the most
common questions always involves the initiation ceremony. Whether it’s a
simple oath, a harsh hazing, or something decidedly more sinister, the ways
in which people are inducted into university societies holds a huge amount
of interest to those who have not passed through the process. For people
who are on the outside looking in, the induction into any kind of society
seems like it would involve a bizarre and complicated ceremony that makes
little sense. When we combine this with the similar practices in the
Freemasons and other secret societies, it is expected that the Order of the
Skull and Bones must possess some ritualistic means of initiating their
members into the group. As such, the rites, rituals, and initiation ceremony
of the Order is one of the most hotly contested and fascinating parts of
studying the group.
 
Rituals and Rumors
 
One of the main reasons why people obsess over the various initiation
processes that are used in campus societies is the way in which the media
has portrayed them. Likely based on some truth, mixed with interpretation
and exaggeration, everyone expects these ceremonies to be humiliating,
strange, and tinged with something of the occult. Often, it is thought, the
ritual will be so embarrassing or demeaning as to bond the inductee to the
group for the rest of time. Should these details get out, it is suggested, then
their reputation will be left in ruin. Put simply, those who are searching for
these kind of rites and initiations are often left wanting. But in an Order
where there is already a heavy obsession with the morbid, the close
proximity of many occult items, and a reputation for involving some of the
most powerful people to have come out of Yale in the last century and a
half, the means of entering into the Order of the Skull and Bones is
certainly strange.
 
Like every property owned by a society on the Yale campus, there is an
acknowledgement that only society members should be allowed inside.
While other organizations might be lax with these rules and may allow for

guests and invited parties, the Skull and Bones society keep their priorities
strict. Walking in to the Tomb, one of the first things that one might see is
an old sign from a dusty backwater part of Middle America. While the sign
is likely stolen, the words echo true with the sentiment expressed by every
single Bonesman around. “This is a private club,” the sign states in capital
letters, “be prepared to show membership card.” The sign, however, is
something of a side joke. To gain entrance to the Temple, one must need
much more than just a card.
 
Rosenbaum
 
Interest in the Order of the Skull and Bones is not new. In 2001, for
example, the investigative journalist Ron Rosenbaum began to grow more
and more interested in the rumours of the activities that were happening
within the walls of the Tomb and the influence which Skull and Bones was
beginning to have on the world of American politics. In all, Rosenbaum has
spent close to twenty-five years investigating secret societies and was able
to uncover what he believed to be the very first account of what one of the
Order’s initiation ceremonies looks like. Acquiring an audiotape of the
ceremony supposed to have taken place in 2000, he came across the
recording after being approached by a student. Building on this, Rosenbaum
professed to have infiltrated the group and used night vision recording
equipment to glance into the ground of the Tomb in 2001. Able to record
both audio and video, they were supposedly able to look into the courtyard
that the Bonesmen believed to be their secluded sanctuary. According to the
journalist, the recording that was made depicts a man representing the
former Bonesman and then-recently elected President George W. Bush. He
was locked in a heated debate with an unnamed person, in which he
threatened to “ream” the other party just as he had “reamed Al Gore” (who
had been Bush’s opponent in the Presidential race).
 
According to Rosenbaum, this was all part of the ceremony. Rather than
part of a high stakes political battle, these arguments came down to
screamed threats thrown by the Bonesmen towards those who were hoping
to join the Order. Along with the aforementioned comments, there were

references to Abner Louima, a Haitian immigrant who had recently made
the news after being tortured by the NYPD. There was shouting and
screaming, with demands such as “lick my bum-hole, neophyte” being
flung towards the potential recruits. The ceremony closed when one of the
authoritative figures broke out a butcher’s knife. Wearing nothing but
animal furs, he wielded the blade in front of the recruits, standing over a
nude woman who seemed to be covered in blood. The so-called “neophyte”
was then forced to approach a skull placed just a few feet from the body and
lean down to kiss it on the polished bone. As his lips met the skull, the man
with the knife bent down and carefully rubbed the blade along the
neophyte’s neck, pretending to slit his throat. With that, the recording ends
and the figures move back into the building.
 
Rosenbaum has since used this footage to put forward a number of theories
about what took place that night. According to the journalist, this ceremony
was evidence of the extent to which the group has exerted control over
media moguls, diplomats, spies, and bankers. Rituals such as this can be
used, he says, to seal their involvement in a lifelong fraternity and
brotherhood, supplying the group with direct access to huge amounts of
power. But while these accusations have often been levelled at Skull and
Bones (simply due to the demographics of their alumni), Rosenbaum’s
accusations went further. He suggested that the CIA might be involved, as
well as Time Inc., a Secretary of State, and a group of National Security
Advisors under the Order’s control. He goes on to say that events such as
the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the invasion of the Bay of Pigs,
and the Vietnam war were all inventions of the families who had passed
through the annals of the Order of the Skull and Bones, such as the Tafts,
the Bundys, and the Lovetts. According to him, they all took part in the
ritual his film depicted and were thus bonded to the society for life.
 
The release of the footage cause quite a shock. It even got mentioned in
mainstream media, such as ABC News, who ran images and clips from the
footage and interviewed Rosenbaum about what he had seen and what he
belied it meant. It was described as a “great day” in the history of American
investigative journalism by some sneering commentators, who didn’t quite
believe that Rosenbaum deserved the attention that he so clearly adored.

But it was a worldwide sensation. As far away as Sweden, people were
discussing the Skull and Bones initiation ceremony. It further cemented the
idea of the Order as an international force to be reckoned with and made
Rosenbaum’s name, however briefly, famous around the world. It speaks of
just how suspicious people are of the Order and their reputation that people
were so willing to belief the story.
 
An Alternate Story
 
However, there have been aspersions cast over the veracity of Rosenbaum’s
footage. One graduate of Yale (and a member of other societies) described
the ritual as being “too vulgar” for the Order of the Skull and Bones. Rather
than a display of obvious power and imagery, this person was under the
impression that the ceremony for initiating the new members of the
organization was rather a process of educating them on the history of the
Order and its importance within the world. It is designed, according to this
source, to impress and to leave initiates awestruck rather than to terrify and
intimidate them. The ceremony as depicted by Rosenbaum seemed too
much like a schlocky, horror, B movie to be real. One Bonesman who
attended Yale during the 1970s says that the process is more concerned with
passing on the Order’s history than with cheap scares. As such, it has been
suggested that Rosenbaum witnessed something else. Perhaps a skit or
prank organized by the group in the knowledge that he was watching. It
might have been a joke which blew out of proportion or a deliberate sleight
of hand designed to distract from the Order’s real rituals. By giving the
public a theatrical, almost comedic image, the Order was able to present
themselves as silly and non-threatening. While Rosenbaum might have
gained the Order more attention, it was publicity that was manageable and
dismissible. Indeed, one Bonesman, when asked about the subject, admitted
that they purposefully wanted to joke around with the journalist and were
well aware of his recording.
 
Recruitment
 

Getting a grip on the society’s most secret rituals, it seems, is very difficult.
There is a determination to keep the most intimate of the group’s secrets
secret, and they are willing to misdirect, distract, and otherwise obstruct in
order to maintain this veil of mystery. Accordingly, you would imagine that
this makes recruitment into the Order a very tricky business. One wrong
move and the Bonesmen might find themselves exposed by someone who is
willing to trade all of their secrets for some quick cash or notoriety. So how
are candidates selected?
 
The process of recruitment for the Order is known, as we have already
mentioned, as “tapping.” During the early years of the society, this was a
very private affair. On the designated evening, the fifteen extant Bonesmen
would meet together in the darkest of the night and move silently around
campus. When arriving at the residence of their intended recruit, they would
enter baring a real skull and bones. Presenting the remains to the target,
they would ask the recruit whether they accepted the society’s invitation.
Regardless of the response, the group would then file out in total silence.
Only later would the recruit know their fate.
 
But this process soon became notorious on the Yale campus. After a short
while, the other students realized what would be happening and became
understandably fascinated by the tapping of the new members. Rather than
a group of fifteen cloaked figures, there was soon a procession of interested
parties who followed the Bonesmen around campus. This meant that they
were forced to abandon their proclivity for meeting at midnight, and in
order to maintain some semblance of mystery, began to appear to new
recruits at more random hours. The group was whittled down until it was
just one or two senior Bonesmen (people who understood the gravitas and
the importance of the invitation), who arrived at the younger man’s dorm
and presented their offer. On the rare occasions when the student declined
the offer of the Order, increasingly senior members of the society would be
sent to repeat the invitation in a more persuading manner.
 
Tapping as a Competition
 

At the end of the 19th Century, however, the sheer number of societies on
the Yale campus and their similar recruitment policies meant that the
tapping of new recruits became a big event. For most societies, there was an
“A-list” of desirable recruits and then a backup list should they be rejected.
For Skull and Bones, however, the possibility that they might be rejected
was nonsensical. For a long time, there was resistance to the idea that they
might be in any way rejected by potential recruits, who would surely be
mad not to join. However, the increased competition for the new waves of
Yale scholars meant that by 1928, the society had received eight rejections
from those that tapped. Unlike the other societies, they refused to do any
preliminary investigations into who might accept and who might decline
their offer. From then on, they were more organized and more determined to
land their first choices when it came to filling out the Tomb with the best
and the brightest.
 
Accordingly, there is a history within the society of attempting to hoodwink
the other groups in order to land the most desirable targets. In 1871, another
group named Scroll and Key attempted to organize the societies on campus
to move the initiation ceremonies forward in the calendar in order to better
teach the incoming students coming into the club before the older members
graduated. Skull and Bones declined to answer the letter, and it was
assumed that the tapping would occur at the regular time. Instead, Skull and
Bones launched their recruitment a full three weeks before the other
societies. The move was brash enough to make the local news, while the
Yale Literary Magazine (whose editor was a Bonesman) took a gloating
approach to the reportage.
 
A similar event occurred in 1917. Provoked by the onset of the World War I
and the American involvement in the conflict, the three most important
societies on campus decided to begin their recruitment early. A pair of
Bonesmen, Robert Lovett and F. Trubee Davison, had been instrumental in
setting up a Naval Aviation Unit made of Yale students in preparation for
the war. Davison’s father was the financier for the project. Such was the
wealth poured into the unit that they earned the nickname “the millionaires’
unit.” As the move to war escalated and other societies suggested that
recruitment begin early, Skull and Bones found that they had been

distracted and demanded that the recruitment be delayed in order to allow
them to catch up. The date they demanded was the 19th of April, almost two
full weeks after America had decided to enter into the war. During this time,
the Naval Aviation Unit had partnered fully with the military and had been
flown out to West Palm Beach to begin full preparations. With them went a
huge number of the most desirable candidates for the recruitment that yea.
They stayed together in an old hotel. This was where the recruitment
ceremony took place, with the other groups having to enter into the
organization of the Skull and Bones in order to try and get their men. The
choices were made at the base, information which was then relayed through
telephone and telegram conversations back to campus. Arriving at the base,
former Bonesmen who were in the area were able to initiate the new
members before the other societies realized what was happening. Thanks to
their process of taking the group away from the campus and being prepared
for the initiation right away, they had secured their desired candidates.
 
A Public Affair
 
Up until the end of the 20th Century, the names and details of those who had
been selected by the Yale societies would be printed in the Yale Daily News
and the New York Times. With column space limited, the names printed
were only those selected by the most important societies, while others could
have their names printed in exchange for a small fee. In 1919, following
that year’s tapping, the Yale Daily News changed the process. In the place
where one might expect to see the list of all the top societies, there was
instead only the details for the very first and the very last man to have been
tapped by Skull and Bones, written in large print. This kind of exclusivity
was unprecedented. It should be no surprise to see that the managing editor
of the publication was a member of the Order, Henry Luce.  Luce would
play a key role in founding Time Inc. by the next issue and issued an
apology for the “oversight.” But his actions confirmed to many what was
already known to most on campus. While there were a number of secret
societies on the Yale campus, there was only really one with any real
influence and only one that really mattered: the Order of the Skull and
Bones.

 
One leaked document from the 1960s possibly best represents the approach
of the Order to recruiting new members. The guide on how to approach
potential new members is very strict. It impresses upon the Bonesmen that
they should under no circumstances appear to be desperate to recruit a
certain member. They must instead always remain “cool and concise,” with
the privacy of the Order prioritized above all else. Trying too hard to
convince a potential member seems out of sorts and, in so powerful a
society, not an impression they need to make. Instead, an offer is extended,
and should it be met with any reticence, the recruit should be informed
about the nature of the society and the advantages it will bring. The Order
of the Skull and Bones is “based on such intangible factors that we cannot
meaningfully convey to you either its nature or its quality.” Join the Order,
it suggests, and you will be welcomed into an inner circle and provided
with riches and knowledge beyond your wildest dreams. Since the middle
of the 20th Century, the tapping of Yale students had again become a private
matter.
 
Recruiting Traditions
 
Recruitment for the Order follows a precedent. Each year, there is a
willingness to offer membership to the same “types” of student, those who
fit into a mold of what has come before. This process has led to other
societies accusing the Order of recruiting “tokens,” students taken for their
profile rather than their merit. But the history of who might be recruited is
limited the further back we look into Yale’s history. For example, there was
a long period of time when the large majority of students fit into one
particular demographic: white, protestant Americans from a privileged
background. It was many years before Catholic or Jewish students made up
a sizable portion of the student body, longer still before non-white or female
students were allowed to attend the university. Ideally, each current member
looks through the incoming possibilities and selects the person that will
replace them. These choices are then presented before the Order, who can
approve or veto their inclusion. One veto (otherwise known as a blackball)

and the candidate might be asked to appear before the society and present
their case. Two vetoes and the candidate is automatically rejected.
 
Though many of the early years of Skull and Bones were filled with the
same type of person, later years have seen the remit expand. A leaked
document from 1968 outlines the “ideal” group who might be recruited in
any one year. Based almost entirely on stereotypes, the literature suggests
the following be recruited:
 
1. The captain of the football team
2. The chairman of the Yale Daily News
3. Someone who is a “conspicuous radical”
4. A Whiffenpoof (an a cappella singer)
5. The captain of the swim team
6. A “notorious drunk” who has an average of 94
7. A filmmaker
8. Someone known for their political columns
9. The leader of a religious group
10. The chairman of the Lit
11. A foreign person
12. A “ladies man” who possesses two motorcycles
13. A former service man
14. A “negro” providing there are “enough to go around”
15. Someone whom no one in the group had heard of, “ever”
 
There is no doubt that the precedents have changed and altered over the
years, moving in flux with the changing patterns of the Yale student body
and the political and social movements of the day. There is, however, a
seeming desire to recruit both the best members (those with a high profile
around campus) and a need to keep the group balanced. There are
accommodations made for those who have had family in the organization
before and a willingness to alter the patterns in years when suitable
candidates might not present themselves. As we have not been able to look
upon a similar list from recent years, we do not yet known how the
recruitment criteria have changed in the last decades. However, this list of
fifteen stereotypes informs us of the process of tapping and how it might

follow a predetermined route, rather than the whims of the current
members. Here, we can see the precedents and the importance placed on
both history and secrecy.
 
The Initiation Ceremony
 
So, now that we know just how much interest there is in what happens
during the initiation of the Skull and Bones members and the extent to
which they recruit the ideal members, what do we really know about the
rituals and ceremonies that take place within the Tomb? The problem here
is that many of the most important processes remain hidden and secret. The
truth about the Skull and Bones is that the real power resides among those
who have already graduated from the university, rather than those who are
currently in attendance. The Order is a bond shared by Presidents, CEOs,
media bosses, and many others. Through the Russell Trust Association,
they own and operate the apparatus that is used to recruit the next
generation of influential people. Once in the crosshairs of the Order, they
are bonded together while at Yale. But in order to mark them out as
potential powerbrokers of the future, they must be inducted into the Order
in the correct manner. Of all the rituals that are said to happen behind closed
doors, the initiation ceremony is perhaps the one about which we have the
greatest amount of knowledge. Even then, it is difficult to separate
verifiable fact from supposition-based fiction. If we want to learn more
about the initiation ceremony, we must trust the former Bonesmen who
have revealed information to the world.
 
The trouble with this is that they typically refuse to give their real names.
While they might divulge their identity to the journalists and authors
writing pieces about the Order, these names are very rarely made public. In
biographies and confessional pieces by confirmed Bonesmen, many choose
to remain decidedly silent about what happens within the society. So we
must turn to the anonymous sources and try and piece together bits of
information and use separate accounts to corroborate one another. In this
regard, there is an element of trust that must be exercised. Like Rosenbaum
before us, there is the pratfall awaiting anyone curious about the Skull and

Bones. But there is at least a vague comprehension of the information that
we believe we can verify. If you are curious about the initiation ceremony
of the Order of the Skull and Bones, the process by which some of the
world’s most powerful people are inducted into a secret society, then read
on.
 
According to Lanny Davies, the initiation into the Skull and Bones was “the
most harrowing” of all such ceremonies. In a review of the lore as
established in the 1960s, Davies described how an initiate must face a
combination of current and former members. The neophyte is alone,
without friends or support. Davies’s account suggests that a physical
beating took place, after which the recruit was stripped naked and forced to
wrestle with Bonesmen. The next part of the ceremony is one of the biggest
rumors that concerns the Skull and Bones. According to these rumors – and
recounted by Davies – the initiate must then lay down inside an empty
coffin. Still naked, they are commanded to begin masturbating and must
speak aloud their sexual history for all of the Order to hear. This type of
behavior is typical for many secret societies and cults, who conduct such
rituals in order to bond the recruit to the Order for as long as possible.
Should they later decide to leave, this detailed sexual history added to the
rumors of “deviant” rituals is thought to be enough to destroy any
credibility that a person might have. Certainly, reports in Observer Life
magazine during the Presidency of George W. Bush posit the idea that he
might have taken place in such a practice. Examples of such behaviors can
be seen in the rumored activities of Scientology, a religion that encourages
new members to confess their sins and then uses this information to
influence the person’s future decisions. It is a means of giving up control
and freedom to the group in exchange for greater power or truth. But
whether it is something that takes place today is another matter. There
seems little doubt among scholars of the Order of the Skull and Bones that
teenage sexual braggadocio might have been common in the early days of
the Order, especially mixed with the hazing one might normally expect
from college societies. The adolescent nature of the recruits and current
members adds weight to this, though many have sought to dispel rumors
that the modern initiation is anything like what is described by Davies.
 

A More Modern Ceremony
 
Instead, the supposed modern version of the initiation ceremony is likened
more to a theatre performance. One member who now works as an engineer
described it as being like something from Harry Potter book. Described
variously by the same witness as “goofy” and “exciting,” or intentionally
scary and worrying, the effect seems to depend on the student in question.
Some take it more seriously than others, while a great deal of the
effectiveness of the ceremony likely comes down to which Bonesmen
perform the ritual and how much conviction they are able to implement in
their role. There is typically a consistency relating to things like costumes,
props, and the words that are used, though each generation of Bonesmen
put their own spin on the ceremony itself.
 
Before the ceremony takes place, the Order must ensure that they have the
right tools to do the job. This means that they will need to collect the
following:
 
1. Black ribbon
2. Black sealing wax
3. Black ink
4. Reams of red paper
5. Pins for the new members
6. The Black Book (in which the overseer records notes about the
ceremony)
7. A scrapbook for the new members
 
The person placed in charge of the ceremony takes on the traditional title of
Uncle Toby, the name given to every Bonesman who conducts the initiation
ceremony on any given year. Before the ritual itself takes place, the Uncle
Toby and his fellow members (plus any returning members) will rehearse
the ritual and plan for the coming ceremony. Before the ritual begins, the
members of the Order will venture out onto campus and travel to the
confirmed recruits’ residences. Typically on a Sunday evening, this visit
will involve the delivering of a red packet. The red packets are traditionally

prepared invitations containing details of when and where to meet, as well
as the Skull and Bones insignia. It will be sealed with the black wax and the
seal of the Order, sometimes burned using a candle. The initiation ceremony
will be arranged for a short time later. Before this time, four Bonesmen will
pay a visit to the new member and provide him with a formal invitation.
 
The delivery of the formal invitation is a ceremony within itself. Four
Bonesmen will arrive at the home of the recruit. One, a guard, will check to
see whether the nearest bathroom is empty. When it is, he will signal to the
speaker among the group. One of the two so-called “shakers” will knock
“soundly” on the recruit’s door. Once the person within is correctly
identified, he is grabbed by the shakers and dragged into the bathroom. The
guard will shut the door behind them and ensure that no one else is able to
enter. As the recruit is led into the room and forced to stand facing a corner,
the speaker will announce when and where he must travel to take part in the
initiation ceremony. He is told to wear no metal, Sulphur, or glass, and to
knock three times upon the door of the Tomb. The recruit must remember
these instructions but keep quiet. A white packet is then thrown at his feet,
thought to contain a formal invitation, while the Bonesmen exit.
Throughout, the recruit must stare into the wall in the corner.
 
Once the recruit is suitably informed, then the process of preparing the
Tomb for the ritual begins under the guidance of the anointed Uncle Toby.
We know that the ritual itself has changed since the early days of the Order,
when the new member was dragged before “the Devil” and then struck with
the flat of a sword in a twisted parallel of the tradition of knighthood. This
is where the name “Knights of the Order of the Skull and Bones” derives.
Before there was an official residence for the society, the ritual took place in
the Sheffield Scientific School, the office of Benjamin Silliman (one of the
first Order members). The modern version of the initiation differs, however,
in that it has taken a more theatrical approach.
 
The Initiation Night
 

On the night when the ceremony is set to take place, as many Bonesmen as
possible are gathered together. This is not only those who are currently in
the Order, but also alumni who travel back to campus. Traditionally, there
are at least eleven graduated members who are contacted up to a month
before the evening in question. Many of the more famous members are
reached out to, with the idea being to impress the new recruits and show a
raw demonstration of the influence and power the groups wields. During
the evening, the new recruits will be lead through every room in the Tomb,
but the ritual itself will always take place in the Inner Temple. By the time
the actual ceremony takes place, those involved will have rehearsed their
actions to the point where they can be conducted without error. All furniture
is removed from the Inner Temple, clearing space enough for all of the
members apart from a number of chairs.
 
When a new recruit approaches the door and attempts to knock as they have
been told, they will discover that the door opens before them. As soon as
they step inside, a Bonesman will appear out of the darkness and thrust a
hood over the unsuspecting head. The first port of call is the Firefly Room,
one of the many living quarters within the building. Here, the hood is
removed, only for the recruit to find themselves in the pitch-black darkness.
The only things visible are the Bonesmen’s lit cigarettes that float around
the room, leading to the Firefly nickname. The neophyte is pushed into a
chair and receives instructions. Before they can really get a grip on what
else is in the room, the hood is thrown back over their head. This is when
the recruit is marched from room to room, during which time they are
subjected to torrents of abuse and insults from the hordes of Bonesmen who
have gathered in the Tomb. Throughout, strands of the Order’s history are
woven into the tour, and the recruit learns about the importance of certain
rooms. During this time, his hand is run along a piece of wood, which he is
told is a coffin. He is made to listen to the sounds of running water, which
gave birth to the idea that there might be a swimming pool in the depths of
the property. Instead, the sounds are effected by the Bonesmen to confuse
and disorientate the neophyte.
 
Inside the Inner Temple are two chairs and a table. The Bonesmen, wearing
masks, move into the room in their robes. The designated Uncle Toby has a

special set of robes, while the person who is set to play the role of the Little
Devil also has a distinctive outfit, resembling Satan himself. The Little
Devil hides in the room, waiting. A Bonesmen with the deepest voice is
selected to read and is made to dress in a Don Quixote style. One current
Bonesman dresses as the Pope, taking a seat to the left of the fireplace, and
perches his foot on skull carved from stone. Four of the Bonesmen are
designated as shakers, usually the largest among the Order, while one
person is dressed as Elihu Yale, one of the school’s most important
benefactors. The figure is made to sit in another chair, holding open a Greek
book fixed with an upside-down pin representing the Skull and Bones. The
others are there to provide a deafening noise, a disorientating sound made
of clattering metals and drums. Those who have specific costumes are
symbolically important, while the remainder of the group add to the
atmosphere. No one in the room is identifiable as all are masked.
 
Once the stage is suitably set, it is time to retrieve the oath of secrecy from
its resting place. Kept in a draw in the table that stays in the room, it is
removed and placed on the top of the table. Next to the oath is a skull
fashioned into a drinking vessel and named Yorrick after the play Hamlet.
This skull is filled with a dark red liquid chosen to represent blood (though
it is rarely the real thing.) This skull is then taken and placed at the foot of
the Madame, before Uncle Toby announces the name of the next neophyte
to join the order. As the name is announced, the masked men begin to make
as much noise as possible, until the atmosphere is deafening as the hooded
figure is led into the room. Soon, everyone is screaming the name of the
new recruit. Shoving the neophyte to the center of the Inner Temple, his
hood is ripped away just as the noise reaches a crescendo. The shakers
begin to drag the recruit towards the oath on the table, and soon the chants
change to “read, read, read!” From this point onwards, after reading the
oath, the neophyte is bound to secrecy.
 
The neophyte is then grabbed by the shakers and dragged before a portrait
of the goddess Eulogia. There is just enough time to look at the picture
before they are again grabbed and dragged back to the table. Again, the
chants sound up, demanding that they read the oath of secrecy. Once this is
done, they’re taken back to another picture, before returning to the table,

returning to a different picture, and so on. Each time the neophyte is placed
before a new picture, the Bonesmen chant the name of the subject. Finally,
the recruit is shoved down before Uncle Toby, and the room falls quiet. The
robed figure reads out his full name – Uncle Toby Philamagee Phimalarlico
Carnicks Carnickesi Carnickso McPherson O’Phanel – and the crowd then
demands that the neophyte repeat the name back. When he cannot, there is a
calamitous din, and the shakers drag the recruit away and throw him down
before a picture of Judas Iscariot. The crowd chants Judas’s name three
times before the recruit is dragged to the feet of the Madame. Here, he must
drink the ‘blood’ from the skull. As he does so, the Little Devil springs
from his hiding place and begins to whip the recruit. The shakers once more
take hold of the new member and march him to the feet of the Pope, while
the Little Devil continues to whip him. The recruit must kiss the Pope’s
slipper, which is perched atop the stone skull. Once this is done, the
neophyte moves from the Pope to Don Quixote, standing in front of the
fireplace with a sword clasped in his right hand. The crowd falls silent
again as the neophyte drops to his knees. Don Quixote reaches out with the
sword, taps the kneeling recruit on the left shoulder, and names him as a
Knight of Eulogia. Elsewhere in the room, the Tocsin is rung three times.
Around the Inner Temple, all the Bonesmen take up chants of “Bones!”
repeating the word over and over. As their shouts get louder, the neophyte is
grabbed and taken before Elihu Yale and told to read the book open on his
lap. When it becomes clear that the recruit – in the dark and astonished by
the ritual – cannot read, then the crowd chants to admonish him. The
shakers enter once more, pick the neophyte up, and walk him to the door of
the room. From here, they are thrown into the waiting crowd who hustle
and jab at the recruit. The initiation ritual, at last, is complete.
 
This is repeated fifteen times exactly. The only difference in the practice is
the role of the recruit who is dubbed as the new Little Devil. Of all the
recruits, the extant members will select one of them to take on the title. The
Order’s bylaws dictate that the new Little Devil’s feet must never touch the
ground of the Inner Temple. Accordingly, the recruit is turned upside down
by the shakers and must journey through the ritual while turned the wrong
way. This includes the drinking of the blood from the skull and the kissing
of the Pope’s foot, which must be done upside down. According to those

who have passed through the ritual, it can be equal parts exhilarating and
frightening. The sensory shock of the sound, the light, and the commands
can remove the weight of any expectations one might have about the Order.
Until one has travelled through the ceremony and been welcomed into the
society, it’s probably impossible to understand exactly how the ritual feels
and how it might seem to any budding new recruit.
 
Minor Rituals
 
Following this ritual, there are a number of smaller ceremonies relevant to a
number of the rooms within the Tomb. One of the more important events is
the time at which all of the recruits are sat down and the Patriarchs inform
them about the history and the importance of the Order. This takes place in
the dining room, where lessons on lore and rules are dished out. The
following party lasts all of the night, welcoming the newest members of the
Skull and Bones into the fold. At this point, each of the recruits is awarded
their golden Skull and Bones pin, is told how the locks to the building
function, is made to meet the staff of the building and the stewards, and is
allowed to share in the literature specific to the Order including the Bones
Bible. By this point, the guide to the rituals of the Order declares that the
recruits are now officially the “new keepers of the secrets of Skull and
Bones.”
 
There are a great many rumors about the ceremonies of the Order of the
Skull and Bones. There is no doubt that there are certain rituals that have
not yet become public knowledge. There is a willingness from many people
to believe almost all of the stories that are told about the initiation
ceremony. However, the initiation ritual is hardly the crux of the Order’s
power. Instead, it is the entrance point for the real power that comes much
later. As we will see later in the book, the members of the Order wield a
disproportionate amount of power. After recruits have been sealed into the
membership of the Order, they become bonded to the society for life. It
engenders them with the connections and social links that can make real
changes in the world. Even for those who are from a less privileged
background than the rest can expect to benefit from the advantages that the

membership of the Skull and Bones brings. Not every member of the Order
has gone on to achieve astonishing wealth, though a huge number of
America’s wealthiest families have had some contact with the Order at one
point or another. There is a great fascination with the rituals of the Skull and
Bones because ceremonies such as the initiation enter many people into a
shared group that has members in every strata of society. Though it might
seem strange and even silly at points, rituals such as these seemingly
demonstrate the depth of the bond that is shared by the men and women of
Skull and Bones. While traditional views of secret societies would involve
authentic demon worship and traces of the truly occult and strange, the
modern view of the Order is that these ceremonies are simply a starting
point. Rather, their real power lies elsewhere.
 
The Network of the Bonesmen
 
It is hard to impress upon people the importance of the Order of the Skull
and Bones without mentioning to them the people who have made up the
membership lists of one of the United States’ oldest secret societies. In this
chapter, we will work through a number of the better known members of
the Order and place them in a context which demonstrates their power,
influence and importance. But in addition to those who are listed below,
there should follow an assurance that there is always a huge number of
people whose names do not make the lists. These people have been
influential in their own special ways, often facilitating and helping those
who are in real power. They are often lawyers, doctors, researchers, and
CEOs. Those whose names might not be the most eye catching, but whose
work is equally felt by the rest of society.
 
The discussion below is not presented in any order, but it can help to think
about the legacy of the Order as a complex interweaving spider’s web of
power and contacts. Similarly, there will be an emphasis placed on the
relationship shared between the order and the specific individuals, rather
than a list of that respective individual’s accomplishments. For more
information on the people listed below, a wealth of information is available
on the Internet. Accordingly, rather than separate the members out into

separate sections, the chapter will attempt to illustrate their connections and
the ways in which the Order intersects on the lives of many people all at
once.
 
The Bush Legacy
 
Perhaps the greatest interest in the Order of the Skull and Bones can be
traced back to one family. While they were not involved in the creation of
the society, the Bush family have been one of the most powerful families in
America over the past half-century. Two generations have held the office of
the President of the United States, and other members of the family have
worked on many layers of the political world for decades now. As well as
this, two of the most prominent members of the family, George H. W. Bush
and George W. Bush (his son), are confirmed Bonesmen. Throughout their
careers, their political allies, their business partners, and their rivals have all
held an association with the Order. As such, the modern Bush family makes
an excellent lens through which the entirety of the modern network of
Bonesmen can be examined.
 
The first political campaign of George W. Bush took place in 1978. While
running for Congress, Bush garnered a great deal of publicity about his
father’s involvement in the CIA, the Trilateral Commission, and both
generations’ involvement in Skull and Bones. An incident is described in a
biography of the future president in which Mel Turner, a radio host, hosted
an afternoon debate about the topic. Turner was right to the point, voicing
concerns (supposedly shared by many other Texans) that the young George
was somehow a tool of a shadowy government cabal. Turner went as far as
to dub the politician a “tool of the eastern kingmakers.” Bush, tired of being
lambasted for his paternal and social connections, was adamant that there
was no one out there who held the power to change his mind on any matter.
After the interview was over, Bush refused to shake Turner’s hand and
labelled him an “asshole.”
 
But the accusations didn’t end there. Kent Hance, a Democrat, accused
Bush of riding along on his “daddy’s coattails,” following on from

accusations of elitism. Hance was decisively victorious in the election, but
it was the accusations of shadowy support that followed Bush around for
decades. So much so, in fact, that George W. Bush chose to address such
charges in his autobiography, labelling the accusations so random and
disparate that they were “virtually impossible to refute.” It was not the first
time that someone from the Bush family had exhibited annoyance at these
kind of rumors, as both his father and grandfather and faced similar issues.
In 1966, for example, his grandfather Senator Prescott Bush had been
forced to deal with the suggestion that the Senate might have been under the
control of what was called an “establishment” group. According to some
reports, George H. W. Bush saw his glittering Curriculum Vitae (and its
inclusion of Skull and Bones) as a hindrance, causing accusations and
conspiracies to follow him from job to job.
 
It should come as no surprise, then, to see that George W. Bush went to
such lengths to distance himself from the “establishment.” In fact, there is a
gap of twenty years between the times when George graduated Yale and
returned to the campus. He has discussed the “intellectual snobbery” that he
feels surrounds the place and has described Yale as epitomizing the kind of
“East Coast attitude” that he resents. When he returned again to the campus
in 2001, he took the opportunity to make jokes about the school, where he
was a not-particularly exceptional student. For some people, however, these
constant throwbacks to his alma mater are nothing but an attempt to
distance George W. Bush from the home of the Order of the Skull and
Bones.
 
Networking
 
It is undeniable that one of the chief benefits of joining the organization is
the networking opportunities that it presents. It brings together different
types of people, as well as those who are used to wielding power. At any
given time, with the induction of fifteen new members each year, there are
roughly 800 living Bonesmen. For so many of them to be occupying
positions of power demonstrates the advantage that this networking
opportunity provides. Since its inception every President who spent time at

Yale as an undergraduate was a member of the Order. In 2004, the
Presidential election pitted George W. Bush against John Kerry, another
Bonesman. Though Bush won, the influence of Skull and Bones on
American politics was never clearer.
 
But it’s not just the political sphere that’s felt such a big influence from
Skull and Bones. One of the most obvious ways in which the Order has
infiltrated a power structure is in the academic structure of Yale University.
It was only until very recently that the authorities on campus were not
dominated by former Bonesmen. With people in high ranking parts of the
Yale infrastructure, Skull and Bones could do a lot to offer protection for
their members. For example, two students faced expulsion in 1873 for
below-standard results in their exams. One of the two was a member of the
Order, and one was not. The Bonesman was allowed to continue his studies
and retook his exam six weeks later. The other student faced a term of
suspension and was restricted from retaking any exams until the following
term. According to one professor (and Skull and Bones alumni), the
reasoning was that this was a “special case.” Such an event led the Yale
magazine the Iconoclast to publish their views that Skull and Bones was the
“bane” of Yale University.
 
Similarly, in the 1920s, the disciplining of any students at the university
came under the purview of a student council. In 1928, three quarters of the
council (including its chairman) were members of Skull and Bones. When a
case came before them that suggested that one of their fellow society
members might have been caught cheating on his exams, they were the ones
who were able to determine the suitable punishment. They chose to do
nothing. This decision angered the other members of the class to the extent
that they formally complained to the council and demanded an answer. The
students were told that, in this case, the council simply preferred not to have
to make a decision. Just a year later, the student council was abandoned.
With so many important people in such high ranking places of the Yale
institution, Skull and Bones were able to protect their members from some
of the worst punishments offered up by the university. Already, before even
graduating, members were able to take advantage of the institutional
privilege exercised by the Order of the Skull and Bones.

 
Family Histories
 
We have already examined the ideal selection criteria that the Order will
examine when making its decisions on who to join. But just as with the
manner in which the Order is capable of influencing the wider world, there
have been accusations of nepotism in the recruitment of certain people.
Being a family member of a noted Yale student or former Bonesman is an
excellent way in which you can advance your cause for being selected.
This, perhaps, is the chief reason why George W. Bush was selected. A self-
confessed “C student,” he was hardly the stand-out academic candidate in
his class. However, both his father and grandfather had been prominent
Bonesmen, Yale graduates, and politicians. It was almost predetermined
that young George would be joining the society.
 
Prescott Bush, George W. Bush’s father, benefitted hugely from his
connections to the Order. At the age of thirty-one, after graduating Yale as a
Bonesman, he was invited to join W. A. Harriman & Company. Owned and
operated by two Bonesmen and the father of a Bonesman, the investment
bank was the largest private banking institution in the United States.
Prescott didn’t have a huge CV, having worked for another Bonesman –
Wallace Simmons – for a short while. But Prescott was one of the most
active Skull and Bones alumni and often returned to the Tomb. The
networking opportunities it offered were unsurpassed and allowed him to
waltz into a high-paying banking position that would lay the foundation for
his wealth and political power.
 
The man who had started the company that employed Prescott, Averell
Harriman, was also a Bonesman and was awarded with a number of
incredibly important positions. As well as having his name above the door
on America’s biggest private bank, he was later elected as the Governor of
New York before taking a position as the ambassador to the USSR during
the height of World War II. Speaking years later about what the Order did
for him, Harriman said that it gave him purpose. Just like Prescott Bush, he
took the society very seriously and was seen to venture back to the Tomb on

a number of occasions. There were suggestions that he would discuss vital
national security secrets over his regular dinners at the Skull and Bones
Temple, but that he would never, under any circumstances, discuss the
activities of the Order with anyone but a member. He took the code of
secrecy incredibly seriously. Indeed, when Harriman was moving his
codified dispatches between London and Moscow during the war, he was
allowed to select the combination to his diplomatic case. He chose the
number 322.
 
Nor was Averell Harriman the first of his family to take advantage of the
Skull and Bones networking opportunity. A man named Stuyvesant Fish (a
Bonesman from 1905) gave Averell’s father his first big job in the railroad
industry. Edward Harriman, Averell’s father, had attended Yale in the class
preceding Fish and had been in the Order when Fish arrived. By the time of
his death, it is estimated that his estate was worth some $100 million,
largely built up from railroad interests. In 1904, Edward Harriman tried to
influence the politics of the country, promising that he would raise
campaigning money for Teddy Roosevelt on the condition that Roosevelt
appoint Chauncey Depew as the ambassador to France. Depew was not
only a Senator, but he was also a fellow Bonesman and a friend of the
railway industry. Harriman raised the money as promised, but when
Roosevelt won, he discovered that the President was going to renege on the
deal. To try and reconcile things between himself and the President,
Harriman dispatched an intermediary, naturally a Bonesman, named
Maxwell Evarts. At all times, those Harriman elevated and trusted the most
were the people who shared their membership in a secret society from the
Yale campus.
 
Even the formation of W. A. Harriman and Company was made possible
through the connections gardened at the Order of the Skull and Bones. The
firm was founded thanks to financial backing from Percy Rockefeller, a
Bonesman in 1900 and part of one of the richest American families of all
time. Added to this one bank, Averell Harriman was able to convince Percy
to invest in a number of other ventures, such as a burgeoning aerospace
business that belonged to Averell’s brother-in-law. When seeking out good
employees, the Harriman family often turned to Yale graduates and showed

particular favor to those who had been in the Order. All across the country,
many large and powerful firms were being run in exactly the same manner.
The connections that one made while a member of the Yale Skull and Bones
society could provide lasting employment at the very top of the American
business pyramid. Often, Bonesmen would specifically seek out and trust
one another when populating their companies with employees. Slowly,
many of America’s most important institutions – politics, universities, and
business – became another networking opportunity for the Order of the
Skull and Bones. And it is a legacy that has continued to this day. The
modern iterations of Harriman’s bank – Brown Brothers Harriman and
Company – had nine of their twenty-six partners as alumni of the Order as
recently as 1972, while the chairman himself – Frederick Allen – was a
member in 1900.
 
Pre-University Days
 
Even before arriving at Yale, it is possible for Skull and Bones to have an
influence over a person’s life, especially for those who have previously had
family members in the Order. Taking the Bush family again as an example,
it’s possible to see the connections to the Order affecting a person’s life.
There is a story from the military days of George H. W. Bush, who was
serving in the Pacific during the World War II. It was the 2nd of September,
1944, and George was the lieutenant of a flight crew who had just received
orders to destroy a radio installation located in Chichi-jima. Before they set
off, George was approached by a man who had been in the Order two years
previously. Knowing that George had ties to Skull and Bones, he plead to
be taken along on the mission despite his lack of experience. Ted White, as
he was known, was a gunnery officer and replaced his equivalent Leo
Nadeau during the mission after getting approval from Bush and his
commanding officer. The mission went wrong, however, with the Japanese
shooting down the plane. Bush, managing to send the explosion payload
before ejecting, was dismayed to learn that Ted White had been killed in the
mission.
 

It was three years later when George H. W. Bush was telling the story to a
captive room. Inside the Tomb, George told his new society mates about
how he had encountered a Bonesman before and how it had ended in
tragedy. According to reports from the night, Bush was regretful that he
ever “let him go” and wished he hadn’t allowed White along on the
mission. To those in the room that night, it seemed as though there was a
sense of real anguish in the new recruit’s face. It was that year that George,
as the son of Prescott Bush, was receiving the honor of being the last (and
most important) tap. Having already been deeply affected by the death of a
fellow Bonesman, Bush was now on the inside and ready to start fostering
the relationships that would suit him so well later in life. It wouldn’t be long
before his connections within the Order were cemented. Alexander Ellis
would go on to become an insurance executive and would be the roommate
of John H. Chafee, a future senator. Ellis would marry Nancy, George’s
sister. Along with James L. Buckley (another future senator), George and
Chafee would be the ushers at the wedding.
 
In fact, George H. W. Bush’s life just after graduation can give a fantastic
insight into the extent to which Skull and Bones connections can facilitate
success and power within those who join. Straight after leaving Yale,
Prescott Bush was prepared to break the rule against nepotism that had been
implemented in the Brown Brothers Harriman bank and wanted to offer his
son a job. George turned them down, however, as well as refusing a job
with his uncle, George Herbert Walker (a Bonesman in 1927). On the
suggestion of his father, he turned to another former Order member, Neil
Mallon, who had been placed as the president of Dresser Industries by
Roland Harriman at the suggestion of Prescott. The company worked with
oil in the Southwest of the United States, and George was hired as the only
trainee that year, supposedly on the promise that he’d have the chance to
run the company someday. Bush spent years under the tutelage of Mallon,
to the point where he would eventually name a son, Neil, after his mentor.
Even for a Yale graduate, the chances laid out in front of George H. W.
Bush when he left university offered him untold fortune and power. He
could have worked in finance, investment banking, or a multitude of other
industries – essentially, anywhere the Bonesmen held influence. Being able
to turn so many excellent opportunities down demonstrates the capabilities

of the Order of the Skull and Bones when it comes to putting people in
positions of power. If you possess the right connections, then it is possible
to get an incredible head start in some of the country’s most powerful
industries. When it came time for George to start his own oil business, it
was former members he turned to in order to raise the requisite funds. Even
at a lower level, there were less successful Bonesmen who were encouraged
to invest sums such as $40,000, enough to buy a home in 1952. From the
very top down, members of the Order of the Skull and Bones were able to
take care of one another.
 
This was particularly useful when George H. W. Bush decided to run for
President. Having been in the office of Vice-President for a number of
years, he had remained close to the fellow members of Skull and Bones. He
held regular dinners with those from his graduation year, as well as other
members of the Order who were occasionally invited. It was to these groups
that Bush announced the difficulties he felt he faced as Vice-President, as
well as the worries he held about running for the big office. But it was the
Bonesmen who raised a great deal of money to fund his campaign. One
member, William Judkins Clark, raised $400,000 all by himself, a huge
amount at the time.
 
Loading the Deck
 
When he did win the Presidency, Bush held no qualms about stocking many
of the best positions with former Skull and Bones men, as well as doing
political favors for those who were aligned with the Order. Frederick Smith
had been a member of the Order of the Skull and Bones in 1966 and had
gone on to found Federal Express, one of America’s biggest companies. He
had headed up a group of the top 100 business people in America and had
pledged their support to the Bush presidency. This favor was returned once
George was in office, with FedEx receiving the highest honor that can be
bestowed upon an American business, the Malcolm Bridge Quality Award
(which is actually named for the son of another Bonesman.) Of the
Bonesmen Bush appointed, George H. Pfau became the director of a
department named the Securities Investor Protection Corporation; Richard

Anthony Moore became the Ambassador to the Republic of Ireland; and
Paul Lambert (utterly lacking in any diplomacy experience) became the
Ambassador to Ecuador. All of them had been members of the Order of the
Skull and Bones. Furthermore, David George Ball became Assistant
Secretary of Labor, Christopher Buckley became Bush’s chief speechwriter,
James T. Hempill joined the Department of the Interior, David Grimes
became a representative of Bush during some key foreign trips, Thomas W.
Mosely formed part of the delegation to Uruguay, Edward McNally wrote
some of Bush’s most famous speeches, and Raymond Price was awarded
the job of writing Bush’s speech to the Republican National Convention in
1992. Bush wasn’t just giving Bonesmen posts in business and overseas,
they were forming key parts of his government. Even in the CIA (where
George spent time working), there were a disproportional number of Yale
graduates, to the extent that members of the other agencies referred to their
agents as “Yalies.” Of course, among the most important assignments were
those with close ties to the Order.
 
Listing the full extent of Skull and Bones appointments during the Bush
administration would take up a huge portion of this book. Suffice it to say,
Bonesmen were more than represented throughout the annals of the
government, especially when you consider the fact mentioned earlier, that
there were typically only 800 living Bonesmen at any one time. This is
perhaps the best example of the spider web of Skull and Bones networking
that we have today. Though there are further examples to be found in the
world of business, media, and law, the presidency of George H. W. Bush is
a fine example of the extent to which the Order of the Skull and Bones
infiltrated the government. The extent to which Bonesmen were involved in
the administration during this time became an open secret. It was known to
most everyone who paid attention, but few dared to mention it. Perhaps this
is why, by the time the Internet had risen to power and George W. Bush
sought the same office, he went to great lengths to distance himself from the
accusations that had trailed his father. The son has worked hard to keep
himself from the accusations that have followed his father around for
decades. But that ignores several salient facts. Firstly, thanks to efforts by
people such as the senior George Bush, there is already in place in the
government of the United States a heavy influence of those with ties to

Skull and Bones. Secondly, the emergence of the World Wide Web of
information – the Internet – means that it is now possible to track and trace
the movements of those who are in the Order. While previously the
existence of the Order was known as well as some of its members, it was
difficult to disseminate this information quickly. This has not been possible,
and it could be that the Order is either struggling to come to terms with this
prevalence of information or (more likely) they have simply taken a greater
degree of secrecy to their actions. For example, as of 2015, Austan
Goolsbee has been appointed as staff director chief economist to the
Economic Recovery Advisory Board started by Barack Obama, who did not
attend Yale. James Emanuel Boasberg is a judge for the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia. Edward S. Lampert is the
chairman of Sears and Kmart. Even Academy Award nominated actor Paul
Giamatti is a Bonesman. What is markedly different from the previous eras
is the extent to which this information is offered much less freely. These
days, one of the most famous secret societies seems to be retreating back
into their more secretive past.
 
But despite this commitment to secrecy, the legends of the Order of the
Skull and Bones have been passed down from generation to generation. It
seems that, while the networking system is still in place, there is a growth in
the number of theories that relate to Skull and Bones. In the next chapter,
we will examine some of the most common legends, from world
domination to campus pranks. Now that we have established just how real
and far-reaching the network of Skull and Bones members has become, it
lends credence to some of the most extreme rumors.
 


The Legends of the Order
 
Ask anyone on campus which is the strictest of all the Yale societies, and
they’ll give you the same answer: Skull and Bones. These rules have been
misinterpreted and misconstrued over time, giving rise to some of the
strangest rumors about the group. For example, an old bylaw seems to
suggest that all Bonesmen must exit a room should someone utter the words
“Skull and Bones” or the number “322.” The legend of the rule was largely
established in a novel – Saving the Queen by William F. Buckley – and is
backed up by hearsay and whisperings, especially by those who attended
the university in the 1960s. It’s been a Harvard legend that all that was
required to beat their academic rivals at football was to take to the field, say
the name of the society, and watch half the team exit the pitch. The legend
stuck so much that during the 1988 elections, a group of reporters attempted
to see what George Bush would do when he heard the name of the Order.
He did nothing. Some legends, it seems, are simply exaggerated, even if
they do have their roots in the truth.
 
Strange Rumors
 
It seems that some of the rules and stories surrounding the legends of the
Skull and Bones are now archaic. Previously, they were designed to offer
some sort of protection or benefit, though they do not make as much sense
in the modern world. Much like the human appendix (a carryover from
earlier evolutionary times), these rules have outlived their true usefulness,
though they continue to exist within each generation of Bonesmen. For
example, the above rule might well have been a means of discouraging
discussions about the society in the presence of non-members. Over time,
the rule was misinterpreted by the public, and its purpose was altered in the
minds of those who were not members. Some of the members still held to
the rules and traditions out of nostalgia and respect, while others recognized
rules such as this one as having outlived its purpose. A similar rule suggests
that Bonesmen should not enter the Tomb in the presence of witnesses.
Previous generations might have been able to look over their shoulders for

human eyes, but in the modern age of electronic surveillance, this is almost
impossible. Accordingly, adherence to the rule has fallen slightly by the
wayside.
 
One rule that has continued, however, and led to the birth of many of the
stranger tales of the Order, relates to the names given to members. When a
person joins Skull and Bones, they are given a new name on their first day.
Once this name is handed out, it will be used by the Bonesmen exclusively
for the remainder of their lives. It is possible for a member to pass on a
name to the new generation of recruits, a tradition that has occurred many
times, and helps to bond the new Bonesmen to life within the society and
within the walls of the Tomb. Certain nicknames within the group have
certain connotations and are handed out accordingly. For example, the name
“Magog” is given to the recruit deemed to be the most successful in their
romantic endeavors, while “Gog” refers to the least successful. The tallest
of the Bonesmen is named “Long Devil,” while anyone who captains the
Yale varsity football team is named “Boaz.” “Little Devil” – the person so
involved in the initiation ceremony – is the name given to the shortest
member of the order. For everyone else, a name is chosen at the members
own discretion. In addition, Magog and Gog are allowed to select new
names should they wish.
 
For an example of the naming traditions in action, we should look to
George W. Bush. While the world might know him by one name, Skull and
Bones members know him as Temporary. According to the legends from
within the Tomb, it was a name he selected on the spur of the moment and
never got around to changing. If we look back a little further, rumors
suggest that Temporary’s father went under the title of Magog, though he
was already married by the time he passed through the initiation ceremony.
The title of Magog for George Bush Snr is a point of contention, however,
with some Bonesmen being adamant that his nickname had been
“Barebones.” Whether this was hastily reworked following George’s
burgeoning political career or whether it’s the actual name Bush selected for
himself, we do not know. When looking through the archives of Skull and
Bones documents that have surfaced, however, it seems that Prescott Bush
was named Barebones and that this name might well have passed along the

generations. However, this would lead to a question about why the junior
George Bush did not inherit the title. It’s a question that, like many of the
Bones names, leaves the audience with nothing but further questions.
 
We do know the names of several of the more famous Magogs. William
Howard Taft, Robert Taft (his son), and Don Schollander all bore the title.
In addition, we know that F. O. Mathiessen and Amos Alonzo Stagg were
both Little Devils. Details such as these hint at the reams of unknown
information we have about the Order. In addition, the names themselves
serve a particular function. They provide an immediate point of familiarity
and discussion for Bonesmen across different generations. When requesting
a favor from a fellow Bonesman, being able to use his secret name adds a
touch of familiarity and trust that is not permitted to those not in the Order.
 
Just like the awarding of names, the title of Uncle Toby is something that is
frequently misunderstood by those who are not a part of the Order. While
most college societies will elect a permanent leader, Skull and Bones allows
its members to take turns at assuming the role of Uncle Toby. As already
discussed, the person with this title will lead the ceremonies and rituals and
will also chair debates, takes notes during discussions, and typically is
allowed to have the last say on anything that pertains to the society itself.
This way, power is spread out among the members. Similarly, the seniors in
the Order are overseen by the former members who sit on the Russell Trust
Association’s governing board. This board elects a President of the Society
and a Treasurer, as well as the more idiosyncratic Corporal Trim (who is in
charge of menus), the Secretary of the Eulogian Club (who liaises with the
alumni), and the Commissary, who manages society business interests. The
Secretary of the Eulogian Club sits to the right of Uncle Toby, and the
Commissary sits nearest to the door. While it might seem as though the
president of the society is the de facto leader or that Uncle Toby might take
on that role, true power in fact resides with the Secretary of the Eulogian
Club. During the 19th Century, this position had the power of veto and could
approve business related to the Order. The Little Devil is equally important,
as he sits to the left of Uncle Toby and is in charge of collecting any fines
from members. Many of the names handed out in this manner can be traced

back to the novel Tristram Shandy, where characters such as Uncle Toby
and Corporal Trim feature.
 
These smaller rules give an example of what life might be like within the
walls of the Tomb. There are other flights of fancy, such as the fact that the
schedule runs on Skull and Bones Time (five minutes faster than real time),
and students use their own annual calendar. But these actions typically lack
far-reaching ramifications beyond the Yale campus. They might seem
strange to those unfamiliar with the American academic system, but they
are not entirely uncommon. However, they certainly add to the strangeness
that permeates the Order. It is this uncanny appearance, coupled with the
type of individuals who are involved, that gives rise to many of the theories
that exist about Skull and Bones. In fact, there is an intersection between
the ideas of the standard college society and the theory of a global
conspiracy that can be found in the regular alumni dinners. At these events,
some of the world’s most powerful people are invited to rub shoulders and
talk with their fellow graduates and Bonesmen. But what actually happens
at these events?
 
Face to Face
 
Typically, there are two meetings a year when the alumni are invited to the
Tomb. One takes place in the winter, while the other occurs close to the
Yale commencement. Before each event, every living Bonesman will
receive a printed invitation. Close to these dinners are the times for the
official meetings of the Russell Trust Association. The more important of
the two is typically regarded as the one nearest commencement, usually
taking place around spring time, and the invitation to this dinner will
include the list of the newest Skull and Bones members. The invitations
themselves (as with all communications from the Order) arrive in black
edged envelopes closed with the Skull and Bones seal. Those who cannot
make it to the dinner will often provide information about their activities, in
order that the society can update their records on the whereabouts of
alumni. Thus far, apart from the slightly morbid aesthetics, the dinners seem
like many other gatherings of university societies.

 
The dinners themselves are typically lavish. Including a large number of
courses overseen by a number of chefs, the meal is usually followed by the
smoking of cigars. In all, it seems as though the Tomb transforms into a
high-class restaurant for the night. One noticeable absence, however, is
alcohol. Forbidden on Skull and Bones property, the society is traditionally
teetotal at all times. The rule seems designed to ensure all members remain
as levelheaded as possible during their meetings, though it is said that the
presence of the goddess Eulogia should be enough to act as a form of social
lubricant. There have been a few exceptions, however, usually involving
very fine wines. At the 1836 Christmas function, for example, two special
bottles were sealed away to be enjoyed on the centenary anniversary.
Despite the intent, the opening of the Tomb was seen as a special enough
occasion, so they members uncorked the saved bottles several decades early
and celebrated their new home in style.
 
Perhaps the most important part of the dinners comes at the end. While
other campus societies might invite guest speakers, the only people
permitted within the walls of the Tomb are Bonesmen and servants who
have been bound to secrecy. As such, the only guest speakers are those who
have been initiated into the Order. They discuss with those present how
Skull and Bones has shaped them, helped them, and changed their lives. But
the levels of secrecy that are present at these events often mean that those
who are talking can do so with a degree of candor not permitted at many
speaking events. McGeorge Bundy, for example, was the National Security
Advisor from 1961 to 1966, serving under two Presidents. During his after-
dinner speech in 1968, he took advantage of the frank and relaxed forum to
speak about political figures and foreign policy without fear of his words
being spread further than the Tomb. To some extent, he was right. While we
know that he discussed many important subjects and discussed very
privileged information with the Bonesmen, not one of them has seen fit to
reveal the actual content of his conversation. This oath to secrecy on such
matters is one of the bedrocks of the success of the Order, while the ability
to divulge such information means that Bonesmen often have access to the
very best intelligence simply by dint of association. Other speakers have

included George H. W. Bush and Tex McCray, who discussed his actions
during the Nixon-Khrushchev debate.
 
Such events are not cheap. While the attendance of the Bonesmen is free,
the lavish dinners and hiring of servants is most certainly not. Add to this
the upkeep and maintenance of the Skull and Bones facilities, the writing of
letters and arrangements, as well as the commissioning of regular “Bones
Bibles” (historical accounts of the society by members) and one is looking
at a hefty price. While there are a great many members from privileged
backgrounds who could undoubtedly pay their way through the Order,
members are not expected to pay any dues. Instead, funding is taken from
regular donations. Each year, every Bonesman receives a letter from the
treasurer that requests a voluntary contribution. Such a letter might remind
the Bonesman of whom they are required to pay (the Russell Trust
Association) and what their last donation amounted to. While it might not
seem the best means of funding, it has worked. It is thought that by the end
of the 20th Century, the Order had gathered an endowment amounting to
around $3million. According to the tax returns filed by the Russell Trust
Association in 1997, the group’s assets totaled close to $4.3million, though
this shrank in the following year. Typically, the Russell Trust can expect
revenues of around $750,000, with around 15% of that coming from
donations. The rest can be derived from the various business interests and
fundraising events held by the society.
 
Another key difference marking Skull and Bones out from their rival
societies is the manner in which they use their wealth. Typically, societies,
groups, and clubs at Yale and other universities will be known to use any
money they raise to both fund themselves and to help out in the
communities where they are based. This is not true for Skull and Bones.
Instead, the group uses its large resources to fund its members and serve
their interests “to varying degrees.” In contrast, Scroll and Key – Skull and
Bones’ rival secret society on the Yale campus – provide a number of grants
and fellowships totaling many thousands of dollars. Described by one
Bonesman as being a “pretty self-serving” society, the approach is not
intended to be dark or evil. Rather, it is intended to be just another way by
which Skull and Bones marks itself out as different from other groups.

Money from the Order rarely leaves the coffers of the Russell Trust, instead
being used to pay for the upkeep and the lifestyle of the members. There is
a rumor that one year, a certain unnamed Bonesman amassed a large
number of drug-related debts, which he paid for by stealing a valuable rug
from the organization. He sold it, and the Order used their resources to
replace it. As well as this, many have suggested that there is a graduation
gift given out by the society amounting to $15,000. When discussing the
matter, however, one member (who graduated in 1968) mentioned that, if it
were true, he was still waiting to see his gift.
 
While these stories have been told many times about Skull and Bones, there
are a great many rumors and theories that are far more serious and move
beyond simple collusion. One accusation, for example, is that Skull and
Bones can be considered an anti-Semitic organization. However, there are
certain flaws to this theory that has, in the age of the Internet, been
commonly accepted by many. When looking closer, it seems as though the
Order has counted among its number a great many members who dislike the
Jewish people, though there is little to point towards the Order itself being
prejudiced against them as an institution. When we look through the
documented history, for example, we can uncover a letter written from
Robert Nelson Corwin to Frederick Jones in 1922. The former was the
Chairman of the Yale’s Board of Admissions, while the latter was the Dean.
Both were Bonesmen. In the letter, Corwin advocates there being a quota
placed on the number of Jewish students that Yale can enroll in any given
year. It contained with it an analysis of the situation concerning a seeming
increase in the “students of Jewish birth,” and after Jones agreed that there
was such an issue, the university introduced a quota. This is backed up by
the diary entries of another Bonesman, Farwell Knapp, who visited Jones
later that year. In the diary, Knapp acknowledges that Jones “hates Jews,”
though he believes that Jones is usually impartial on such matters. Knapp
discusses the efforts that have been made to reduce the number of Jewish
students who hold important scholarships, and after noting that he also
happens to “dislike Jews,” says that he agrees with the policy. Just six
months later, another diary entry suggests that the only means of dealing
with the “Jewish problem” is to place trust in the actions of the Ku Klux
Klan. Among those occupying high-ranking positions in the university

infrastructure, many were Bonesmen and many were anti-Semites. Drawing
a correlation – suggesting that it was Skull and Bones which made them
thus – can be disingenuous, however, as there is little written into the actual
society bylaws concerning such matters.
 
Crooking
 
Another of the more salacious rumors that circulates regarding the Order is
their involvement in a number of thefts occurring around campus and
beyond. Though not quite as serious as the allegations of anti-Semitism, the
suggestions that Bonesmen may have stolen a number of items certainly
have a great deal more credibility and these stories are accepted as truth by
many people. For a long time, the moment any item of importance went
missing around Yale, it was assumed that Skull and Bones will have played
a part in acquiring it. The fact that non-members are prevented from
entering the Tomb (a ban which includes, it is rumored, the police), the
building is treated as something of a trophy cabinet for the successful heists
that are conducted by the Order. These stolen items – tributes to Eulogia –
have ranged from relatively minor items that are somehow connected to
Yale’s history to actual items of historical importance. For example, it is
said that Skull and Bones have in their possession the gong which
previously hung in the Treasurer’s offices of the Old College, a drum from
the same building, a bell taken from an East Haven church, one of the Old
College’s flags, and pins stolen from every single secret society that had
sprung up on campus during the Order’s lifetime.
 
The Skull of Geronimo
 
But there are other items that are reportedly in the possession of the Order
of the Skull and Bones that would involve a far more serious accusation.
One such item is the skull of Apache tribe leader Geronimo. During the
1980s, there was a concerted effort on behalf of Geronimo’s modern-day
descendants to find the remains of the man who went to war with the early
Americans. At first, it seemed as though all of the remains had been buried
in Oklahoma, inside Fort Still. Though this was the commonly accepted

story of where the remains had been placed, as investigations deepened, the
man tasked with finding the bones of Geronimo received a letter.
Supposedly from a Bonesman, it presented the theory that the remains were
not in Oklahoma, but in New Haven. Should the investigator wish to learn
more, photographs could be made available. The photographs arrived and
depicted both the Tomb and a glass display cabinet that contained a number
of small items (stirrups, bone fragments) and – it was claimed – the skull of
Geronimo himself. In addition to this, there was a written account of how it
came to be in the Order’s possession.
 
Back in 1918, a group of Bonesmen – including Prescott Bush – journeyed
to Fort Still. Aware of how bad it would look should such prominent figures
be caught grave robbing, they made sure to keep quiet while they dug up
the remains. Two dug, two rested, and two men stood guard. Slowly, as they
dug deeper, they began to uncover a saddle horn, then some rotten items of
clothing, and then finally, at the very bottom of the grave, they came across
the skull itself. They quickly filled the grave back in and sped back to their
lodgings nearby. There, they cleaned and polished the skull. With their
trophy, the Bonesmen travelled back to Yale and placed the skull of
Geronimo on display.
 
On learning this, the investigator journeyed back to Fort Still to discern
whether there was any truth to the matter. According to reports, a number of
personal items had indeed been taken from the grave. The unnamed
Bonesman was contacted again, and he invited the investigators to campus
for a tour of the sites related to the theft. The man was clearly concerned,
insisting on walking sixty feet ahead of the investigators, so as not to be
associated with them. The Bonesman grew increasingly paranoid and
according to the investigators, believed that people were rummaging
through his garbage searching for clues. Eventually, the Bonesman vanished
and went on the run.
 
To take matters further, the investigators and their legal team set up a
meeting with Jonathan Bush, a Bonesman and brother of George H. W.
Bush. The meeting took place in New York City and lasted less than an
hour. Showing Bush the photographs and asking that the skull be returned

in order to receive a peaceful burial, the investigators quickly realized that
any genuine interest Skull and Bones had in helping them was beginning to
evaporate. Though Bush promised the investigators that he would help them
get what they wanted, they discovered that he was impossible to contact in
the days following the meeting. It was eleven days before they could
arrange another meeting. This time, Bush was accompanied by a number of
other Bonesmen. They had brought with them a display case, the very same
from the photographs, which contained the smaller items and the skull
itself. This was given to the investigators, who remained suspicious. The
skull was slightly different, though it was hard to tell why.
 
Taking the display case away, the investigators decided that they would
need to have it analyzed. Though they found that it was actually the skull of
a human, the results proved that it was actually the skull belonging to a boy
aged ten years old. Added to that, it was not nearly old enough to have
belonged to Geronimo. The Bonesmen tried to have the investigators sign a
document that absolved them of possessing the skull. When the
investigators refused and handed back the display case, they travelled back
to Arizona and exercised their one remaining course of action. They asked
their Senator – John McCain – to personally contact George Bush and
request the return of the actual skull. After a short time, McCain responded
to say that Bush would take none of his calls. To this day, the display case is
kept in the Tomb. There is still a skull inside, though whether it is
Geronimo’s or the one belonging to the little boy, we will never know. The
Bonesmen, however, still refer to the skull as Geronimo.
 
There is a similar story relating to the skull of Pancho Villa. A story
purports that a group of Bonesmen paid a solider in the 1920s almost
$25,000 to steal the skull of the Mexican leader. This is roundly denied,
however, and there are reports mentioning Villa’s skull inside the Tomb. Far
more accurate are those that supposedly relate to the theft of the gravestone
of Elihu Yale. Those who have been inside the Tomb have seen the
gravestone (or an incredibly expensive, accurate replica), which is
displayed alongside a note revealing that it was taken from Wrexham
Church Yard. Elihu himself held a lot of ties to Wrexham, a small village in
Wales, and when it was reported that the gravestone had been stolen from

their churchyard, the locals requested that it be returned. The requests were
ignored, and the stone remains in the Tomb to this day.
 
This kind of stealing is not only accepted among the Bonesmen, but it is
actively encouraged. Known as “crooking,” the act of stealing something
from around campus or beyond is part of becoming a legitimate Bonesman.
These items are then returned to the Tomb and displayed next to a small
plaque which records when and who “crooked” the item. As long as there is
space in the Tomb, it seems that the Bonesmen will continue to steal and
pilfer.
 
Widespread Influence
 
But a far more serious claim relates to the hold Skull and Bones has over
the press. For many years, the process of tapping new recruits would always
include those who held the editorial positions on the student newspapers.
Almost always, those in charge of the various Yale publications would have
some link to Skull and Bones, which allowed them to dictate how they were
presented in the press. Ever since the tail end of the 20th Century, however,
this has ceased to be the case. Nowadays, the proliferation of the Internet
makes it much harder to control what is published. Accordingly, very few
of Yale’s editors are now tapped by the Order. But their hold has always
gone far beyond the campus boundaries. For example, two of America’s
biggest news magazines were founded by Bonesmen. Time magazine was
supposedly conceived within the walls of the Tomb itself, with some saying
that meetings from the 1920s will contain mentions of the magazine in the
society’s minutes. In addition, Today magazine was founded by Averell
Harriman, merging with another publication to become Newsweek. On a
number of occasions, Harriman is known to have stepped in and strong-
armed the editorial team of his publications in reaction to favors and
requests from fellow Bonesmen.
 
Other serious claims against the Bonesmen relate to their closed-door
policy of admittance. We have already mentioned anti-Semitism, but for
many years there was a refusal to allow the recruitment of female members.
Even many decades after Yale became co-ed, Skull and Bones did not

change their rules until 1991. Even today, there are alumni who regret this
change in rules. It caused a great deal of consternation in 1971 when the
idea was first floated. That class – now known in Skull and Bones history as
the “bad club” – suggested that women might be admitted. Though the
decision was accepted within the Tomb, the alumni were furious. The bad
club were invited to dinner with fifty alumni as a French restaurant in New
York. Some of the most prestigious members of the Order were present. It
was impressed upon the group that since the alumni paid the bills of the
society, they would have the final say. There was little in the way of
argument, and nearly half of the bad club stormed out of the restaurant. In
fact, up until 1991, the closest any woman could get to becoming a member
would be to marry a Bonesman, in which case there was a special wedding
ceremony for the happy couple. The little we know about such a ceremony
comes from the sister-in-law of one Bonesman who snuck in. She reports
hooded cloaks, coffins, strange incantations, and references to ghosts.
 
The process of accepting women was still difficult in 1991. The alumni
changed the locks on the Tomb, and the Bonesmen of that year had to
contact lawyers. It was finally put to a vote among the near-800 living
members. It passed by a slim margin. Just before the initiation ceremonies,
William F. Buckley led a group of alumni to get a court order restricting the
Order’s recruitment of the six woman (and nine men) who had been tapped.
Another vote was held. Though it was a secret ballot, we know that John
Kerry and David Boren (both Senators) voted in favor of recruiting women.
Likewise, we don’t know how either George Bush or his son voted, though
George W. might well have revealed himself when speaking to a PBS
producer many years later, confessing that he felt the group has lost its way
since they began to admit women. The decision has led to a split among the
alumni. Many now choose to disassociate themselves from the Order, while
others are still bitter about the decision.
 
It has often been said that learning the secrets of the Order of the Skull and
Bones can appear as something of a disappointment. For many, the
inclination is to believe that it is a shadowy cabal run by the world’s most
powerful men. But at its heart, Skull and Bones is still very much a student
society. It is run by young men (and now women) who usually hail from

privileged backgrounds. At that age, they are far more likely to lean
towards the typical hedonism expected of young people than the ruthless
world domination thrust upon them by the many conspiracy theorists who
learn about the club.
 
The Real Secrets?
 
So what are the real secrets of the Order of the Skull and Bones? In a book
such as this – one which attempts to show the truth behind the rumors and
deal in confirmed facts – the real secrets might never be held within the
walls of the Tomb. It can help to think about the society much like an
incubation chamber. At one of the country’s most prestigious schools, a
selection of the most privileged and brightest individuals continually recruit
and bond with the next generation. In doing so, they create a structured web
of power, a training ground for the networking of the elite that will help
them so much in the world beyond Yale. It is true that Skull and Bones has
entertained some of the most powerful people of the 19th, 20th, and 21st
Centuries, but in doing so, it has provided them with a means to seize their
power. The schism in the society on issues such as female admission
demonstrates that there is not one single hive mind that is used to make a
decision. Instead, the real power of Skull and Bones can be found in the
trust it builds among members, the way in which its alumni have infiltrated
the most powerful positions in the country, and the way in which it
perpetuates the continuation of power being shared among the elite. Should
you be a member of Skull and Bones, you will not learn the secrets of some
mysterious New World Order. Instead, however, you might become a key
figure in the real machinations that run the country, allowing you to glimpse
and perhaps even grasp real power, all thanks to your involvement with a
strange university society. The real secret of the Order of the Skull and
Bones is that it is little more than smoke and mirrors. The real secret and
the real power lie in what its alumni do with their connections and how it
allows them to slide so seamlessly into the framework of control possessed
by the United States of America.


Further Readings
 
Benson, Michael, Inside Secret Societies (New York, NY: Citadel Press,
2005)
Dice, Mark, The Illuminati (San Diego, Calif.: The Resistance, 2009)
Goldwag, Arthur, Cults, Conspiracies, And Secret Societies (New York:
Vintage Books, 2009)
Haag, Michael, The Templars (London: Profile, 2009)
Marrs, Jim, Rule By Secrecy (New York: Harper, 2001)
Millegan, Kris, Fleshing Out Skull & Bones (Walterville, OR: Trine Day,
2003)
Reynolds, John, Secret Societies (New York: Arcade Pub, 2011)
Sora, Steven, Secret Societies Of America's Elite (Rochester, Vt.: Destiny
Books, 2002)
Steiger, Brad, and Sherry Hansen Steiger, Conspiracies And Secret
Societies (Canton, MI: Visible Ink Press, 2013)
Steiger, Brad, and Sherry Hansen Steiger, Conspiracies And Secret
Societies (Canton, MI: Visible Ink Press, 2013)
Sutton, Antony C, America's Secret Establishment ([Walterville, OR]: Trine
Day, 2002)
Young, John K, Sacred Sites Of The Knights Templar (Gloucester, Mass.:
Fair Winds, 2003)


Conclusion
 
There is no doubt that the Order of the Skull and Bones is one of the most
important secret societies in the world. Unlike many such groups, it actually
exists. Along with the Russell Trust Association, there is a real-world paper
trail and physical evidence that points towards not only the society itself
existing, but its membership including some of the most important people
of the last two centuries. When compared to supposed societies such as the
Illuminati, there is no question as to which group is more credible.
 
But many of the stories about Skull and Bones are seemingly just smoke
and mirrors. The pagan rituals, the goddess worship, the morbid aesthetic,
and the perpetual rumors that surround the society serve to distract the
world from the cold, hard truth. As long as everyone believes it to be
nothing more than a slightly silly, slightly archaic group, then there will be
little attention paid to the fact that they have so successfully held sway over
so many important industries within America.
 
They are a networking group, a means of picking and selecting their
successors and placing them into positions of power. Skull and Bones is a
proving ground for the next generation of power players, allowing the
Bonesmen to evaluate and condition Yale graduates before awarding them a
great deal of influence over society. It is nepotistic, reactionary,
conservative, and – to the outside eye – very strange indeed. But there is no
question as to whether they truly wield power. Thanks to the secretive
nature of Skull and Bones, we may never know the true extent of their
influence. But as we have seen behind the doors of the Tomb, we can accept
that we must look further out into the real world if we are to see their real
influence. The real mysteries of the Order of the Skull and Bones do not
hide inside the Tomb. Instead, they are all around us.


Volume 7
 



Contents
 
Introduction
Hidden Evidence
The Secrets of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
The Royal Bloodline
A Growing Revolt
The Truth
The Victims of the Priory
The Fallout
Mary Magdalen
The Grand Masters
The Da Vinci Code
Conclusion
Further Readings


Introduction
 
Hoax, conspiracy, or secret society? That is the range of responses you
might hear when raising the idea of the Priory of Sion. Ostensibly a
clandestine order designed to disguise the truth about the children of Jesus
Christ, the group have been labeled as either an elaborate concoction, or the
most powerful secret society in the world. Are they real? What are they
hiding? Where did they come from? What impact can they have on the
world around us? These are the questions this book will hope to answer.
 
At the heart of the story of the Priory of Sion is the somewhat heretical
notion that Jesus Christ — the supposed son of God — fathered children.
Not only that, but that his bloodline survives to this day. If true, the idea has
a huge impact on the very existence of Christianity, the world’s most
popular religion. If the Priory — as is believed — are guarding the truth
about such a matter, they then potentially control some of the most powerful
information in the world. Think of it like an ideological atomic bomb,
ticking away and ready to explode through the consciousness of the world.
 
Not only that, but the men allegedly chosen to guard these secrets rank as
some of the greatest thinkers in human history. Isaac Newton, Nicholas
Flamel, and Leonardo da Vinci have all been implicated in the order, though
their involvement is debated. In fact, the entire existence of the order has
been argued. Some suggest that, rather than a secret society, the Priory is in
fact an elaborate hoax.
 
Others claim that these accusations are merely an attempt to disguise the
truth. But what do we know for certain? Who exactly are the Priory of
Sion?


Hidden Evidence
 
One of the most important parts of this story is a battle. On one side is an
American, pressed into defending himself. On the other side, three
Englishmen stand convinced that they have been robbed and their ideas
made to seem ridiculous. It is as though their honor has been sullied. They
demand satisfaction. Each side is spending hundreds of thousands of dollars
to face off against the other and it will not be settled until one side emerges
victorious. But rather than some medieval fist fight or Victorian duel, this is
a very recent battle. Though the history of the Priory of Sion is said to
stretch back for thousands of years, this fight was fought after the turn of
the second millennium. The venue is the Royal Courts of Justice in a part of
London known as the Strand. The date is 2006.
 
This is where we will start. These days, it is impossible to discuss the Priory
of Sion without mentioning a number of books. These books vary in
popularity, from an international bestseller which made its author millions,
through to a supposedly academic work which defied expectations and left
a print on the world, and finally, an obscure French text, one which many
people have credited with starting this entire affair. Appropriately enough
for a story that may or may not be true, the publishing of books is
inextricably linked to the Priory in every single respect. As we shall see, the
writing, the reading, and the impact of these texts is essential to the story.
 
Of these books, two were written by the men who stood opposed to one
another in the Strand. On one side was Dan Brown, writer of The Da Vinci
Code, and the man often credited with turning the Priory of Sion into a
global concern. Condemned by the Church, ridiculed by critics, his work
has nevertheless proved to be a success beyond any comprehension. For the
university professor, it has become a rich industry. As someone who teaches
other to write, there are few people in the world better placed to tell others
how to make money from a story. But how that story came to be is the
entire predicament of the court case.
 

On the other side of the courtroom stand two men and their team of
lawyers. Richard Leigh, hailing from New Jersey, and Michael Baigent,
hailing from New Zealand. They glower at Dan Brown (who, strangely
enough, hails from New Hampshire) from the other side of Court 61. Dan
Brown is the defendant and the other two men have accused him of
plagiarism. Brown, they say, not only stole their ideas, but presented them
to the world in a way which discredited the work they had done. Baigent
and Leigh are better known to the world as the authors of The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail. As well as being one of the most popular pieces of
writing ever created on the subject of the Holy Grail, their book brings the
idea of the Priory of Sion to an English-speaking audience. As we will
discover soon, their work was wildly successful and few writers have come
as close to delivering as ground-breaking, as controversial, and as profitable
a take on religion in the last three centuries.
 
And so both sides of the courtroom are inhabited by writers. On this day, a
verdict is to be reached which will lend credence to (or demolish the
credibility of) an idea which is said to date back almost 2,000 years. At the
heart of the matter, with the judge set to rule, is the purported existence of
the Priory of Sion. Through the works of both sides of the argument, the
Priory’s name has reached more ears than anyone ever thought possible.
While Brown has managed to dominate the bestseller charts in the world of
fiction, Baigent and Leigh (as well as a third author who is not present, but
who will be touched upon soon) created massive waves in the world of non-
fiction. Between them, they have dominated both sides of the bestseller
charts.
 
That is one of the key underlying aspects of the case and, by extension, the
existence of the Priory of Sion itself. There is a huge amount of money to
be made in publishing these ideas. Whether that is because they are
dangerous, because they are revelatory, or because they are entertaining, is
never really made clear. But, simply because the case ever came to court,
there is money to be made through publishing works on the Priory of Sion.
And, with court cases such as these, there is also a huge amount of money
to be lost.
 

So what exactly were the duo of Baigent and Leigh claiming in Courtroom
61? Their case was not as simple as run-of-the-mill plagiarism. Typically, in
plagiarism cases, the prosecution must prove that the defendant took their
idea and made a profit on it, without attributing credit or sharing in the
revenue. This has been done countless times in the past and, in the world of
publishing (and the media at large) it is not uncommon. But this particular
case was slightly different.
 
Specifically, Baigent and Leigh claimed that Brown — in The Da Vinci
Code — made use of a plot that was “directly plagiarized” from their own
book, The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Stealing this idea, they said,
allowed Brown to make a huge amount of money from the ideas of the
original authors. At the time of the court case, it was estimated that Brown’s
writing had made him in excess of $45 million. Besides the book, there was
the multi-million dollar film franchise starring Tom Hanks. The Da Vinci
Code had achieved huge success, ranking perhaps alongside Harry Potter
alone in terms of post-millennial publishing successes. This success, the
prosecution alleged, was built on top of ideas that were borrowed wholesale
from The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
 
That is not to say that The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail had not been
successful in its own right. Far from it. Indeed, after being published in the
1980s, the book caused a huge stir. But it was considered (by both its
authors and its readership) as a work of non-fiction. Walk into any
bookshop in a quest for the book and it would be found in the non-fiction
section. Indeed, rather than the new age or the spirituality section, The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail was nestled amid other, weightier works under
the banner of history. This was the realm in which the book dominated.
Most non-fiction books do not sell in huge numbers, but this one was
different. Perhaps because it managed to transition from the speculative
theology that most people dismiss, into the realms of accepted historicism,
it had become immensely popular.
 
And herein lay the rub. For the authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy
Grail, the very existence of The Da Vinci Code undermined their own work.
Not only were ideas borrowed from the historical text, but they were

presented in a fictional world, and this brought them into question.
Convinced as they were that the Priory of Sion was a real, functioning body,
the way in which Dan Brown had taken and presented his ideas undid all of
the work they had achieved to that point. Their future successes (and the
successes of the sequels to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail) were
damaged by the existence of The Da Vinci Code. This was why they were
suing.
 
To that point, it almost seemed as though money was far from the issue.
Baigent, Leigh, and Henry Lincoln (the third writer) had already become
wealthy men. Their years of research into what had eventually become The
Holy Blood and the Holy Grail had turned them from struggling writers into
authorities on the Holy Grail and, in particular, the Priory of Sion. Michael
Baigent was even quoted at the time as having said, “Whether our
hypothesis is right or wrong is irrelevant.” The lawsuit was not an
attempted to earn punitive damages, but to protect their ideas, to protect
their integrity, and to protect the idea of the Priory of Sion. As Baigent
stated, the authors felt as though they had “no choice.”
 
Baigent and Leigh resented “being lumped in” with the work of fiction
known as The Da Vinci Code. As they constantly insisted in the press, it
seemed more and more as though this was indeed a high-minded quest to
protect their intellectual property in the face of an overwhelming behemoth
of the fictional world. It was almost as though these men were the
protectors of the integrity of the Priory of Sion, holding out against the
bastardized version that had been presented to the world by the callous Dan
Brown. As anyone in the publishing world will tell you, a non-fiction
bestseller (such as The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail) might net plaudits
and respect, but a fiction bestseller (such as The Da Vinci Code) will always
net you the profits. So while Baigent and Leigh were keen to protect their
integrity and that of their work, Dan Brown and his publishers were very
keen to keep their money-making avenues open. And so there the men
found themselves, facing off against one another in a London courtroom.
 
Key to Baigent’s argument (and that of his legal team) was the idea of
“historical implication.” The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, the authors

argued, was an authoritative historical text. It was one that they had spent
years researching and putting together. The Da Vinci Code, if read by
millions, damaged the implied historical accuracy of the non-fiction work.
It was not quite plagiarism, but it was the argument that Baigent repeated
time and time again in the press.
 
But the idea seemed to fly in the face of common sense. Surely, if a reader
sat down with either book, they would naturally know that one was a work
of fiction and the other was a work of non-fiction? The tone, presentation,
style, and even the cover of the book would tell them as much. As long as
The Da Vinci Code veered away from quoting verbatim tracts of the other
text without crediting it, how could this “historical implication” affect The
Holy Blood and the Holy Grail?
 
Furthermore, if the alleged history told by the authors of The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail was indeed held to be true, the facts should have been
available to a fiction writer regardless of whether they appeared in a
particular book or not. When writing about the past, school textbook writers
rarely take authors to court over the mention of the Battle of Hastings or the
Spanish Inquisition. If the book written by Baigent and his co-writers was
based purely on fact (as is the premise in non-fiction) then there seemed
little wrong with Dan Brown making use of an idea such as the Priory of
Sion, and the secrets they guarded.
 
It took three weeks to reach a verdict. The judge assigned to the case, Peter
Smith, seemed to be enjoying his moment in the limelight. Rarely in the
British legal system, it seemed, was he allowed to partake in such a
sensational but also so clear cut a case. It was no surprise when Judge Smith
ruled in the favor of the defendant, Dan Brown. Not only did the judge rule
in such a manner, but he took the time to pass comment on the accusations
that had been strung out by the legal team of Baigent and Leigh. Their
argument, the judge said, was “vague.” They had altered their course during
the trial, and had even based their entire argument on a “weak foundation.”
 
As mentioned previously, this was a costly affair. As well as the publishing
rights and the profits that had been mentioned in the case, the matter of the

legal fees was decided by the court. It cost Baigent and Leigh over a million
dollars to sue Dan Brown. As they were suing in Britain, this fee was
usually given as being around £800,000. But not only did they fail to secure
a verdict, they lost even more money. Dan Brown’s legal team (and that of
his publishers) was even more expensive. It cost £1.2 million. When the
judge ordered Leigh and Baigent to pay 85% of Brown’s legal fees, he hit
the authors with a massive bill. As most people do in this situation, they
filed for an appeal. By the time this was over, the legal costs had risen to
over £3 million. This is just a small sliver of the money involved in modern
day discussions of the Priory of Sion, and an example of why the subject is
so fiercely contested.
 
The effects of the judge’s ruling were not limited to claiming one side right
and one side wrong. The case included a close textual comparison of the
two books. Led by Judge Smith, this comparison can provide a bit of insight
into the ways in which the two books were created and why the consistent
element across the two — the Priory of Sion and the ideas it is said to
protect — became such a controversial matter. While the story of how
Baigent, Lincoln, and Leigh had written their book was very distinct (a
matter we will come to shortly), a discussion of how the idea came to be
seemed to convince the Judge that it wasn’t plagiarism.
 
According to Dan Brown and his legal defence, the history of the Priory of
Sion was told to him by his wife. Blythe Brown, who is regarded as an
expert in art and often a pool of resources for her husband’s books, had read
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. As an art expert, she was more than
familiar with many of the fundamental participants within the book, and
discovered a new take on the ideas that she clearly found so interesting that
she took the ideas to her husband. Blythe provided Dan with a basic
rundown of the ideas outlined in the book, ideas which would eventually
coalesce to become The Da Vinci Code.
 
Indeed, that the ideas were originally explored and outlined in The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail was never a matter which Dan Brown regarded as
an issue. He went as far as to name one of the main characters of The Da
Vinci Code after the authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Leigh

Teabing takes his first name from Richard Leigh, while his surname is an
anagram of Baigent. It seems a knowing tip of the hat to anyone who might
have encountered the story of the Priory of Sion before. In a book with a
plot based on hidden clues in various masterpieces of art, Brown’s own
puzzle is fairly easy to decipher. It was never meant to be too well hidden.
 
But during the course of the case, Dan Brown and his publishers’ legal team
pointed out that the author in fact knew very little about the topic other than
what his wife told him. The judge pointed out that it seemed to be of little
interest to Brown just how the research of the non-fiction book was
handled. Instead, Peter Smith seemed content to agree that Dan Brown had
taken his wife’s research and incorporated it into his book, happy to rely on
his wife’s proven research skills.
 
While this might point towards a questionable thoroughness in the historical
accuracy of The Da Vinci Code, this seemed to slightly disagree with the
comments made by Dan Brown following the trial. After the judge had
delivered the verdict and awarded the case to Brown and his publishers, the
author had come out to say that he felt the result was a victory for “artistic
expression.” It was important, he told the press that a novelist felt free to
draw on any aspect of history that he so desired, without the fear of being
sued by anyone else.
 
That leaves then us with a number of questions. Aside from the
questionable importance placed on The Da Vinci Code as a great work of
art, we are faced with the idea of just how much we can consider the ideas
behind The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail to be considered history? As
will become clear over the course of this book, the very idea of the Priory
of Sion is up for debate. It is said that the order’s existence can be traced
back thousands of years, though some suggest that its reputation died that
day in a London court room. When we are asking the question what exactly
is the Priory of Sion, we must ask ourselves, how exactly are we able to
truthfully describe anything as being a verifiable part of history?
 
Nowadays, the Priory of Sion is big business. If we look once again at The
Da Vinci Code, we can see a book that was optioned to be turned into a

film. Under the direction of Ron Howard and with Tom Hanks in the
leading role, the film was successful enough that it has earned itself two
sequels — Angels and Demons was released afterwards, while Inferno is set
for release in 2016. But as well as the box office money the film generated,
it managed to whip up the argument over the contents of the book all over
again. The subject matter, it seems, is highly volatile. As we trace the
history of the idea back from the three authors of The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail, this is the media frenzy that has steadily escalated over the
years.
 
But why would it cause countries to ban the film? In India, for example, the
film was criticized and outlawed for having cast aspersions over the divinity
of Jesus Christ. Christianity is the largest religion in the world, with
Catholicism its biggest denomination. Could one idea, put forward in a few
books and a film have that big an impact?
 
Perhaps the answer lies with one of the authors of The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail. Of the three authors, it is the one who we have barely touched
upon who can provide the entry point into the history of the Priory of Sion,
the lens through which much of the ensuing story will make sense. His
name is Henry Lincoln. Of all the people in this story, he is perhaps the sole
reason why people in the English speaking world have heard of the Priory.
He might even be the reason why you picked up this book. The difference
is, his name is not familiar to the general public. But that is not to say that
he is not famous, or well known.
 
Let’s take a brief moment to look at the introduction to The Da Vinci Code.
Before we delve into the history of Henry Lincoln, we should know that
everyone who opened the bestselling work of fiction was met with a
statement from the author. Before the book had even begun, before the
reader starts to enter into the plot, the author has included a statement to be
read. It places the book into a context. It starts with one very important
word: fact. Throughout the book, there will be plot holes and sudden
shocks. Albino monks will whip themselves and characters will double
cross one another. This all takes place in the commonly accepted world of
fiction. Read a novel and you are all too aware that what you are reading is

not necessarily truth. That it, unless the author goes out of his way to
suggest otherwise. In the case of Dan Brown, there is a statement of “fact”
at the beginning of the book which informs readers about the world they
will soon enter into.
 
“Fact,” Dan Brown writes, “The Priory of Sion […] is a real organization.”
The author continues to mention a number of historical sources (which we
will come to later) as a means of asserting his claim, but he leaves
audiences in no doubt that the Priory itself exists. Alongside the works of
art which are mentioned in the book, alongside the other pieces of historical
fact, and alongside the more whimsically fictional elements of the plot,
Brown insists to his readers that the Priory of Sion is a very real
organization and one which will be hugely important in the following novel.
It is this kind of appraisal and certainty that we must understand before we
meet Henry Lincoln. Without Lincoln, no one would be quite so sure at all.
 
Even Baigent and Leigh would agree with the way in which Brown presents
the preface to his novel. Though they might disagree with the author in a
courtroom, the information contained within that statement seems very
much in line with exactly what they outlined in their book, The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail. The third writer of that book, the one who was not
present in court, was Henry Lincoln. Indeed, in the follow-up to their
bestselling work of non-fiction, The Messianic Legacy, the three authors
wrote that the information about the Priory of Sion that they revealed was
enough to rock the “very foundations of Christianity.” Just as with Dan
Brown, Lincoln and his fellow writers were more than happy to assert the
legitimacy of the Priory. If this was all quantifiable fact, if Lincoln and his
fellow writers had poured so much hard work into their book, if the
information in The Da Vinci Code was just all accepted truths, then why
was the Catholic Church so angry about Dan Brown’s book? Why did the
whole world not know about the Priory of Sion? And where had the three
authors found this hidden information?
 
Even though he was not present in the courtroom in London, Henry Lincoln
was the point of origin for the knowledge of the Priory of Sion that we have
today. As one of the co-authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, you

might have expected to see him alongside Baigent and Leigh. But Henry
Lincoln was never exactly what he seemed. To some people — and
especially during the 1980s — he was better known as a television
personality. He appeared on the occasional broadcast, covering history and
presenting informative shows. Every now and then he would write
something approaching serious material. Genial, laid back, and
approachable, he was different to the stuffy television historians that had
preceded him. Dressed in turtleneck sweatshirts and with a loose goatee on
his face, he faced a number of enquires and discoveries with a relaxed yet
plausible dignity. For a certain generation of television viewers, he was a
marked break from the past and a fascinating figure in the world of
televisual history.
 
This was not the whole truth about Henry Lincoln, however. When delving
deeper into his life, we find many things that are not quite as they appear.
Firstly, his real name was Henry Soskin. Many people in the entertainment
industry change their names before they become famous. But what is
interesting is that Henry Lincoln (or Soskin) was never actually a historian.
Instead, he was an actor and a writer, and had been in the television industry
for a long time. As a writer, he had worked on a number of science fiction
shows, including the famous BBC series Doctor Who. Those who go
looking for his name will find it in the credits of a 1968 film starring Boris
Karloff called The Curse of the Crimson Altar. Henry Lincoln was a co-
writer of the film. As an actor and a writer, we can take it as a given that he
knew how to tell a story.
 
But Henry Lincoln’s best story would be told time and time again, to
increasingly more important people. It began with a holiday. In 1969, he
recounted in the preface to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, he was on
his way to the south of France. Along the way, he decided that he would
buy a book. He went off searching for a paperback — something light to
read on holiday — and bought a novel called The Accursed Treasure. The
book was written in French, authored by a man named Gerard de Sede. As
recalled by Lincoln, it was “lightweight” and “entertaining.” It managed, he
said, to blend together elements of historical fact and “genuine mystery”
with just a dash of conjecture. The plot revolved around a priest in a small

town in 19th century France. The priest lived in Rennes-le-Chateau, a
relatively poor part of Languedoc, with a relatively poor church. But one
day, the book supposed, he found an incredible secret inside his church. The
secret was enough to turn the priest into a very wealthy man and his church
benefitted massively.
 
The Accursed Treasure stuck with Henry Lincoln. Whereas the majority of
people might read it once and forget about it, something about the story of
the poor priest striking it lucky stayed with him. But there was a problem.
While the book said that the discovery the priest had made involved
“cryptic documents,” the book didn’t mention exactly what these
documents were. These documents were even printed in the novel itself, but
the author didn’t provide a decryption. There were two real documents that
were supposedly recovered from the church that made it into the printed
book, though it was impossible to say exactly what they meant. They
needed to be deciphered, a fact which clung to the inside of Henry
Lincoln’s skull like a limpet.
 
Armed with the two mysterious documents that he found in the book, Henry
Lincoln set about trying to work out their hidden meaning. After not too
long, he even managed it. But it was not enough. If it was this easy for
Lincoln and he only had two pages from the mysterious find, why exactly
had Gerard de Sede not deciphered the notes himself? For Lincoln, this
simply added to the mystery. After having cracked the mystery behind the
first two sheets, Henry found himself increasingly obsessed with the story.
Not only did he need to decipher the rest of the papers, but he needed to let
more people know about the strange documents and the message they
contained. As he began to delve deeper and deeper, new secrets and “layers
of meaning” began to reveal themselves to the author.
 
Armed with a number of these glimpses into a hidden world, Henry Lincoln
set about spreading his message. He worked in the television industry
already, so it seemed obvious that he should go directly to the biggest
power within his business — the BBC. The British Broadcasting
Corporation produced a large number of historical and documentary
programs. Indeed, they even had a regular series that focused on such

issues. It was called Chronicle. Despite the fact that Henry Lincoln was
neither an academic historian nor a qualified anthropologist, the BBC
decided the story was good enough to tell anyway. They commissioned
Henry to produce an item to be shown on an episode of Chronicle, which,
when you consider the man’s lack of qualifications, is somewhat
remarkable. It is perhaps even more remarkable that Lincoln managed to
convince the television executives despite being armed with nothing more
than two photocopied pages taken from an obscure French paperback.
 
As remarkable as it might have seemed, Henry Lincoln received his funding
and packed up and went off to France. An interview with Gerard de Sede
was arranged. The author of The Accursed Treasure was set to meet Lincoln
in Paris in the latter months of 1970. Though the interview was seemingly a
laid back affair, Lincoln could not help himself but insistently question de
Sede as to why he had not bothered to provide full deciphers for the entire
text. After being badgered seemingly into submission, the Frenchman
answered in a way that Lincoln remembered for the rest of his life. The
decryptions had not been given, de Sede exclaimed, simply because “we
thought it might interest someone like you to find it for yourself.”
 
The French author could not have been more right. Lincoln, he could tell,
was already hooked. The possibility of uncovering further information was
like a drug and the British man had been given a taste. De Sede began to
supply small morsels of information, drip feeding the truth behind the little
church in the small town. This first code was not the only one that needed
breaking, it seemed. Lincoln plunged deeper and deeper into the rabbit hole.
One of the first mysteries presented to him involved the French painter
Poussin. According to the author of The Accursed Treasure, there was a
tomb hidden away in the French countryside that bore a remarkable
resemblance to the one found in Poussin’s painting, Shepherds of Arcadia.
It was to be found near the church in Rennes-le-Chateau, in a place called
Pontils. De Sede even had photographs. When he showed Lincoln, the
similarity was both obvious and striking. Lincoln began to believe that he
was on to something far bigger than just a regional legend. What he
described as a “small local mystery” was beginning to take on “unexpected
dimensions.”

 
These unexpected dimensions meant that eventually there would be three
entries in the Chronicle series. Not content with just the one short piece,
Lincoln helped to produce another two on the subject of the church at
Rennes-le-Chateau. The first was titled the Lost Treasure of Jerusalem and
was aired in 1972. After a positive reception, it was followed up with
1974’s The Priest, the Painter and the Devil. These first two entries struck a
chord with the British television public. Just like de Sede’s book, there was
a delightful combination of codes to unravel, mysteries to be solved, secret
histories, buried treasures, and a fascinating prospect. According to the
films, the keys to unraveling the mysteries were hidden in pieces of art.
Solve the puzzle in the art, and you would help solve the mystery. Just like
the tomb in the Poussin painting, the church’s secrets were seemingly
known to artists.
 
One notable absence from the show was any form of criticism, especially
from the more serious end of the historian spectrum. Airing on the BBC,
one might expect the show to adhere to a certain set of standards. But no
one wrote in to complain about the slacking historicism of the pieces by
Lincoln. As only short segments which were appreciated by the majority,
perhaps no one viewed them as being altogether too important. Not worth
working a fuss up over. In an age when clumsy video recorders and no
internet meant that once something was broadcast, repeat viewings were not
very easy, there was little point in getting worked up over an item shown on
Chronicle. Neither historians nor the Catholic Church felt the need to
respond to Lincoln’s findings.
 
Following the broadcast of the second entry in the Chronicle series, Henry
Lincoln found his team was expanding. For the first time, he was working
alongside Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh. Richard Leigh had been the
first to enter into Lincoln’s world. The two had been giving lectures at a
summer school for writing in 1975. During a period of down time, they
found themselves chatting about the Knights Templar and other mysteries.
The subject turned to the films Lincoln was still shooting and Leigh offered
his services should the man need anything clarified on the matter of the
Templars. In addition, Leigh provided the introduction to Baigent, a

psychology graduate who had given up a fairly profitable career working as
a photographer for a news agency in order to pursue his interest in
everything to do with the Knights Templar.
 
The trio collaborated for the first time on what would eventually become
the third entry in Lincoln’s series of films for Chronicle. This one was titled
The Shadow of the Templars and was broadcast in 1979. In Leigh’s own
words, the trilogy of short films were regarded by the BBC as being the
“most successful documentaries [the BBC] had ever done.” More
significantly, the work the trio had put into the final entry in the series had
given them information that would supposedly clarify the entire mystery of
the church in Rennes-le-Chateau. The work they conducted together on the
short film for Chronicle would go on to become the foundation of The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail.
 
Anyone who has managed to catch the first entry in Lincoln’s series for the
BBC might remember the final words in the program. As he reminds
readers in his preface to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, Lincoln was
certain that “something extraordinary was waiting to be found” in the
church. The book the three men wrote together hoped to uncover exactly
what that extraordinary something was. By the time the book was released,
people were just as curious. So much so, in fact, that on the first day of
release the book sold 43,000 copies.
 
Despite having no real background in history, and despite taking his lead
from a forgotten piece of French fanciful writing, Henry Lincoln had put
into place the pieces that would transform into our modern comprehension
of the Priory of Sion. It is safe to say that had Lincoln decided against
taking a holiday to the south of France, the Priory might never have become
public knowledge. But with so many claims being made as to the earth
shattering revelations that were uncovered at the church in Rennes-le-
Chateau, it might be time to examine exactly why The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail became such a best seller.


The Secrets of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
 
Throughout this book, we have referred time and time again to The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail without spending much time focusing on exactly
what the books tries to accomplish. The Priory of Sion is forever bound to
this book, and no explanation about the Priory and their function would be
complete without first exploring a number of the ideas that are laid out by
Henry Lincoln, Michael Baigent, and Richard Leigh.
 
There is a central thesis to the book which will be known to anyone who
has read The Da Vinci Code. It has been mentioned several times already in
this book, but let us take a brief moment to discuss the theory in full.
 
Put simply, The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail suggests that there is a
secret society known as the Priory of Sion. The Priory can trace its history
back to 1099, and has been led at various points by a collection of
illustrious and well-known figures, each of whom inherits the title of Grand
Master. It’s said that previous Grand Masters have included Leonardo Da
Vinci and Isaac Newton, and that the purpose of this secret society is to
reinstate the Merovingian dynasty to the French throne, as well as to spread
the power of the Merovingian family across Europe. The Priory believes
that the Merovingian line is sacred and possesses a world-changing secret.
 
It is also suggested by the book that other societies — in particular, the
Knights Templar — owe their very existence to the Priory’s work. It is
alleged that the Templars were established during the Crusades as a kind of
military and financial division of the Priory of Sion. Through the Templars,
the Priory could project a form of power without having to reveal
themselves or place their secret in jeopardy. This secret is also the
underlying hypothesis of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
 
It is claimed that Jesus Christ, the founder of Christianity (and a major
figure in a number of other major religions) was wed to Mary Magdalene.
Not only this, but the marriage produced a number of children. From these

children, it is possible to trace the bloodline of Jesus Christ from his death
all the way into the modern day. Following the arrest and execution of Jesus
Christ, the authors believe that Mary Magdalene and her children flew the
Near East and settled in southern France. There, they intermarried with a
number of important noble families. This eventually led to the rise of the
Merovingian kings. The Priory of Sion believes that this bloodline should
be protected at all costs.
 
Linked to this is the idea of the Holy Grail. A long standing item of
importance in Western Christendom, the Holy Grail has been described
variously as a cup or chalice that — when drunk from— can give
everlasting life. It has featured in film and literature, from medieval French
poetry to the Indiana Jones film franchise. However, the authors of The
Holy Blood and the Holy Grail suggest that the Holy Grail is not a physical
cup. Instead, it is a reference to two things. Firstly, to the womb of Mary
Magdalene, which bore the children of Jesus. Secondly, to the bloodline of
Jesus’s descendants. As we will see shortly, they believe that an error in
passing along the story changed the nature of the grail from this
metaphysical reference into an actual physical item. Thus, the pursuit of the
Holy Grail is actually a pursuit of the truth about the lineage of Jesus Christ.
According to the book, his descendants still walk the earth today.
 
These theories were not simply plucked out of the air. During the course of
their research, Lincoln and his fellow writers had come across the Dossiers
Secrets, a collection of apparently ancient documents that were found
hidden away in the National Library of France. These documents
supposedly provided the authors with a detailed history of the Merovingian
line. They combined this with their knowledge of the Roman Catholic
Church, as well as their knowledge of history and the work they had already
done in Rennes-le-Chateau. Not only did they believe that the dynasties
outlined in the Dossiers Secrets demonstrated how the blood line traveled
all the way back to Mary Magdalene, but they believed that they could use
this information to show that the lineage could be traced back to King
David.
 

In The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, the Priory of Sion exists in tandem
with this truth about the children of Jesus Christ. It is the job of the Priory
to protect and to help the lineage. But who would they need protecting
from? According to the book, it is once again the Catholic Church which
takes on the role of the bad guy. In the text, the authors outline how they
believe the Catholic Church has threatened the descendants of Christ. Not
only have they destroyed institutions such as the Knights Templar (and the
Cathars) that were set up to protect the descendants, but they have also
attempted to actually kill a number of the members of the bloodline. The
reason? Power.
 
The Catholic Church, according to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail,
hopes to preserve the power of the episcopal throne. That is to say, the Pope
acts as the mouthpiece for God on Earth. Should a descendant of Jesus
Christ himself remain alive, then it would place this power in serious
jeopardy.
 
That leaves the Priory of Sion with a number of stated goals. The authors
are able to conclude (after looking through the evidence they possess) that
the Priory must be dedicated to a number of different causes, all in the name
of protecting the children of Jesus Christ and Mary Magdalene.
 
The first of these goals is to reveal to the world the tomb of Sigebert IV and
the lost treasures of the Jerusalem Temple. Both of these are supposedly the
actual physical records of the genealogy of Jesus Christ. They provide
apparently irrefutable proof of the fact that Jesus fathered children and that
those children exist into the modern day. The tale of these items is linked to
the rise of Charlemagne, the French king who overthrew the Merovingian
dynasty.
 
The second is to promote the rise of a kind of pan-European national pride.
This has been linked to the reinstitution of chivalry, the code of honorable
practice known for its adoption by medieval French knights. The Priory are
said to hope that the rise of chivalry will lead towards a better Europe in the
future, though this is one of the claims which is most often dismissed when
discussing The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.

 
The third goal is associated with the rise in chivalric order and a pan-
European sense of nationalism. The Priory hopes to see the establishment of
a kind of United States of Europe, all under the banner of one religion. This
Holy European Empire will be created and lead by the Merovingian (and
thus holy) bloodline and will involve the conflation of both the political and
religious seats of power. The Holy See will be dethroned and, in his place,
the descendent of Jesus will form the spiritual and political leadership.
 
Finally, the authors of the book believed that — once these goals were
accomplished— the Priory of Sion would be able to take on the role of a
government that spans Europe. This would include the formation of a one-
party government which would provide the Priory with the only means of
real power.
 
The further one moves away from the central tenet of the book, the more it
descends into the realm of typical conspiratorial notions. While there had
been previous suggestions of the existence of Christ’s children (and that
they had been born from Mary Magdalene), The Holy Blood and the Holy
Grail had been the first work to combine these notions with similarly far-
reaching ideas of European power struggles.
 
This is perhaps because the authors incorporated a well known
conspiratorial document into their research. Known as The Protocols of the
Elders of Zion, the tract is distrustful of both the Masons and the Jews. As
such, it has been described as both anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic. For
Lincoln and his fellow writers, the ideas outlined in the document seemed
to run parallel to those they were uncovering in their research into the
history of the Priory of Sion. They even went a step further. According to
the text, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion was the most damning piece of
evidence for the Priory’s activities. They believed that the original text (the
one which had formed the basis of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion) had
not actually had anything to do with Judaism, but had instead been issued
by the Masons (specifically, those who practiced the Scottish Rite) and the
inclusion of the word ‘Zion’ was less a reference to Judaism (as it was
interpreted) but was a reference to the Priory of Sion. It was the Priory

whom the Masons believed to be behind a global conspiracy, not the Jewish
people.
 
Baigent, Lincoln, and Leigh seemed to be convinced that The Protocols of
the Elders of Zion was not intended to be released to the public. Instead, it
merely outlined the way in which the authors and their readers could
wrestle control of the Freemasons in order to undermine and re-organize the
church and the state. The change in the direction of The Protocols was
made following a failed mission to attain influence in the Russian court,
when Serge Nilus altered the text and released it in 1903 in order to
discredit the Catholic Church. The men surrounding the Pope, it seemed to
claim, were actually Jewish and Masonic conspirators, placed into positions
of power. By overlooking the esoteric Christian principles so close to the
Priory of Sion, Nilus managed to distance the text from the original purpose
and left people down the centuries with a warped perception of the original
meaning. Once again, the authors seem to suggest, the Priory of Sion faded
purposefully into the background. 
 
All of this is laid out in nearly 500 pages of text, backed up by a further 36
pages of footnotes and comments, 24 pages of pictures and photographs, as
well as a 13-page bibliography which lists texts in English, German, and
French. Even if the cover of the book might make it look like a thriller, the
interior clearly has its sights set on academic credibility and goes to great
lengths to lay out the truth of the claims. But there’s a populism to the text
that is not usually present in many academic works. Take for example, the
way in which the story is told.
 
Jesus and Mary Magdalene are described as lovers. This, it is claimed, is
backed up by ancient scrolls (though, in actual fact, they are books) which
were discovered in Egypt in 1945 and have become known as the Gnostic
Gospels. But they say the relationship between Jesus and Mary was not
without its problems. The authors claim that Peter — disciple of Jesus and
the man who would eventually found the Catholic Church and become the
first Pope — was jealous. He did not like the intimacy displayed between
the two. When Jesus was crucified, Mary fled across the water and went
into hiding with her children. They are sheltered by the local Jewish

community in the south of France. Already, the story is starting to feel like
a drama, rather than a dry academic work.
 
The story picks up some four hundred years later, as the Merovingian line
begins to rise to power. The French kings are eventually displaced by the
Carolingians and Charlemagne and the bloodline of the Messiah is once
again forced to go into hiding. From there, the descendants of Jesus
transform into the French aristocrats, the House of Lorraine. When one of
their members, Godfrey de Bouillon, joins the first Crusade, he is
eventually awarded the crown of the conquered Holy Lands. He becomes
the first Christian King of Jerusalem for hundreds of years (if ever). But the
unseen hand that has been guiding his rise to the top is none other than the
Priory of Sion. The secret society have yet to be named, but following the
coronation, they begin to build a small priory on Mount Zion in the
captured city. It lends them their name: the Priory of Sion. As they work to
form the Knights Templar, they begin to excavate Solomon’s Temple and
discover a hidden treasure buried beneath the ancient floor. It might be the
remains of Jesus Christ or the Ark of the Covenant. It could even be the
documents which finally prove the existence of Christ’s descendants. 
 
The Priory remain a powerful (though hidden) force to be reckoned with for
hundreds of years. It is not until 1307 that the Catholic Church finally
makes a move to have them eradicated. As the French monarchy (worried
about the existence of a Merovingian bloodline) and the Catholic Church
(worried about potential threats to their domination of religious law)
conspire against the Priory, they make a move against the public bodies.
The Knights Templar is disbanded, its members rounded up and tortured.
The Templars, the Church claims, are devil-worshipping usurers. Without
their great banking and military organizations, the Priory of Sion flees from
public sight. They have their most important secret — the truth about Jesus
Christ — and they resolve to protect it at all costs.
 
One of the most tantalizing aspects of the book, however, is the way in
which it claims that clues and hints as to the truth about the Priory have
been left in many pieces of art scattered across Europe. In the hundreds of
years since the Knights Templar were first prosecuted, the Priory has

satisfied itself with leaving many clues about the truth in medieval and
Renaissance paintings, sculptures, and tapestries. Perhaps most famous of
these is the story of the Grail itself. According to the book (and in a legend
that lends the work its title), the phrase which we know today as Holy Grail
(San Graal) does indeed mean cup of tradition. This is where the image of
the cup that bestows immortality came from. It was even said to be the cup
that Jesus drank from at the last supper. But, the authors claim, this is
actually a mistranslation of the truth. In reality, San Graal is Sang Real. A
letter shifts from the end of one word to the next, there is a slight difference
in spelling. Easy mistakes before the advent of the printing press. And most
importantly, whereas San Graal might have meant the cup of tradition, Sang
Real means holy blood. The lineage of the divine. The children of Jesus
Christ. A clue to this, Priory historians say, can be found in a very familiar
painting. Leonardo da Vinci knew the truth about the Holy Grail, which is
why his depiction of the last supper does not feature a cup placed on the
table in front of Jesus Christ. Clues like these attempt to inform the world of
the truth without being explicit.
 
So, the book suggests, this fascinating history and amazing secret are now
passed down from generation to generation. Over the next 650 years, the
Priory of Sion recruited the best and brightest minds of their age, all under
the guidance of a series of Grand Masters. They bore the secret about Jesus
and Mary Magdalene while watching over the couple’s descendants. It is
the list of these Grand Masters that the team of Henry Lincoln, Michael
Baigent, and Richard Leigh discovered in the National Library of France,
hidden inside the Dossiers Secrets. The list reads like a who’s who of
European artistic and scientific tradition. Victor Hugo. Isaac Newton.
Claude Debussy. Jean Cocteau. Robert Boyle. Leonardo da Vinci.
 
The presentation of these ideas in an exciting and non-academic manner
makes it easy to see why The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail was a
bestseller. The knowledge it seems to confer on its readers points at a
centuries old conspiracy that totally redefines everything we think we know
about European history, about the most popular religion in the world, and
about the current state of geopolitics. It’s a revelation and it is told almost
like a thriller. It even involves the reader.

 
We have mentioned already that Henry Lincoln’s investigations involved a
painting by Nicolas Poussin. The Shepherds of Arcadia, it is pointed out,
features a tomb. On the side of this tomb, the artist had taken the time to
inscribe the words ‘Et in Arcadia Ego,’ a hint that Poussin knew all too
well.
 
This habit of scattering clues across artworks seems to catch up with the
Priory, however. As we know, in 1885, a priest in the small southern French
town of Rennes-le-Chateau suddenly came into a huge amount of money.
The priest, named Berenger Sauniere, is said to have discovered that one of
the pillars in his church was in fact hollow. When he opened it up, he
discovered a number of encrypted documents hidden inside. Along with
help from a local bishop, he worked to break the codes and discovered a
secret message:
 
“To Dagobert II [the last of the Merovingian Kings] king and to Sion
belongs this treasure and he is there dead.”
 
The cryptic message seemed too obscure to be relevant to anything, but
Sauniere realized that it referred to the lineage of Jesus Christ. Using this
information (and the other proof which he found inside the column), he was
able to blackmail the Catholic Church. This provided the priest with a small
fortune, money which he spent on renovating the previously poor and
destitute church, and decorating it with a number of decidedly un-Christian
symbols.
 
So, to recap, it was based on this discovery that Gerard de Sede began to
write his book. From there, it was picked up and read by Henry Lincoln.
Then, the BBC commissioned the production of the pieces for Chronicle.
This put Lincoln in contact with Baigent and Leigh. This led to the
discovery of the documents in the National Library of France. This, finally,
led to the writing of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
 
The final stage in the authors’ depiction of the Priory of Sion was perhaps
the most audacious. After years of conducting research and tracking down

all of the individual pieces that came together to make up The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail, they hinted as to the identity of the extant Grand
Master. The man currently heading up the Priory of Sion, they believed,
was named Pierre Plantard de St Clair. Pierre, they surmised, was a direct
descendent of the Merovingian line and a claimant to the French throne.
Thus, he was also the living embodiment of the bloodline of Jesus Christ.
The reason that this information was beginning to come to light, the book
claimed, was because Plantard was on the verge of launching his political
career, heading up a movement which had the power to change world
politics forever. What the future held for Plantard, however, the authors
could not say.
 
The millennia-old mystery laid out by the authors of the book leads the
reader right up to the moment when they are turning the pages, holding the
text in their hand. It involves the reader, brings them into the fold of an
ancient conspiracy.
 
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail not only outlines a revolutionary plot
about the history of the Catholic Church, but it deftly brings the reader into
the fold. In a clever fashion, Baigent, Leigh, and Lincoln manage to make
their own quest for the truth involving to the reader. Through the very act of
knowing about the Priory of Sion, the authors manage to make the reader
complicit in the conspiracy. This is appealing on several levels and manages
to explain why such a book would prove so popular, especially when other
historical non-fiction works rarely sell in such numbers. It would eventually
lead to Blythe Brown picking up a copy and passing the information on to
her husband. It would eventually lead to two of the authors standing in a
London courtroom, accusing a fiction writer of plagiarism. It is, no doubt,
directly responsible for your interest in the Priory of Sion today. But that is
not to say the book was without its critics. In the next chapter, we will begin
to probe a little deeper into the complexities of the book and how it weaves
pieces together. In doing so, we should begin to realize the truth about the
Priory of Sion.


The Royal Bloodline
 
It might surprise modern readers to know that The Holy Blood and the Holy
Grail was not immediately lambasted by critics. In this modern age of
instant communication and a world wide web, such a book might be
expected to cause outrage across the world, the fires fuelled by the easy
availability of information. In the 1980s, however, there was an excited but
fairly muted response to the ideas that were put forward by the authors.
 
There were those who were not impressed by the concepts. Hugh
Montefiore, for example, was the Anglican Bishop of Birmingham at the
time of the book’s release, and he went on the television to discuss the
book. Also present on the show were the authors themselves. The two
parties had something of a showdown about the truth behind the book,
though aired as it was on late night television and involving a British priest
and a group of authors, the discussion did not become too heated.
 
Elsewhere, there were positive reactions. In the newspapers of the day,
literary critics seemed to enjoy the fascinating insight into a previously
unknown world. The Times Educational Supplement, for example, listed it
as “compulsive reading,” while the Oxford Times described the book as
being full of “well documented and often sinister facts.” There were some
dissenting opinions in the press. The Times Literary Supplement (in a
separate review to their Educational cohorts) called the book “rather silly”
and considered it to be “worthless.” There did seem to be an
acknowledgement of how challenging the ideas might be, with the Sunday
Telegraph concluding that the book would no doubt “infuriate many
ecclesiastical authorities,” even if it did concede that the authors might yet
be proven right.
 
Even in America, on the other side of the Atlantic, people were taking
notice of the book. Though the Chronicle series had not aired in the United
States at the time, papers such as the Los Angeles Times reviewed the book

and proclaimed that there was certainly enough inside to “challenge many
traditional Christian beliefs.”
 
Reviews such as these made a big difference to how the work was viewed.
In bookshops, there is a considerable difference between those books which
are located in the New Age or Spiritual section, and those which are found
under the banner of history. Though The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
might normally be expected to be found in the former, due to the
unqualified history credentials of its authors, the press surrounding the book
meant that it was moved into the latter part of the book store. Being placed
in the history section brought with it a certain cache and an expectation of
diligent research and truthfulness from those who were browsing the
shelves. For a book which seemed to be so obsessed with conspiracies and
ancient mysteries, The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail did not receive the
usual scepticism given to books about alien abductions or the lost city of
Atlantis. It was considered a serious historical investigation, and thus the
existence of the Priory of Sion was taken to be rooted in clear, well-
researched historical fact. Accordingly, it sold tens of thousands of copies.
 
Buoyed by the success of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, the authors
embarked upon not just one, but a vast number of successors across a
variety of media. We have already mentioned The Messianic Legacy (the
book’s sequel) which was released less than three years later, but there were
also many others, written by all three authors or individually. These had
titles such as The Dead Sea Scrolls Deception and The Elixir and the Stone.
Henry Lincoln took a special interest in the church at Rennes-le-Chateau
and began to produce guides, videos, maps, lectures, and a library of other
materials focused on the building.
 
In the wake of the popularity of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, there
has been a tidal wave of merchandise and media focused on similar themes
to the original book. It’s not even limited to the original three writers.
Simply typing Mary Magdalene into an internet search engine will equip
you with hundreds of sources proclaiming to know the truth about the
biblical figure. This is true of the Holy Grail, the Knights Templar, and

many other figures that are tangentially related to the Priory of Sion. In
short, it has become a booming industry.
 
What’s more, those who have found success in publishing books on these
subjects have discovered the possibility of riches and sales figures above
and beyond anything normal historians might expect. It’s not just books, but
DVDs, CD-ROMs, and now YouTube videos that all form a new canon of
Priory-related media that can almost guarantee a return on your investment.
And it can all be traced back to the initial success of The Holy Blood and
the Holy Grail. Ironically, a book which is obsessed with tracing the lineage
of an important historical figure can have its influence traced over the
course of almost forty years. Even this book you are reading right now is in
some way related to the successes experienced by Baigent, Leigh, and
Lincoln. And this is without even mentioning the astronomical success of
The Da Vinci Code.
 
But all of this success brought with it an added sense of judgement. Richard
Leigh and Michael Baigent were not historians, neither was Henry Lincoln
(though he did play one on TV). And so, following on from the
astronomical sales figures and the growing interest in the Priory of Sion and
the ideas laid out in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, it should be only
logical that the academic credentials of the writers would come to be
questioned. When this happened, a new avenue of criticism would open.
Once people started to take a critical look at the ideas behind the book,
would it be able to hold up? Was the research done into the book enough to
guarantee the existence of the Priory exactly as they had described?
 
For those who had viewed the Chronicle series on television or for those
who had picked up The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail from the history
section in the bookstore, there was an assumption of the rigor that had been
put into the research by Henry Lincoln and his cohorts. It is a basic social
contract, to presume that when a piece of media is presented in this style
that it adheres to the principles of academic history. Other items featured on
Chronicle were written and shot by qualified historians. The other books on
the shelf in the store would have been written by similarly qualified people.
For all intents and purposes, this wave of new media presented the Priory of

Sion as part of the same canon of historical research that one might expect.
It just happened to be more exciting that the typical fare, and presented like
a fictitious thriller.
 
But while it might have been assumed that the three authors of the historical
work had just lucked upon a fascinating tale during their normal courses of
investigation, it became apparent that the three men were particularly
interested in, shall we say, non-orthodox views of Christianity. The areas
which they considered — the early days of the Church, the writing of the
Bible, Freemasonry, alchemy, Renaissance art, myths, legends, and secret
societies — were certainly beyond the normal bounds of historical
investigation. But if it were to be assumed that the writers were adhering to
traditional research principles, then there was nothing wrong with this. If
anything, they should be applauded for making history so interesting and
relevant to the mainstream.
 
But therein lay the problem. The three authors of The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail did not hold themselves to the accepted standards. They knew
what was required of researchers in the field of history and they ignored
those rules. It states as much in their book. But rather than shying away
from such accusations, the trio embraced their lack of historicism. As well
as having discovered the truth about the Priory of Sion and the truth about
the Holy Grail, it seemed that the three men believed that they had also
discovered a brand new way in which to look at history.
 
One need only look at some of the less exhilarating passages of The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail. While there are passages of the text which
discuss secret societies and plots within the Catholic Church, there are also
sections which are not nearly as exciting. The reader might be forgiven for
glancing over the parts of the text where the authors take a moment to
discuss the “sorely inadequate” techniques that they believe mark
“academic scholarship.” Indeed, in the next sentence, they outline their
belief that they were compelled to abandon such “conventional analysis” if
they were to find the “requisite connections” that exist between the
“radically diverse bodies of subject matter” that they choose to investigate.
That is to say, they did not believe they were required to check their

research to academic standards, simply because of the subject matter that
they were discussing.
 
As we will see later in the text, this is an incredibly significant admission,
and one which will define the way in which we view the Priory of Sion, and
how the group is seen by the world. It might also hold the clue as to just
how a text was able to become so incredibly popular when compared to
other works within the discipline. Indeed, a quick scan of the paragraph
from which the above quotes were taken would serve only to furnish the
reader with a number of key words. These could be “academic,”
“conventional,” or “scholarship,” all of which would hint at a higher level
of academic credentials than were actually being used. By the time the full
meaning behind the paragraph is clear, the less attentive reader has already
moved on to exciting tales of Catholic conspiracies.
 
The justification given for the lack of scholarly principles in the research is
said to be the subject matter itself. Since the Priory of Sion was counter to
the conventional historical narrative, the writers suggests, their research
should not have to adhere to the conventional standards by which historical
narratives are judged. There was very little recognized previous material for
them to actually study, because they were breaking new ground. The
authors manage to paint a picture in the minds of the readers that their
version of events is dangerous, revolutionary. Any criticism of the ideas
which stemmed from the old guard, from the traditionally academic, would
be obvious. It’s almost like a conspiracy. Simply by pointing out the lack of
standards for the research, the critics are placed firmly on the side of the
bad guys. It made any criticism of the book very difficult indeed. For the
authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, the novelist is freer than the
historian. While the historian is confined and constrained by the academic
rigors, the novelist can speculate, can envision, and can chase down even
the slightest of leads. It made Baigent, Leigh, and Lincoln into something
like detectives, adventurous men sailing dangerous seas in order to bring
home the truth. It made future accusations leveled against Dan Brown all
the stranger. But it was exactly this atmosphere and this approach which
allowed the writers to put forward their concepts while remaining relatively
free of criticism.

 
So what does this mean for the book? And more importantly, what does it
mean for the theories the book puts forward? A close reading of The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail will mean that you frequently encounter words
such as “if” and “probable.” Turn to any random section of the book and the
prose style will inevitably continue in this way. Once it has been pointed
out, it is impossible to dissuade this from the mind. It is worth remembering
that Lincoln and Leigh both had an extensive history in fiction writing.
Their styles were far from academic. Accomplished writers, they would
know how to present an idea in the right fashion. Through their careful use
of language, as authors they could write in what is best described as a
presumptuous style. Leaps of faith are made, as well as assumptions. But
the clever writing disguises this on first glance.
 
These assumptions seem, on the surface, to be perfectly reasonable. For
example, Henry Lincoln asks the reader to consider two concepts. First, that
a man was born of a virgin, was able to walk on the surface of water, and —
after he was executed — rose from the dead. Secondly, that a man was
born, got married, and raised a family with his wife. Which scenario is
more reasonable, Lincoln asks the reader, which was more likely to be true?
Once the reader seems to naturally assume the latter might be more
reasonable, that it is the far more probably to have happened, Lincoln then
uses this as a means of backing up his argument.
 
But this is a flawed approach. Take, for example, the gospels. In these
books of the Bible, the reader is presented with the story of a man who was
born of a virgin, who did walk on water, and who did come back to life. As
questionable a premise as these ideas may be, they are at least mentioned in
the key text of the Christian faith. The ideas put forward by Lincoln — that
Jesus got married and had children — are not. They are not mentioned
anywhere. The reader is not provided with any source — at least, any
source that is readily available — that indicates that Jesus might have had
children. Instead, the evidence put forward by Lincoln asks the reader to
make an assumption. As credible as this plea might be, it is devoid of the
standards that are normally required for an assertion in a history book.
 

Indeed, talking many years later, Henry Lincoln tells a story about how he
and his fellow writers came to the idea that the bloodline of Jesus might
have been linked to the Merovingian kings. Whereas a historian might have
followed a series of clues within a number of texts, the story Lincoln tells
seems more like the writing department of an American television show. As
the writers are sat around discussing the matter, Lincoln remembers it being
as though a penny suddenly dropped. Almost out of the blue, as the team
were discussing how they believed there was something ‘fishy’ about the
Merovingian line, the pieces of information all aligned. Merovingian kings.
Fishy. Fish are associated with the early Christians. They were a symbol of
Jesus. Fish. Jesus. Merovingian. They must all be linked. After that, Lincoln
suggests, it was just a case of putting all of the pieces into place. With
historical research conducted in this manner, it is easy to see why The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail eventually drew criticism for the way it was
written.
 
So, where does this leave us? We can consider The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail as the key turning point in the story of the Priory of Sion and
how its existence became known to the public. But we also know that the
way in which the book was researched was not entirely in line with the
standards we might expect of non-fiction history books which make far-
reaching and world changing claims. If nothing else, it increases the amount
of scrutiny which we should place on the authors. But should it affect the
way in which we view the Priory of Sion itself? Even if the authors were
pushing the envelope in terms of their research, do we need to critically
examine the society itself? In the next chapter, we will begin to pick apart
the story of the Priory of Sion and how it has impacted the world.


A Growing Revolt
 
While the initial reviews (and the sales figures) for The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail were good, it was not long before one or two people began to
notice the cracks in the theories. Those who had paid more attention during
the course of reading the book or those who already had a background in
the subject matter (or even those who knew how academic research is
typically carried out) began to voice their concerns over the idea that
Baigent, Lincoln, and Leigh had put together. The list of criticisms began to
grow and grow. Many of the comments were relatively minor, but added
together to form a kind of snowball effect. As the criticisms piled up, the
authors were forced to defend themselves and to defend the existence of the
Priory of Sion.
 
If we are to look at some of the most fundamental flaws in the book’s
reasoning, then it might help to start at the most obvious point: the central
thesis. This is the idea that the bloodline of Jesus Christ was preserved in
the Merovingian monarchy and their descendants. This very idea, though
seemingly possible, is limited in scope by its very nature. One major
problem is the time span between the rise of the French dynasty in question
and the supposed date on which Jesus Christ was executed. There are
roughly four hundred years between the two events, allowing enough time
for perhaps twelve or thirteen generations to have lived, died, and passed on
their genetic legacy. If we are to reason in the way of the book’s authors, is
it not probable that these subsequent generations gave birth to more than
one child each time? Is it not probably that – rather than a single, definitive
bloodline – there is a sprawling family tree? If these ideas are taken to be
true, there would not only be the single Merovingian dynasty, but hundreds
(if not thousands) of potential descendants of Christ. If this were true, then
our modern age would be filled with people who (perhaps unwittingly)
were all part of the same shared ancestry. The number of potential
progenies of Jesus might by now number in the millions. It would seem
strange that the Priory of Sion would exist to guard only a single member of

such a potentially massive family, and unthinkable that such a secret
organization could keep tabs on every possible descendant.
 
One need only look at the royal houses of Europe for proof of this idea in
practice. Queen Elizabeth II of England, for example, can trace her family
roots back many centuries. Even with the huge amounts of inbreeding and
intermarrying that used to define the blue bloods of the Old World, the
current Queen of England shares her ancestry with many thousands of
others. Not all of them are considered royalty. But with the coups, wars,
successions, revolutions, and abdications that have occurred throughout
European history, there is always potentially someone who is primed to take
over. The idea that there might be one single living descendant of Jesus
Christ (who is guarded by the Priory of Sion) seems almost ridiculous when
stepping back from the book for a moment.
 
Which brings us neatly to Pierre Plantard. Plantard occupies a unique role
in this story, in that The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail specifically names
him as the living successor to Jesus Christ. This is a huge mantle to place
on any one person. That they also describe him as the extant Grand Master
of the Priory of Sion adds another string to Plantard’s increasingly busy
bow. But what did Plantard himself believe?
 
Despite the claims made by the authors of the bestselling book, Pierre
Plantard has never once described himself as a potential relation to Jesus
Christ. While it is certainly true that he believes he can trace his lineage
back to Dagobert II (the last of the Merovingian kings), he has distanced
himself from the claims made about his family, which were mentioned in
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Indeed, by 1983, Plantard was
specifically going out of his way to deny the theories put forward in the
book and to disavow himself of any knowledge or station that the authors
might have thrust upon him.
 
Another major point of contention raised by the book’s critics concerns the
actual idea of the Holy Grail itself. This concept, when looking back
through the history books, does not appear to have existed before the
twelfth century. As it stands, many researchers into medieval French

literature have credited Chretien de Troyes with having invented the idea.
The French poet worked under the patronage of Count Philip, ruler of
Flanders, and was an author of knightly romances. These chivalric tales
were immensely popular during the time and one of them — The Story of
the Grail — proved to be a hugely successful poem. As with all successful
poems of the day, it was borrowed, copied, reworked, and retold
extensively. Historian Richard Barber has gone as far as to say that, prior to
1180, no one would have had any clue as to what exactly a Holy Grail
might have been at all. By extension, Barber comments that the ‘Sang Real’
reasoning given in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail is nothing more than
an error deriving from the mistranslation by an English writer of the
original French text that was made in the 15th century. Far from conclusive
proof, the mistake seems to have been a genuine product of an age before
the printing press, when all book production was done by hand.
 
Even the story of the priest that is so central to Henry Lincoln’s retelling is
questionable. Berenger Sauniere, the head priest of the church at Rennes-le-
Chateau, was said to have mysteriously come into a huge amount of wealth,
a phenomena which the book attributes to his uncovering the truth about the
lineage of Jesus and the Priory of Sion’s secret. But we have the records for
Sauniere’s church. While he did fund renovations for the building, we know
that this was accomplished through the selling of masses, a popular means
of fundraising for a church at the time. From 1896 up until 1905, the priest
advertised the sale of his masses in the local newspapers. Clients could pay
via postal order and would receive a mention during the church service (a
boon when they eventually ascended to heaven and stood to be judged
before the pearly gates.) The venture was so successful that the priest was
receiving as many as 150 postal orders a day, order which came not just
from small religious communities, but from people outside of France. Even
despite this success, Sauniere himself was far from rich. There are records
of the priest applying for a bank loan in 1913, with the paperwork placing
his personal finances at just thirteen thousand francs. If he had uncovered a
secret that threatened the very foundations of the Catholic Church, he was
by extension terribly unskilled in the art of blackmail.
 

Staying in Rennes-le-Chateau, one of the claims made in The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail is demonstrably false. The book suggests that Berenger
Sauniere discovered that one of the pillars in the church was hollow. It even
goes as far as to suggest that this particular pillar was constructed in a
Visigoth style, linking it artistically to the Merovingian dynasty. Within this
hollow pillar, the authors claim, the priest found a number of hidden
parchments. But this pillar still exists in the church. As any visitor to the
building will notice, it is far from hollow. Like every other pillar in the
building, it is solid. There are no hidden compartments.
 
Another artistic error in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail involves the
tomb supposedly depicted in the work of French artist Poussin. Lincoln
recollects how he was informed during his investigation that the tomb bore
a striking resemblance to a real life counterpart. This much is true. Which
tomb was the original, however, was a fact that Lincoln got drastically
wrong. The tomb, which is near Rennes, that Lincoln was pointed towards
was not centuries old. It had been constructed in 1903 and belonged to the
wife of a local land owner. Poussin’s painting was completed around 250
years earlier. It is possible to comb through the text line by line and point
out the numerous errors in this fashion. Pointing out these first few,
however, can begin to show of just how little the research holds up under
close inspection.


The Truth
 
But even as the story begins to unravel, it can help to pay an increased
amount of attention to the plight of Pierre Plantard. Unlike the other errors
committed during the research of the book, Plantard was the only person
who was directly named (and was alive to deal with the resulting attention.)
If, as suggested in the book, Plantard was the supposed descendant of Jesus
Christ, how would this affect his life? One thing that it certainly
accomplished was forcing people to look closer at the man’s history,
something which he may or may not have desired.
 
One of the facts uncovered during an investigation into the supposed last in
the Merovingian line related to one of the more troubled times in France’s
recent history. In the latter months of 1940, France found herself occupied
by Nazi Germany. The invaders sought to set up a government in France,
one which they controlled and through which they could rule over the
country. This was known as the Vichy government, due to the location of its
headquarters, and was headed up by a man named Marshal Petain. One day,
Petain received a letter from a man signing his name as Varran de Varestra.
The message was a plea, with the writer begging Petain to involve France in
no further combat. Rather than asking for an end to the conflict, however,
the author of the letter specifically cited “Masonic and Jewish” conspirators
as posing a direct threat to France and even the world. The writer of the
letter claimed to have “about a hundred reliable men” on his side who were
“devoted to our cause.” If Marshal Petain gave the order, Varran de Varestra
and his reliable men who would leap to defeat the conspiracy.
 
The letter seemed to cause something of a stir within the halls of the Vichy
government. An investigation was conducted and a report was put together
at the request if the Secretary of State for the Interior. According to the
findings, this so-called ‘Varran de Varestra’ was none other than Pierre
Athanase Marie Plantard, who had been born in Paris on the 18th of March,
1920. He was described as a bachelor and the son of French parents, one of
whom was a butler who had died in a work accident. At the time the letter

was written, Plantard was living with his mother in a two bedroom
apartment, surviving on the money from his mother’s pension.
 
Pierre Plantard, it seemed, had a long history in a number of organizations.
He had established and maintained a number of groups, many of whom had
a decidedly anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic tilt. La Renovation Nationale
Francaise, Plantard’s then-current group, was described by the officer who
conducted the investigation as being “purely a figment of the imagination of
Plantard.” While the group’s leader claimed that there were 3,245 members,
there were in fact only four. The report went on to describe Plantard as
being “one of those dotty, pretentious young men” who set up and ran
fictitious groups such as these “in an effort to look important.” The report
was damning.
 
So Plantard dropped off the radar for a number of years. He resurfaces in
the government records in 1954, when it is reported that he was held in
custody in Germany after it was revealed that he was attempting to organize
the meeting of a secret society. The post-war government in Germany did
not approve of such things and thus held Plantard before realizing he posed
little threat to anyone. He appears again in police records in 1956, this time
in his native France. This time, the mayor of Annemasse — a town in
Haute-Savoie where Plantard was now living — discussed the
imprisonment of one Pierre Plantard in 1953, mentioning that he had been
found guilty of “offences against property.” But it is in 1956, in the same
town of Annemasse, that we find one of the most important pieces of
evidence in this entire book. During the summer of that year, a man named
Pierre Plantard went to the government offices and registered a new
organization. He described himself as one of four founding members,
people who were tasking themselves with “the defence of the rights and
freedoms of low cost housing.” The name he choose for the organization
was the Priory of Sion. But after this sudden introduction into the annals of
government, Plantard and the Priory drop off the radar.
 
At this juncture, it is important to introduce another player. Noel Corbu
comes to us in the first months of 1956, after a number of articles about him
began to appear in the French press. At the time, we know that he was not

only a restaurant owner in Rennes-le-Chateau, but was now the owner of
the estate of Berenger Sauniere. His hotel, Hotel de la Tour, was located in a
fairly isolated location and many saw his appearances in the papers as an
attempt to drum up publicity and encourage a few more guests to come and
visit. The business had been open for almost a year and it seemed that the
owner’s main method of advertising involved telling people about a
mysterious past filled with treasure and conspiracies. One only need take a
look at one of the headlines of a Corbu interview to know the angle he was
trying to promote. It read ‘the Billionaire Priest of Rennes-le-Chateau’s
Fabulous Discovery.’
 
We don’t know the exact details of what happened next in the story, but it is
clear that during the course of the next five years, Plantard traveled to meet
Corbu. Plantard had learned about the story of Berenger Sauniere and his
sudden fortune. It had captivated Plantard and he wanted to know more.
While it might be true that he was interested in the narrative aspects of the
legend, it might be more likely that he recognized the financial potential
that lay within the story. For a man who dreamed of carving out a self-
important niche in the world, this was an amazing opportunity. And so, after
consulting with Corbu, Plantard began to write a book. It was loosely based
on the story of Berenger Sauniere and the church at Rennes-le-Chateau,
though it incorporated a number of key additions. Details such as the
cryptic documents hidden inside the Visigoth pillar were entirely Plantard’s
creation. He even went so far as to have the documents themselves
constructed. A man named Phillipe de Cherisey (described as a “boozy but
bright aristocrat”) forged the papers that were said to be taken from the
church. But the group did not stop there. They also manufactured a second
set of documents and placed them into the National Library of France in a
covert operation. If Plantard’s story were ever doubted, he had already
planted the corroborating evidence.
 
The only problem was that Plantard was an awful writer. He had put
together a book describing the mystery of Rennes-le-Chateau and passed it
around to a number of publishers. But no one wanted it. So Plantard turned
to another of his friends, an author named Gerard de Sede. De Sede took the
book Plantard had been working on, tidied it up, and eventually had it

published in1967. When we look into the details of the publishing contract,
we see some interesting additions. Philippe de Cherisey, for example, is
noted as being entitled to a share in the profits. We even have a collection of
letters that were sent back and forth between De Cherisey, Plantard, and De
Sede which discuss how their elaborate hoax was progressing and the
numerous strategies which they developed in case anyone should accuse
them of lying. One such strategy was to make use of an organization
Plantard had already registered, the Priory of Sion, and plant evidence of its
ancient history in the National Library. It would sit there for years,
undiscovered, until an inquisitive hand plucked it from the shelf and used it
to prove the existence of the Priory. That inquisitive hand belonged to
Henry Lincoln.
 
It was not long after the publication of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
that all of this was revealed to the public. A journalist named Jean Luc
Chaumeil, writing in 1983, was living on the fringe of the group of men
who worked so hard to set up the hoax. He knew them personally and even
exchanged communications. He had in his possession not only a series of
letters detailing the plan, but a 44-page confession written by Philippe de
Cherisey which outlines how the forgery was handled. After Chaumeil
launched his accusations against the group, other researchers such as Robert
Richardson, Paul Smith, and Henry Cran (a producer for the BBC) began to
look into the stories of Henry Lincoln and his fellow writers. It was Cran,
researching the theories put forward in the Chronicle films, who began an
investigation into the Priory of Sion and its legitimacy. His findings formed
the foundations of a 1996 episode of Timewatch titled the History of a
Mystery, in which he managed to trace the family tree of the Plantard
family back as far as the 16th Century. He discovered that, rather than
dethroned royalty, Plantard’s ancestor was in fact a walnut farmer.
 
And this is where the truth finally becomes clear. It was a hoax. A
conspiracy. An attempt to trick the public. Pierre Plantard, far from being
the last in the bloodline of Jesus Christ, was a chancer who had hoped to
make a name for himself. He had no idea that a group of writers from
England would be so easily fooled by his games, especially to the extent
that they were. What had begun as a small lie — perhaps even an attempt to

drum up business for a failing hotel — had turned into an international
sensation. The publication of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail changed
everything. It brought an increased scrutiny to Plantard’s story, which
buckled under the weight of the investigation.
 
It soon became clear that the long lines of names and genealogies that had
been presented as evidence were in fact simply copied from other
documents. They had been tinkered with here and there, made to fit, while
others were simply travelogues which had been repurposed for the situation.
We even know what motivated the people to invent their stories. De
Cherisey states his interest in surrealism and had a background in
experimental fiction, including being a member of the 1960s organization,
the Workshop for Potential Literature, which saw its members invent
puzzles, codes, ciphers, and tricks on a regular basis. Plantard, as should be
obvious by this point, was desperate in his quest for attention and had
always seen the construction of mysterious secret societies as a means to
that end. Many of the other participants — Gerard de Sede and Noel Corbu,
for example — simply hoped to make a bit of money and never expected
Plantard’s plan to explode in popularity as it did.
 
It must have been strange to see the group of men as they steadily began to
feed Henry Lincoln more and more information. Lincoln seemed genuine in
his intrigue, convinced in the true nature of the conspiracy he was
beginning to unravel. In that respect, the French conspirators played him
perfectly. They were always on hand to provide a nudge in the right
direction or a hint about where to look for a clue. In many respects, they
allowed Lincoln to work himself into the story, to become a part of the
legacy of the Priory of Sion in much the same way that readers of The Holy
Blood and the Holy Grail were seduced by the book. It must have been
astonishing to the original plotters to discover that not only had they
successfully tricked Lincoln into creating the film about their invention, but
also that they managed to string him along for a further ten years, during
which time he shot two more films and brought in his fellow investigators.
 
But by the mid-nineties, well after the release of the best-selling book,
Plantard seemed unable to perpetuate his invention. By this time, his true

nature had been revealed, rather than the invented persona as a descendant
of Jesus Christ. This resulted in an admission — under oath in a French
courtroom — that Plantard had invented everything. The entire business, he
admitted, was nothing more than a fraud.
 
His death in 2000 was not met with revulsion or derision, as some might
expect for an extravagant fraudster. Nor was he mourned as the last in a
divine bloodline. Rather, his death was treated with something of a
nostalgic remembrance. France had lost a jovial and mostly harmless
conman. By this point in time, there was no one left to believe his story and
the entire episode was seen as something of a humorous incident. Well
done, people thought, at managing to trick the English writers. Very funny
indeed. But while everyone in France seemed to be able to see Plantard for
what he really was, there were a few people who still clung to the belief that
he had been telling the truth. They still believed in the Priory of Sion.
Among them were Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh, and even Dan Brown.
Thanks to their continued belief, the story of the Priory of Sion is far from
over.


The Victims of the Priory
 
As it stands, then, there is indeed a conspiracy surrounding the Priory of
Sion. The only problem is that it is an entirely different conspiracy than the
one we set out to investigate. At the beginning of this book, we began with
the promise of uncovering a millennia-old secret that concerned the very
founding principles of the world’s foremost religion. But as we trace the
story further and further backwards in time, it soon becomes very clear that
the original premise is built on very shaky foundations. Despite the claims
of truth that are reiterated throughout works such as The Da Vinci Code and
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, we are left with a certainty that the
entire affair has been an attempt to pull the wool over the public’s eyes.
Rather than a story that begins close to 0 BC, our story really starts around
1950 AD and tries to write itself into the history books. While we originally
set out to uncover the victims of an ancient Catholic conspiracy, we should
ask ourselves who became the victims of a modern attempt at fraud?
 
Perhaps the most obvious victim is Henry Lincoln. We can have little doubt
that — at least in 1969, when Lincoln first went on holiday to the south of
France — he honestly believed in the truth of the story he began to uncover.
As recently as 2004, he was discussing Pierre Plantard with an interviewer.
During the course of the discussion, Lincoln mentioned that the now-
deceased Plantard would have made an excellent poker player. With an
increasing degree of vehemence, Lincoln passes over the Frenchman’s
unreadable qualities and mentions that we as a public actually know very
little about Pierre Plantard, much in the same way that we know very little
about Berenger Sauniere. Furthermore, he exclaimed, we know very little
about the Priory of Sion. In fact, he finished, we know almost nothing at all.
Lincoln, during the remainder of the interview, laments the existence of
“demonstrable facts,” as he calls them. As he admits, the majority of
writing is actually “hearsay evidence, guesswork and interpretation.” As
Lincoln confesses, none of the written works on the subject — including his
own — hold any validity at all.
 

This is a damning statement. It seems to be both a confession and a ray of
hope. Even if he admits to the fact that his own book contains a huge
amount of speculation, the lack of provable knowledge about the
background of Plantard (and the Priory of Sion) seems to be an indication
that there could well be something there. If only we were to dig a little
deeper or search a little harder, we might be able to finally uncover the
evidence of the Priory of Sion that men such as Henry Lincoln have been
searching for over many decades.
 
But as damning as Lincoln’s interview might be, it is also untrue. It is false
to say that we know nothing about Plantard or Berenger Sauniere, or even
— by extension — about the Priory of Sion. In fact, we actually know quite
a large amount. One of the best-known facts we have in our possession is
the knowledge that the existence of the Priory of Sion is a lie. It is a scam.
A con. A fraud, and one which tricked Lincoln completely. Henry Lincoln
was perhaps the first major victim of this con and, so complete was the trick
that the con seems to have endured to this day. At the back of Henry
Lincoln’s mind is an insistent suggestion that there might actually be a
Priory of Sion after all. It niggles away at him and refuses to allow him to
disavow the theory altogether.
 
So while we know that the Priory of Sion was indeed a conspiracy created
by a small group of French con men, we know that the first victims were
actually those who did the most to popularize the lie. That leads us to the
next step in the process and one of the most important questions of all.
Were the writers of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail simply the victims
of a hoax? Did they willingly allow themselves to be deceived? Or were
they even a part of the deception themselves?
 
For more information on this question, it might help to turn to one of the
writers who did actually expose the lies behind Plantard and the Priory of
Sion. Jean Luc Chaumeil released his own book in 1979, which was only a
short time after the broadcast of the last in the series of films Henry Lincoln
produced for Chronicle. It was still a good three years before the release of
the book by Henry Lincoln, Richard Leigh, and Michael Baigent, at a time
in which these three men were said to be conducting their (supposedly)

rigorous research. In a later interview with Channel Four television (a
British broadcaster), Chaumeil mentions a story about how he tried to get in
contact with the men who were writing The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
Chaumeil is adamant that he attempted to contact the trio up to a year
before their book was published in order to alert them to the nature of the
scam.
 
Such an allegation would have a big impact on how we view the authors of
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Had they intentionally ignored such a
warning and published their ideas anyway, at least without checking up on
Chaumeil’s comments, then it would render their decision making process
questionable, to say the least. Such an accusation was directly leveled at
Michael Baigent himself during the filming of an investigation by the actor
and television historian Tony Blackburn. When asked whether the French
journalist’s accusations were true, Baigent states that he cannot recall the
incident. Not only this, but he goes on to state that Chaumeil was “never
necessarily very close to the inner groups of the Priory.” It is unclear to
whom Baigent is referring in this comment. It might be a reference to the
group of men who had created the Priory and forged the documents that had
so successfully fooled people. Or, conversely, it might be a reference to the
actual Priory of Sion themselves.
 
But thankfully, Tony Robinson followed up the question and asked Baigent
about his opinions on Chaumeil’s allegations that the entire Priory of Sion
organization was nothing more than a surrealist fantasy. Baigent’s answer is
simple and to the point. “He’s wrong,” Baigent exclaims. When asked how
he can be quite so sure that the journalist’s version of events is incorrect,
Baigent puts forward his own research skills and abilities forward as proof.
He has seen the documents himself, Baigent tells his interviewer, has
researched them and spent six years examining and learning about the
Priory of Sion. To that extent, and with all of his research having been done,
Baigent states that he is “satisfied that the Priory exists.” It would be hard
for Baigent to be any clearer on his views. Even in recent times, he seems
convinced that the documents and histories that he presented to the world in
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail were entirely legitimate.
 

In actual fact, Baigent has gone on record time and time again and
reiterated that he believes both he and his team checked, examined, and
verified all the information they came across in the course of their research.
Not only does Baigent claim that he and the team checked everything they
could, but he was happy with their conclusion, that it “proved accurate.”
The style and diligence of this checking is not mentioned, however, though
it cannot have been entirely thorough. By 1993, every person involved in
the French side of the hoax had as much as admitted their guilt. The
documents — including the Dossiers Secrets that had been hidden in the
National Library of France ­— had been confirmed as fakes.
 
But Baigent did not relent. The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail was
reprinted in 1996 and the author took the time to address these accusations
in an afterword he wrote especially for the new edition. Along with the
other authors of the book, it was argued that the accusations leveled against
the book and its theories stood on shaky ground. Baigent, Leigh, and
Lincoln suggested that Plantard did not stand to “gain financially or in any
other way” from fabricating the documents. They reiterated once again that
they believed there was no reason to doubt Plantard’s word. It seems a
stretch that the authors could truly believe that Leonardo da Vinci and Sir
Isaac Newton had led hidden lives and kept the secret of the bloodline of
Jesus Christ, but not that Pierre Plantard could have invented or lied about
the Priory of Sion.
 
It is the origins of the Priory that have caused the loudest defences from the
authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. In the follow up to their
best-selling book, titled The Messianic Legacy, the authors doubled down
on their belief in the existence of the Priory of Sion. Though the book was
published in 1987, long after Chaumeil’s articles revealed the truth,
Baigent, Leigh, and Lincoln reiterated their belief in the Priory’s
authenticity. Not only that, but the sequel made it clear just what they
thought of the accusations that their previous claims might not have been
true. In one section of the book, the authors admit that “nothing appeared
straightforward” when they were researching the Priory. They enter into a
vivid description of the nature of the Priory of Sion in which they compare
its existence to “a holographic image.” This image, they say, shifted,

altered, and appeared differently under changing lights. From one side, the
book claims, the Priory of Sion appeared to be an “influential, powerful and
wealthy international secret society,” though they concede that, in another
light, the Priory might appear to be nothing more than a “dazzlingly
ingenious hoax devised by a small group of individuals for obscure
purposes of their own.” Perhaps, the authors suggest, both views were true.
 
This is an interesting tactic by the writers. In writing this passage, they
place their own interpretation of the hoax on equal footing with the truth.
Both versions are equal, they seem to suggest, just different perspectives.
But while the idea that the Priory of Sion is nothing more than a con was
backed up by reams of evidence and confessions, their own claims about
the true nature of the Priory was still based on documents which were
known to be fraudulent. While it might seem that the authors were being
reasonable in adding an element of doubt, their acquiescence is nothing of
the sort. Once again, they resort to depending on poor and inadequate
research skills, wrapped up in convincing rhetoric.
 
One need only look at Baigent’s background for some insight into why he
might want to believe in the Priory of Sion. The man’s personal history
points towards someone who could very easily fall into the belief that there
might be a negative agenda hidden within the Catholic Church. As per his
own recollections, Baigent was raised in a devoutly Catholic household. His
entire youth featured a dedication to the church, so it’s possible that any
rejection of their teachings could be a form of anti-establishment
resentment. In his home town in New Zealand, Michael Baigent and his
family would attend their local Catholic church at least three times a week.
From the age of five, he was even given private lessons from a theology
tutor on the history and doctrine of the Catholic Church. Like most
teenagers, he rebelled against his parents and the overarching institutions in
his life. But while some teenagers turn to drink or drugs, the young Michael
Baigent still felt the need to scratch a religious itch. For a period, he began
to attend every different kind of church that he could. The Anglicans, the
Methodists, the Presbyterians, and even the Mormons all welcomed him
into their church. But he never quite found the answers he was looking for.
 

Later, when he went away to university, Michael Baigent changed his area
of study. Though he had originally been signed up to a science degree, he
decided to switch courses and take comparative religion. Perhaps if he had
stayed his original course he might have gained a better understanding of
how to achieve provable results through research. Nevertheless, his interests
while at university began to grow increasingly esoteric. As well as his
comparative religion classes, he began to stretch his interests into more
obscure branches of theology. He joined a group named the Builders of
Adytum, who practiced the little understood art of Christian Kabbalah. Up
until his graduation, he maintained an interest in the less mainstream
aspects of the Christian world, miles away from his Roman Catholic
upbringing.
 
Eventually, this path brought him to England. Moving to London in the
1970s, he moved into a flat with a man named Richard Leigh. The two
became great friends and soon discovered a shared passion for the stranger
aspects of religion. By this time, Baigent was pursuing a mildly successful
career as a photojournalist. But when Richard Leigh introduced Baigent to a
man named Henry Lincoln, he was quick to give this up. After Lincoln
outlined his interests in the film he was currently making for the BBC,
Baigent quickly sold all of his photography equipment in order to fund his
research with the pair of writers. He even started working night shifts at a
nearby soft drinks factory in order to pay his way while carrying out the
preliminary research on what would eventually become The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail. It is safe to say by this point that Michael Baigent was
heavily invested in the existence of the Priory of Sion and was obsessed
with the possibility that there might be a hidden meaning behind the
Catholic doctrine. The discoveries made by the team provided him with the
ideal justification for his growing suspicions about organized religion, as
well as indulging his fascination with the esoteric practices. Baigent says as
much, admitting during his deposition in court that “with hindsight, I had
become obsessed with [the Priory of Sion].”
 
Even after the release of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, Michael
Baigent was seemingly still wrapped up in his obsession. A man named
Paul Smith, a noted sceptic of the ideas laid out in the book, recalls going to

visit Baigent in 1993. Though Smith insists that Baigent was both
hospitable and courteous, he seemed surprised to note that the man
remained adamant about the existence of the Priory of Sion, that the
Merovingian bloodline could be easily traced to the modern age, and that
the Line of David (and thus Jesus Christ) was a probable fact. Even when
looking through the papers and documents that Baigent kept in the home,
Smith discovered various sources that seemed to conclusively prove that the
story of Sauniere and the church at Rennes-le-Chateau was a myth. Either
they were ignored or dismissed. According to Smith, these notable pieces of
evidence lay in the hands of someone who “did not know how to use [them]
properly.” Baigent, Smith says, was more interested in pursuing “non-
sequiturs relating to pseudo-history.”
 
The more we learn about Michael Baigent, the more it becomes possible to
sympathise with him. Though he might well have been proven wrong time
and time again, there is nothing malicious in his continued belief in the
existence of the Priory of Sion. Rather, he seems to be a man who is always
able to look in another direction when confronted with evidence that runs
contrary to his world view. That is not to say that he does not thoroughly
examine ‘evidence.’ During the course of the research for The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail, Baigent and his fellow writers examined a huge amount
of information over the course of many years. The issue is the critical
approach Baigent and his colleagues were able to take. Every time they
evaluated a source, they seemed happy to use only information which
ratified their beliefs, and dismiss anything that might dissuade them from
their opinions. Confessions and conspiracies from men such as Pierre
Plantard were readily dismissed because Baigent and his fellow writers
approached the idea of the Priory of Sion with an almost religious fervour.
They had faith in the idea, even when all evidence ran to the contrary.
 
There is an anecdote which can provide some insight into the matter. The
one-time editor of the Spectator, Matthew d’Ancona recalls a lunch meeting
that was held in the 1990s in a restaurant in central London, named
L’Amico. The meeting was held between two distinct ‘sides.’ On one hand
were a group of right of center political thinkers whose chief unifying
ideology was that they all wanted to withdraw Britain from the European

Union. On the other side were a group whom D’Ancona described as ‘men
who don’t get out very much.’ These were Michael Baigent and Richard
Leigh. The meeting had been put together by the two authors with the aim
of probing the Eurosceptic group for information. D’Ancona recalls the
question being asked as to whether the right wingers had ever come across
anything peculiar in their drive to separate Britain from the EU? Had they
ever had the sensation that there might be some hidden agenda to the
formation and rise of the European Union? Could it be that — rather than
creating a federation of nations for the purposes of trade and governance —
there might be a cover intention to accomplish something as strange as to
restore the bloodline of Jesus Christ to a position of power, perhaps?
According to D’Ancona, the authors of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
put together the lunch meeting with the soul intention of reaffirming one of
their more outlandish ideas. It speaks volumes of the lengths to which they
would go to prove themselves right. It seems strange to consider this the
work of men who might be acutely aware of the inherent falsity of their
own ideas.
 
It certainly seems as though there is a legitimate belief among the writers of
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail that the Priory of Sion actually exists.
Certainly Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh seem convinced by the
evidence they have seen, to the point where they were willing to defend
themselves under oath. Even the principles behind their lawsuit against Dan
Brown seem to suggest that it was the suggestion that their ideas might be
fallible that caused the real issue, rather than literal plagiarism. But there
was one man who was absent from the trial. Trying to pin down the beliefs
of Henry Lincoln seems a bit harder.
 
Some suspect that Henry Lincoln was much quicker to realize the truth
behind the Priory story. After having worked as a writer in film and
television for many years, he was well aware of what it took to tell a story
and to tell it well. It might even be that once he noticed the money that was
to be made from writing The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, he saw it as
being no different than penning another episode of Doctor Who or some
other science fiction B movie. Lincoln was a man who had already built a
television career on a slight deception. He was not a historian nor an

archaeologist, though was more than happy to present himself as one on
Chronicle and other TV shows. How was participating in the conspiracy
behind the Priory of Sion any different than pretending to be an historian?
Certainly, it seems, the truth was not the be all and end all for Henry
Lincoln.
 
In the years since The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail was released — and
especially more in the wake of The Da Vinci Code’s success — Henry
Lincoln has given many interviews. One of these in particular gave a slight
insight into the way he views the evidence for the existence of the Priory of
Sion. During the course of the discussion, Lincoln quite freely admits that
the documents themselves — such as the Dossiers Secrets — are proof of
“absolutely nothing” except the fact that the documents have been created.
This, he says, is true of all documents. Lincoln finishes the rather abstract
thought by stating that “nothing is better than anything else.”
 
“In history,” he suggests, “nothing is real so there’s nothing to get hung up
about.” It is a telling admission of how Lincoln views his work on the
history book. It speaks of how far his standards of evidence are from the
typical historian’s and how he views his work as being more akin to a novel
than an actual academic work. If anything, the comments of Henry Lincoln
seem to place him on an equal footing to Dan Brown. Perhaps the reason
why he was not present at The Da Vinci Code trial was that he saw too
much of himself in Dan Brown. To criticize Brown would be to admit he
himself was wrong. While he may have truly believed in the existence of
the Priory of Sion at the time of writing, it seems that Lincoln is alone
among the authors in realizing the true nature of the organization.


The Fallout
 
During the course of this book, it has become increasingly clear that any
assertion as to the existence of the Priory of Sion is fundamentally flawed.
Nevertheless, this has not stopped numerous publications — books, leaflets,
articles, films, television programmes, and other media — from shouting
loudly about the ideas put forth in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Even
after the fallout from the French conspiracy has proven these ideas to be
false, people have taken these concepts and run with them. Today, there are
myriad media sources that profess to be able to inform the audience of the
reality behind the legend. Despite the evidence that has been put forth, what
do people still think about the Priory of Sion today?
 
As might be expected, there are hundreds of competing theories as to the
true nature of the Priory. A quick Google search will return over 360,000
results just for the search terms ‘Priory of Sion.’ There are dedicated
websites, Wikipedia pages, and YouTube videos, all of which profess to
give the public the best possible explanation of what the society is. As well
as this, Google will make some suggestions to the avid searcher,
mentioning Knights Templar, Mary Magdalen, Opus Dei, and the Illuminati
as searches which are related to the Priory of Sion. It quickly becomes clear
what kind of company the search terms keep.
 
For those who have spent a great deal of time trawling through the
information that is available online, there are a number of repeated themes
and ideas. As you read through web page after web page, these ideas will
crop up time and time again. A number of these have not been touched on
yet by the book but now seem essential to the modern interpretation of the
Priory of Sion. So let us take the time to follow a few of these tangents, in
order that we might better understand what the Priory of Sion means in the
modern Internet age.
 
Mary Magdalen
 

Mary Magdalen is perhaps one of the most important persons in this story
and one who we have barely touched upon during the course of this book.
She is an important figure in the story of the Priory of Sion, and one who
extends beyond the realms of the questions of fraud and delusion that mark
so many of the other topics in this text. Though her name is famous around
the world, there is a huge amount of misunderstanding about exactly who
Mary Magdalen was, and what her role was in relation to the biblical figure
of Jesus Christ. Her story is marked by vicious attacks on her character and
possibly one of the earliest examples of slander and misrepresentation. But
who exactly was Mary Magdalen?
 
Perhaps some of the confusion over the identity of Mary Magdalen comes
from the fact that she shares her name with a far more famous biblical
figure. Not to be confused with the woman who gave birth to Jesus — the
Virgin Mary, or Mary of Bethany — who was the sister of Lazarus, she
occupies a slightly strange role in the story of the New Testament. Just like
the apostles, she is said to have traveled around with Jesus and is a figure in
many of the stories of the biblical son of God. Chief among these is the
story of his death, whereupon she witnesses the crucifixion and the
resurrection up close. Across all four gospels, her name is mentioned twelve
times. Though it might seem like a low number, this is actually higher than
many of the lesser known disciples.
 
However, during the Middle Ages, there was a distinct shift in the way in
which she was presented to the world. Though the biblical sources seem to
depict her as another follower of Christ, her reputation was tarred.
Erroneously (according to most scholars) Mary Magdalen was presented as
a “repentant prostitute” to the followers of Western Christianity. Supported
by very little evidence in the actual Bible, many preachers, clerics, and
members of the holy orders were more than happy to describe Mary
Magdalen as something of a “loose woman.” Over the ensuing centuries,
she became known more for her manufactured past as a prostitute rather
than her devotion to the biblical Jesus.
 
So, if Mary did not deserve this reputation, what does the bible actually say
about her? Well, we do know that it says Jesus cast out seven demons that

had been inhabiting her body. In both the gospels of Luke and Mark (the
latter of which expands more on the topic), she is mentioned as a woman
who followed Jesus and the apostles as they “traveled about from one town
and village to another.” It was Jesus, they state, who cleansed Mary of the
seven demons that had beset her, which some people have interpreted as
being the curing of mental health issues which were not well understood at
the time.
 
It is during the crucifixion that Mary Magdalen plays a real role, however.
During the execution of Jesus Christ, she witnesses three major events. She
is present at the crucifixion itself, at the burial, and is one of the people who
notices that the tomb is empty a few days later. All of Mark, Matthew, and
John mention her specifically by name during these events while Luke, who
mentioned no names, does recall the presence of “women who had followed
[Jesus] from Galilee.” As such, it is safe to assume that — in any biblical
portrayal of the execution of Jesus Christ — Mary Magdalen was present.
 
But she also plays a far more important role. In Mark, Matthew, and John, it
is Mary Magdalen who is the first witness to the most important of
Christian events: the resurrection. Three of the gospels describe either Mary
Magdalen alone or with others as being the first person to notice that the
tomb of Christ is empty. In a number of passages from Mark and John, it is
made clear that she was the first person to whom the resurrected Christ
appeared. In certain passages, it is made clear that this meeting is a private
one shared between Jesus and Mary Magdalen, a privilege not afforded to
many of the more esteemed apostles. It seems, then, that she plays a very
important role in the life of Jesus Christ, especially by the time he is
executed.
 
Not only that, but the way she is presented in the gospels seems to position
her as an important figure. Every time a group of women is mentioned in
the gospel of Mark, for example, it is Mary Magdalen who is mentioned
first. In each of the four major gospels, her name is specifically mentioned
in a way which — according to the historian Carla Ricci — “cannot be
considered fortuitous.” Her mention is deliberate and the importance which
the writers place on her presence is clearly intentional. So how was she

transformed from an important follower of Christ into a woman whose
name became a byword for a prostitute?
 
We already know that the view of Mary Magdalen as a repentant prostitute
is not supported by the gospels. She is not mentioned anywhere else in the
canonical bible (though she does make an appearance in a number of the
books which were supposedly cut from inclusion). Scholars have traced the
sullying of the reputation of Mary Magdalen back to Pope Gregory I. In
591, he issued a claim which conflated both Mary Magdalen and an
unnamed sinner in the bible. He formed what is known today as a
“composite Mary.” This meant that she now would carry a reputation for
the sins of many other people who are not named in the text itself.
Gradually, the seven demons that were said to be expunged from her body
by Jesus came to represent the seven capital sins and, soon enough, Mary
Magdalen was being condemned as a representation of lust and
covetousness.
 
But there is a hidden history of Mary Magdalen. As well as her unfair
corruption by the Catholic Church, there is said to have been a number of
other sources from the time that the gospels were written that position her
as being far more important to Christianity. Known as the Gnostic gospels,
there are a number of books which were not included in the bible. While
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John are the accepted four gospels, there are also
accounts from other apostles, such as Philip. For one reason or another, they
were not chosen to be included in the ‘official’ biblical canon. They had
been pieced together today as the Apocrypha and few traces of their
messages can be read. Perhaps most importantly, we have discovered that
there was — at one time or another — a Gospel of Mary.
 
The Gospel of Mary differs from the main texts in a number of ways.
Firstly, it places a higher importance on the role of women in the early
Christian Church. It is thought that the book was written at the same time as
the Gospel of Philip (also in the Apocrypha) though the fragments we have
of the Gospel of Mary date from around the third century. It is generally
accepted that the Mary of the title is Mary Magdalen. Indeed, in the course
of the gospel, there is the admission that Mary was preferred by Jesus

compared to all of the other disciples. As well as Peter admitting that Jesus
loved Mary “more than the rest of woman,” Levi suggests that “the Saviour
… loved [Mary Magdalen] more than us.”
 
But there are other mentions of Mary in the Apocrypha. In the Gospel of
Philip, she is described using the Greek word for partner, companion, or
comrade. Variously, Philip describes how the affection shown to her by
Jesus caused jealousy and annoyance among the other disciples, as well as
mentioning that Christ used to “kiss her often.” It is references such as these
that form the basis for one of the key conceits of the Priory of Sion.
 
As we have seen earlier in this book, The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
works hard to establish the theory that Jesus bore children. According to
their theory, it was Mary Magdalen who not only mothered the divine
bloodline, but was actually Jesus’s wife. Given as evidence are facts such as
the preference the apostles seem to give her in the gospels, that Jesus would
appear to her in private as the first person he visited when coming back to
life, and mentions such as that in the Gospel of Philip which seem to
describe a romantic relationship. They argue that it would have been
perfectly natural for a Jewish man in the Near East at the time to have a
wife and to have children, so much so that it was not worth mentioning in
the text other than in passing. Mary Magdalen, they argue, was actually the
wife of Jesus Christ.
 
And this is where one of the more conspiratorial aspects of the book comes
to the forefront. It is argued in The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail (as well
as The Da Vinci Code) that Mary Magdalen became an enemy of the
Catholic Church. We have already noted the apparent jealousy that the other
disciples were said to feel towards her, while her demonization by the
church is said to be a part of a Catholic conspiracy to maintain power. Her
reputation was sullied in order to discredit her and to discredit the potential
bloodline of Jesus Christ. Whereas a descendant of Jesus might be a threat
to the Pope as God’s representation on Earth, the child of a prostitute
merited little attention. The campaign against Mary Magdalen was not just
an attempt to reassert patriarchal beliefs through the medium of a religious

text, but it was an active attempt to discredit the one threat to the Catholic
Church’s position. In that respect, they certainly succeeded.
 
Or did they? If nothing else, books such as The Holy Blood and the Holy
Grail and The Da Vinci Code have prompted a mainstream reappraisal of
the identity of Mary Magdalen. As we have seen, it is now possible to go
online and search for more information on subjects related to the Priory of
Sion. If, when searching online, one discovers the tangents and the
associated ideas, then they might come across the numerous sources which
state the claim about the real nature of Mary Magdalen. While she might
not have been the wife of Jesus Christ (and her being linked to the Priory of
Sion is yet another aspect of that hoax), there are sources and academic
works out there which discuss the reputation and the changing attitudes
towards this figure over the years. In prompting people to learn more about
Mary Magdalen, provably false works about the Priory of Sion can point
readers and audiences towards a small kernel of the truth. In that respect, at
least, it seems that the Priory of Sion is retroactively doing a great deal to
promote Mary Magdalen.
 
While they might not be protecting a fictitious bloodline, they are in fact
doing something in encouraging people to delve deeper into the actual truth
behind one of the bible’s most mysterious figures. In a manner nobody ever
expected, books such as The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail have managed
to alter public opinion on Mary Magdalen, or at least begin a gradual
movement towards a reassessment of who she actually was. As such, it
might even be possible to claim that the Priory of Sion have partly
succeeded in their goal, even after having been proven as a complete hoax.


The Grand Masters
 
Another core part of the myth of the Priory of Sion is the exaltation of the
supposed Grand Masters. In creating the backstory for the existence of the
Priory, Plantard and his fellow hoaxers very carefully put together a list of
people whom they considered to be potential leaders of a secret, anti-
Catholic organization. They even gave the position a title, naming the
Grand Masters as the Nautonnier, which is an Old French word that
translates roughly as ‘navigator.’ In esoteric circles, the title of Nautonnier
has variously be translated as Grand Master, hence the title that is given in
both The Da Vinci Code and The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.
 
The way in which the list of previous Grand Masters was put together was
one of the more devious aspects of the Priory of Sion hoax and it is one
which has often gotten the most attention from the public. Using the
assumed name Philippe Toscan du Plantier, Pierre Plantard painstakingly
assembled his list which spans from 1188 right up to the 1960s. The list was
included in the Dossiers Secrets d’Henri Lobineau, which was the
document he and his team hid inside the National Library of France and
waited for people to discover.
 
The list was complex in its creation. It should seem an obvious point that
each person included and mentioned by name was dead by the time
Plantard put pen to paper. This meant that there was no one living who
could deny their involvement. If any family member or biographer spoke up
and questioned the inclusion of any one particular person, Plantard and his
co-conspirators could quite easily fall back on the reasoning that the Priory
of Sion was a secret society and that there was little chance of the Grand
Master himself telling people of its existence.
 
The list includes some of the most famous artists and thinkers in European
history, though it is not entirely without a basis. In fact, all but two of the
names that are on the list can actually be found on the list of members of
the Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, another fabricated secret

religious society which was becoming increasingly famous in France at the
time of Plantard’s writing. In addition, many of the people on the list have
been noted for possessing a vague interest in the existence of the occult, so
their inclusion plays on the expectations and notions many members of the
public already possess.
 
As a point of interest, it should be noted that Plantard created an interesting
piece of lore in writing the Dossiers Secrets. According to him, the Priory
of Sion and the Knights Templar shared a common Grand Master for a long
time. That was up until 1188, when a schism occurred. Following this, each
society had a different leader. Plantard even tied this into a real historical
event, known as the Cutting of the Elm. This referred to a diplomatic
incident between the English and the French monarchies, known to
commemorate the negotiations between the Franks and the Normans. While
the English had stood in the shade of the tree, the French had been made to
suffer under the light of the sun. Following the close of the talks, the French
king demanded that the tree be cut down. This was a sign that the English
would be shown no quarter should they continue to disagree. Through
reasons not made explicitly clear, this historical event had an impact on the
Grand Masters of the Priory of Sion. Little touches such as this are just one
way in which Plantard sought to lend his creation a sense of historical
legitimacy, offering readers just enough fact to allow them to form their
own conclusions.
 
In all, the list is comprised of 26 men. In chronological order, they are:
 
Jean de Gisors
Marie de Saint-Clair
Guillaume de Gisors
Edouard de Bar
Jeanne de Bar
Jean de Saint-Clair
Blanche d'Évreux
Nicolas Flamel
René d'Anjou
Iolande de Bar

Sandro Filipepi
Léonard da Vinci
Connétable de Bourbon
Ferdinand de Gonzague
Louis de Nevers
Robert Fludd
J. Valentin Andrea
Robert Boyle
Isaac Newton
Charles Radclyffe
Charles de Lorraine
Maximilian de Lorraine
Charles Nodier
Victor Hugo
Claude Debussy
And Jean Cocteau
 
A quick look through the list reveals a number of famous and less famous
figures. Leonardo da Vinci and Isaac Newton are two which immediately
catch the eye — surely the reason why Dan Brown titled his book The Da
Vinci Code — while members such as Robert Fludd and Edouard de Bar are
certainly much less famous. It’s a clever tactic, one used by the person who
created the lists on which Plantard based his own. By masking attention
grabbing names amid other less dramatic (though credible in their own
right) names, it brings a great sense of legitimacy to the list. It’s a sleight of
hand trick, applied to a religious hoax.
 
But that is not the end of the matter. There are further documents created by
Plantard that expand on his list of Grand Masters. One of these is named Le
Cercle d’Ulysse and it was also a falsified and planted piece of so-called
evidence. It mentions that Francois Ducaud-Bourget is the latest in the long
name of Grand Masters. But Francois Ducaud-Bourget was not just another
name. In fact, it was the name of a man whom Plantard knew personally. He
had been a Catholic priest and was known as having been something of a
traditionalist. Plantard had worked for the man as a sexton during the
Second World War. Plantard named him as the Grand Master following the

death of Jean Cocteau. It’s an example of the hoaxer drawing the circle in
tightly around himself. Alongside claims Plantard made of having
Merovingian heritage, he was using events from his own life as a means of
providing foundations for an elaborate hoax.
 
But it did not take long for the Dossiers Secrets to be exposed as fraudulent.
While many tests are available that can ascertain the age of a particular
document or piece of paper (useful when assessing purportedly ancient
sources), this was not relevant to the Dossiers Secrets. With it running all
the way up to the modern day, there was little need for Plantard to claim it
was anything other than an updated list belonging to an ancient order. But
that did not mean that it was not easily proven wrong. It was traced back to
Plantard’s hand and, after other members of the group confessed to the
hoax, it was not long before the lie was exposed (at least in France.) But
during the early stages of the exposed hoax, Plantard kept decidedly quiet.
He was very much involved in every aspect of the conspiracy and it should
have been no surprise to anyone to see that Plantard was able to produce a
second, revised list of Grand Masters. During one 1989 revival of the story
of the Priory of Sion, Plantard presented his new list to the public. The first
list, he knew, was discredited, so the second was a slightly more reserved
affair. Gone are names such as Leonardo da Vinci and Isaac Newton, while
the new list seems to have a decidedly more French orientation. What’s
more, it only traces the Grand Masters back to the 1600s, making less grand
claims than the first Dossiers Secrets. By 1993, however, this list was also
confirmed as a hoax.
 
The fame of the Grand Masters is one of the most memorable aspects of the
Priory of Sion. When people are investigating the mystery for themselves,
one of the major points of focus is the celebrity of those involved. If it was
enough to welcome in some of the greatest thinkers, the hoax suggests, then
surely there must be some credibility to the matter. In doing so, the hoax
plays on the famous intellect of the purported members and borrows
legitimacy from their actual accomplishments to make the Priory of Sion
seem more real.
 

While this is perhaps the headline-grabbing feature of the Priory of Sion
(thanks to The Da Vinci Code, it is at least as famous as the idea of a divine
bloodline), it is likely that the list of the Grand Masters attracted far too
much attention. When the organization was nothing more than the
clandestine protectors of a conspiratorial idea, then it was almost impossible
to disprove in any complete capacity. But the involvement of such famous
names adds yet another way of disproving Plantard’s elaborate hoax.
Various scholars, researchers, and academics have demonstrated with
consummate ease why various members of the list could not be involved for
reasons such as geographic location, ideological inclination, or simply that
they were dead at the time they were meant to be heading up a secret
society. In that respect, Plantard seems to have overreached in this
ambition. The people he hoped to involve in the Priory of Sion were almost
too famous for his own good.
 
The Da Vinci Code
 
Along with the fairly easy dismissal of the celebrity Grand Masters, it
becomes easy to question yet another appealing aspect of the Priory of
Sion: the idea that they hid clues in the medieval, Renaissance, and
Enlightenment art in order to hint at the secret they kept hidden. If we know
that Leonardo da Vinci was in no way involved with the Priory of Sion, it
becomes relatively straightforward to dismiss the idea that he hid clues to
the organization’s existence within his artwork.
 
The idea already fails to hold up under close examination. The concept of
hiding clues inside some of the world’s most popular pieces of art seems
reasonable enough, until it becomes clear that these clues are said to point
towards the existence of a secret society. Any organization that truly wanted
to remain in the dark and away from the mainstream would be better served
by hiding false clues or even no clues at all in the various works. However,
thanks to the fact that the list was proven to be false, it can easily be
dismissed.
 

The notion does point towards why the Priory of Sion has become an
enduring myth, however. One need only look at The Da Vinci Code for
confirmation. The Da Vinci Code was released in 2003. By this point in
time, the Priory of Sion and everything written in The Holy Blood and the
Holy Grail had already been proven false. It was a known hoax, though
perhaps not a famous one. The way in which the book presented the
existence of the Priory managed to convince a certain section of its
readership that there might be some truth behind the conspiracy. In fact, it
followed many of the same steps we have already covered in this book and
attributed to Baigent, Leigh, and Lincoln.
 
But what The Da Vinci Code did do was introduce the idea of the Priory of
Sion to a new generation. More than a decade had passed between the
release of Dan Brown’s book and The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. This
meant that there was a huge number of people to whom the Priory of Sion
was not a known quantity. There were also those who had heard of many of
the theories, but had perhaps not heard of the proven falsities that had come
out in the wake of the hoax’s reveal. That meant that Dan Brown was able
to recapture some of the intrigue and fascination that so managed to catch
people the first time around. In doing so, he was even able to make a great
deal of money.
 
And, typically, that is where the myth of the Priory of Sion returns. Even
though it has already been proven to be false, at least three distinct groups
of people have managed to make money using the idea. There is the
original band of French hoaxers, there are the authors of The Holy Blood
and the Holy Grail, and there is Dan Brown and his publishers. Either
knowingly (in the case of the original hoaxers) or unknowingly (supposedly
in the remaining cases) the conspiracy has been sold to the public on a
number of occasions. It has been used to revive the flagging interests of a
hotel, to sell a non-fiction book, and to popularise a book and film tie-in of
the story of an art professor who solves crimes.
 
That is without mentioning the scores of people who have written
companion books, filmed exploratory documentaries, or even those who
offer tours around religious sites in the south of France. On many levels, the

Priory of Sion has proved to be a profitable venture. And for such a
supposedly elaborate conspiracy, perhaps that is the real truth. Rather than
the Catholic Church waging a war against the descendants of Jesus Christ,
the real conspiracy is those who hope to make money from the idea of the
Priory of Sion. From websites to jewelery, non-fiction to fiction, people
have learned about the story and then hoped to pass it along to others. The
real clue hidden in the art work does not point towards the existence of the
Priory of Sion, but rather towards its profitability.


Conclusion
 
Typically, this would be the place to end this book. The hoax has been
revealed, the truth outed. The nature of the Priory of Sion has been
discussed and its reasoning detailed. But that is not the final chapter of the
story. Despite the huge amount of evidence to the contrary, there are still
those who are convinced that the Priory of Sion is a legitimate organization
and one which still guards a secret to this day. But after everything we have
seen and all of the confessions that have been made, how can we possibly
believe that someone could seriously invest in this idea?
 
Some people have pointed to The Da Vinci Code as being a source of these
problems. However, unlike the original The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail,
Dan Brown’s book did not sit in the history section of the book store. Even
though the author opened his book with a claim that everything contained
within was true, it was still nestled neatly in the fiction section. There was a
reasonable amount of doubt that could be attributed to the information
inside, even if the book did perhaps believe in its own mythology. Indeed,
Brown’s choice of antagonist is telling. While people such as Baigent,
Leigh, and Lincoln have previously suggested the existence of natural
enemies for the Priory of Sion, Brown decided to go a different way
entirely. In the Messianic Legacy, Baigent et al suggested that the enemy of
the Priory might actually be the Sovereign Order of Malta, tracing potential
disagreements back to the Crusades. While it was built on as rocky a
foundation as the rest of their work, it did at least feature a reasonable (if
poorly researched) suggestion. But Brown ignored that. Instead, he selected
as his antagonist the Catholic sect Opus Dei. Though controversial in their
own right, Opus Dei had never once been linked with the Priory of Sion in
any capacity. It was entirely conjecture, put down to poetic license. In ways
such as these, it’s easy to see that The Da Vinci Code is discredited without
too much trouble.
 
The serious allegations that the Priory of Sion still exists are found firmly
out of the non-fiction section. Much like The Holy Blood and the Holy

Grail, these books often purport to be serious historical investigations but
fail to measure up to the required research standards. One such example is
The Sion Revelation, written by Lynn Picknett and Clive Prince. The
subtitle of the book suggests that readers will learn “the truth about the
guardians of Christ’s sacred bloodline.” The two authors are not without
previous work on this kind of topic. Indeed, their 1997 book The Templar
Revelation is said to have been the chief source used by Dan Brown for
ideas about the interplay between the Knights Templar and Leonardo da
Vinci. However, The Sion Revelation goes much further.
 
In the book, the authors accept that Pierre Plantard forged much of the
evidence for the existence of the Priory of Sion before 1956. This, they say,
was deliberate. It was intended to muddy the waters, to blur the lines
between reality and fiction. It created a red herring in the minds of the
public, who would now know that the Priory of Sion was a hoax. It was a
distraction, and a successful one, orchestrated by both Plantard and the
people who oversaw his actions.
 
Instead, they believe that the Priory of Sion was nothing more than a cover
organization for a modern political movement. The group hopes to unite the
nations of Europe into a new world power, much like the Priory was said to
have been doing for years. But their activities are secret. In setting up such
a complex hoax, Plantard and the rest of the real Priory were able to distract
the public from their efforts. It is a real conspiracy, hidden behind a forged
conspiracy that was supposed to be real. But like many examples of Priory
of Sion-orientated literature found in both book stores and on the internet,
there is little to no evidence. Nothing compelling is put forward other than
run-of-the-mill conspiratorial ideas. Movements such as these rob the
Priory of Sion of its original distinguishing characteristic (the religious
concepts) and turn it into another shadowy organization bent on taking over
the world. The legacy of the Priory of Sion might be many things, but one
of the worst is the latest wave of poorly informed, poorly researched books
which claim to know the real truth. While Plantard and his team were
cunning in their hoax, the only remaining adherents to theory of the Priory’s
existence have robbed it of all cleverness. By now, the Priory of Sion is just
another entry in the list of standard conspiracy theories. Easily disproven

and easily forgotten, the modern mentions of the Priory pale in comparison
to previous efforts.
 
And that is the state of the Priory of Sion today. In this current climate, they
occupy the same mental space as the Illuminati or the Assassins. They are
blamed for global (or more specifically, European) conspiracies despite the
lack of attention paid to their past. Now functioning in the same way as the
Illuminati or the New World Order, any legitimate dismissal of their
activities is attributed to false agents and even more levels of conspiracy.
But as much as we might have wanted the story of the Priory of Sion to be
true, these days we know it was nothing more than an elaborate lie. For
now, the various ideas put forward by Plantard, Baigent, Lincoln, and Leigh
will be consigned to the forgotten histories. For such a contrived
construction, this might be more than anyone ever expected.


Further Readings
 
Baigent, M., Leigh, R. and Lincoln, H. (1982). Holy Blood, Holy Grail.
New York: Delacorte Press.
Baigent, M., Leigh, R. and Lincoln, H. (1987). The Messianic Legacy. New
York: Holt.
Brown, D. (2003). The Da Vinci Code. New York: Doubleday.
Chaumeil, J. (2010). The Priory of Sion. London: Avalonia.
Howells, R. (2011). Inside the Priory of Sion. London: Watkins Pub.
King James Version popular award Bible. (2001). London: HarperCollins.
Picknett, L. and Prince, C. (2006). The Sion Revelation. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
 
 
 


Volume 8
 



Contents
 
Introduction
Getting to Know the Work of God
Joining Opus Dei
A Global Concern
Controversy Reigns
Cloaked in Secrecy
Pain Threshold
Women’s Place
Follow the Money
The Church and the Government
Is Opus Dei a Cult?
Conclusion
Further Readings


Introduction
 
Of the billion or so Catholics in the world, the members of Opus Dei
constitute almost a hundredth of one percent. Though their numbers might
be relatively minuscule, their reputation is many orders of magnitude
greater. While the guiding lights of the Church have taken a more genial,
modern approach to religion in the last century, the members of Opus Dei
have stuck rigidly to the traditions of old. In doing so, they have become
known as the hardcore. The fiercely devoted. The stringently religious.
Unmoving, distant, and utterly compelling. In an age when the Vatican is
reaching out to many millions of people worldwide, Opus Dei seems to be
shrouded in secrecy, a secret sect that adheres to the ancient practices of
Christianity.
 
Perhaps because of this adherence to the older models of Christianity, the
group has come to represent the most devoted and most controversial of all
Catholic arms. its practices are said to include ancient languages, self-
flagellation, corporal mortification, aggressive recruiting, controlling the
free will of members, cult-like behavior, misogynistic policies, support of
fascists, and many more secrets hidden away within the organization’s
walls.
 
In this book, we will attempt to look deeply into the hidden history of
Catholicism’s most radical and divisive sect. Using ancient texts, accounts
of former members, extensive research, and secret documents, we will
discover the truth behind Opus Dei. If you would like to learn more about
this zealous, sometimes terrifying organization, then read on. For the truth
behind Catholicism’s secret sect, this book is all you will ever need.


Getting to Know the Work of God
 
Before we begin our in-depth study of Opus Dei, we should take the time to
get a general overview of the organization itself. It is commonly
misunderstood, and there are many rumors, conspiracy theories, and
superstitions that surround the institution and its practitioners. If we are to
discover the truth, then it is important to understand the basics.
 
The name itself is Latin. Translated, Opus Dei means “Work of God.” That
gives us an insight into the core belief of the group. That is to say, it is their
belief that God is not limited solely to the Church. Instead, one can infuse
their own work with a sanctity and a dedication to religion at all times.
Whether you’re an engineer, a plumber, or a schoolteacher, the work that
you carry out as an Opus Dei member is dedicated to God. There is a
religious appreciation of the mundane details of life, often giving the
appearance of religious fervor that can appear odd to the outsider. Together,
the members of the church and its clergy dedicate their lives and their work
to the divine power. Literally, the day-to-day lives of members becomes the
eponymous work of God.
 
But Opus Dei is so much more than this. Over time, the group has come to
embody long-standing criticisms of Catholicism and the history of
organized religion. It has become associated with a biblical literalism and a
staunchly conservative mind-set. There have even been suggestions of a
global conspiracy network. But how to these ideas relate to the basic
principles of Opus Dei?
 

 
It is true, certainly, that a traditional problem of Opus Dei has been
communicating their message to the layman. Often, the organization
focuses on promoting what it is not, rather than what it is. This gives Opus
Dei a defensive appearance, which – somewhat paradoxically – leads more
people to become even more suspicious than ever before. To find out more
about what Opus Dei actually is, let’s go back to the very beginning.
 
The date is October 2nd, 1928. A young Spanish priest named Josemaria
Escriva makes a retreat to a secluded monastery in Madrid. Inside the

Vincentian institution, he has a vision. The details of the vision seem
strange, but Escriva is left with no doubt what he must do. After the
experience, he is inspired to create his own organization, an order that
would eventually become Opus Dei.
 
The vision of the Spanish priest was the inspiration for Opus Dei. Josemaria
Escriva, the man who would later be regarded as the founder of the
organization, would have subsequent visions, in which the further details of
God’s plan were laid out to him. Part of these visions seemed to give
Escriva the general overall idea of Opus Dei, while others were more
specific. There should be a dedicated branch for women, there should be an
organized body of priests, and many other details that would go on to shape
the structure and principles of the church. But these would all come later.
According to Escriva himself, the original vision contained the essential
elements of Opus Dei.
 
October the 2nd is a special day. It is a recognized day within the Catholic
Church, known as the Feast of the Guardian Angels. It was on this day that
Escriva received his vision. His own description of the event remembers
that it was a feast day. According to the priest’s description of his vision, it
was on this day that the “Lord willed” that Opus Dei as a group “might
come to be.” Furthermore, he went on to describe the vision as one that told
him of an organization in which men and women were willing to make a
sacrifice of themselves for other people, in order to make sure all of the
“ways of man” were divine and that every “upright work” would be
suitably sanctified. Even if he did not have the structural backing, it clear to
see that Escriva had the central tenants of what would prove to be a
controversial interpretation of Catholicism.
 
It’s important that Opus Dei’s beginnings are the result of seemingly divine
inspiration. Escriva’s vision provided him and his followers with a holy
mandate, a conviction in the importance of the organization’s work. Opus
Dei, as such, is an extension of God’s will. So much so, in fact, that Escriva
himself has denied being the actual founder of the group, instead saying that
Opus Dei was “founded in spite of [him]” rather than because of him. The
origins of the name itself are equally as parochial, with the group going

unnamed before an apparently offhand, random comment from Escriva’s
confessor struck a chord with the priest. When he asked Escriva how the
“work of God” was going, Escriva realized quickly that this was to be the
name. As such, members now refer to the Church simply as “the Work.”
 
At a foundational level, there is a simple message to Opus Dei’s work. It’s
the same one that was revealed in the vision and built upon in subsequent
decades. That is to say, it is the goal of the members to sanctify the ordinary
lives of people by living as taught by the gospels and the Church to the
fullest extent possible. This is not too far from the belief that most Catholics
would espouse, but the group takes their ideas to a more extreme conclusion
that most worshippers.
 
To sum up their aims, Opus Dei members chose as their symbol a simple
circle with a cross inside. The circle – representing the world – is sanctified
from within. To the members, the idea of being holy is not something that is
limited to the higher-ups of the Catholic Church or to the saints, but it is the
potential destiny of every single Christian. It’s not just the clergy, the nuns,
the priests, the saints, or anyone else associated with the Church who are
holy. Instead, it’s something that is available to everyone in the world.
Together, they can sanctify everybody, just as their logo suggests.
 
But this idea is not just expressed through the normal, typically religious
actions such as praying. Instead, small and mundane parts of day-to-day life
can become expressions of worship. In particular, one’s work should be
devoted to the Lord, whether you’re an accountant or a construction worker.
This is where the beliefs of the Opus Dei members begin to deviate from
the path of the traditional Catholic adherents.
 
But the work of Escriva did not go unnoticed. As he was setting up his
organization, he earned himself many admirers. People saw both the priest
and his followers as being necessarily pious. Fans included the late Pope
John Paul II, who would later describe the man as being ahead of his time.
Giovanni Benelli – once the cardinal of Florence – would go on to have
many doctrinal disagreements with Escriva, but he still saw fit to compare
him with another founder of a dedicated group of Catholics, Saint Ignatius

of Loyola, who founded the Jesuit order in the 16th Century. According to
Benelli, Escriva similarly managed to translate contemporary discussions
within the Catholic Church into a codified, dedicated organization.
 
The comparison to the Jesuits is particularly telling. For centuries, the
Jesuits were seen as the most learned, the most devout, and the most
dedicated branch of the clergy. Though many disagreed with some of their
practices – or even their very existence – there were many who saw the
Jesuits as being absolutely necessary. For many Catholics, the simple
existence of the Jesuits was comforting. It was reassuring to know that there
were people on Earth who were suitably dedicated to God, suitably pure
enough to preach his word and to investigate the ways in which modern life
intersected with theology. To many people, Opus Dei filled a similar niche.
As their reputation grew – initially within the Catholic community – they
developed their reputation for dedicated religious practice. It is out of this
dedication that their more controversial elements began to emerge.
 
Trying to get a grip of the more theological elements can be tough. For
anyone who has studied the intricacies of the Catholic doctrine, there are a
number of smaller, more refined points where Opus Dei moves away from
mainstream religious thinking. For the majority of people, however, it can
be difficult to note the key differences between the majority of Catholic
thought and the particular practices of Escriva’s organization.
 
Opus Dei members have, on a number of occasions, attempted to publicly
clarify their idiosyncratic beliefs. In 2004, for example, an interview with
Fernando Ocariz (at the time, the second-highest ranking member of Opus
Dei) made an effort to clarify some of Escriva’s teachings. The “universal
call to holiness” that defines the organization can be split into two distinct
parts: the subjective and the objective. The subjective invites people to
sanctification. In other words, anyone – regardless of who they are – is
called to become a saint. The objective is part of this, in that it states that
everything in the world and every element of the human experience can be
used to move someone closer toward becoming a saint. For Opus Dei
members, every action and every situation is a chance to move closer
towards sainthood.

 
Typically, most Catholics would see sainthood as being something that is
limited to only the most holy people. Looking through the traditional
pantheon of saints, they were typically priests, monks, or nuns. But for
Opus Dei, this is not a limitation. All members, should they follow the
Opus Dei teachings, can become saints in their own right. Borrowing words
and phrases from the Bible’s famous Song of Songs, Escriva himself sought
to find God “in the things that come from outside,” that is to say, the
general day-to-day minutiae of life and work.
 
But there was a theological drive on the part of Opus Dei’s creator. Escriva
is on the record as describing his organization as being an “intravenous
injection” directly into the “bloodstream of society.” The image is vivid and
speaks of how great a shock he saw Opus Dei as causing. Escriva wanted to
make his group different from the common views of the church, and even in
the early days, went to great lengths to ensure that he was able to
differentiate Opus Dei from the typical Catholic denominations.
 
There’s a story told about the first three priests who were ordained by Opus
Dei. The three men – all Spanish priests – were chosen by Escriva himself
to represent the organization. The attention to detail was so great that
Escriva noticed that not a single man out of the three smoked cigarettes. In
Spain at the time, smoking was commonplace. The fact that none of the
three priests smoked made Escriva concerned. What if people believed that
the priests didn’t smoke due to their membership in Opus Dei? People
might believe that not smoking was a part of the belief system, something
that was not true. After some discussion, it was decided that one of the three
men would take up smoking so as to pacify any concerns the general public
might have had. It was not that Opus Dei were anti or pro cigarettes, more
that it was concerned with reaching as many people as possible. The man
chosen to smoke was Alvaro del Portillo, the man who would later take on
Escriva’s role as the head of the organization.
 
In a similar vein, it was decided that the priests would forgo the traditional
Catholic attire, dressing instead in simpler clothes. They would not be
cloistered, meaning that groups of priests would not live solitary, excluded

lifestyles. Perhaps most importantly, all of the priests in Opus Dei would
not claim that it had some special, sanctimonious state of life. That is to say,
they were no more predisposed to sainthood than anyone else, regardless of
their occupation. Rather than removing themselves from the world, these
priests hoped to “Christianize” everything, hoping that their spiritual
actions would set a precedent for other people to follow.
 
This approach was certainly revolutionary for its time. In Spain in the 1930s
and 1940s, when Escriva was developing the foundations of Opus Dei, the
traditional model of the Catholic Church would be considered a clergy-
orientated organization. This means that the clergy would be religious
leaders, elevated above the people in terms of their sanctity. For Escriva,
this seemed wrong. Instead, Opus Dei focused on a model in which the
clergy were on equal footing in all regards. Rather than leading people
through religion, the priests were designed to act in a more supporting role.
They were experts who could provide guidance and direction, rather than
leaders who would strut at the head of the pack. Once the priests provided
the laypeople with an understanding of God, it was down to the individual
to decide how their particular actions could be made into an offering to the
Lord.
 
In principle, this idea would suggest that Opus Dei is an organization
focused on equality. As we will see later in this book, the balance between
men and women in the Opus Dei has faced much criticism. In theory,
female Opus Dei members receive the same spiritual coaching and direction
as their male counterparts, and they are equally capable of achieving
sainthood through their actions. But in many of the smaller details, the
Opus Dei attitude towards women is far from an equilateral balance. At the
time, however, this attitude towards equality was a marked change from the
mainstream. For many centuries, the Catholic Church has had a major issue
with gender equality. Even this small doctrinal change by Escriva was a
step towards equality, even if the ensuing decades have revealed inherent
issues with gender that were not apparent at the time.
 
Such breaks from the mainstream Catholic doctrine led to many people
criticizing Escriva. In certain parts of Spanish society, he was denounced as

being anti-clerical. Some went as far as to call him a heretic. Rumors began
to circulate that he would be reported to the Vatican, the spiritual center of
the Catholic world, presumably in the belief that he would be apprehended,
punished, and likely excommunicated. Even in its early days, Opus Dei was
controversial.
 
For most people, trying to come to terms with Opus Dei as an organization
can be difficult. It is unlike almost every other branch of Christianity, and
this seems to be intentional. Escriva himself described Opus Dei as “a
disorganized organization.” The people in the group are united by their
shared interpretation of Catholicism and their belief in sanctifying the world
from within. There is a frequently repeated phrase that gives an insight into
the decentralized nature of the group: “Opus Dei doesn’t act; its members
do.”
 
But is this true? Long-time critics of Opus Dei have suggested that this
pretense of decentralized, independent members is a myth. Instead, Opus
Dei does indeed have an intention, an organization, and a set of goals, all of
which are hidden behind the smokescreen of general theology. While the
majority of members might ascribe to Escriva’s original vision, others are
focused on seizing power, gaining financial wealth, or recruiting new
members. All of these actions are kept hidden away from the public, who
seem happy to believe that Opus Dei is just a particularly dedicated sect of
the Catholic Church. With both sides of the argument adamant about its
version of the truth, it might help to learn more about the individual
requirements of each and every member. In the next chapter, we will look at
what it takes to become a fully paid-up member of Opus Dei.


Joining Opus Dei
 
The rising profile of Opus Dei has led to a surge in the number of people
who have simply walked in off the street and asked to join. A far cry from
the organization’s humble roots, these walk-ins have become a new
phenomenon that the group has had to deal with. For a long time, the less
publicized nature of Opus Dei meant that there were fewer people who even
knew about them, let alone thought about joining. But is becoming a
member as easy as simply strolling into your local office?
 
If you did decide to walk into an Opus Dei office one day and declare your
intention to become a member, the first thing people would tell you is that
education is important. To become a member, you should first discover
more about the church’s true message. However, the general path to
membership does not follow this pattern. Perhaps unlike most religions, the
idea of converting is not that familiar. Typically, people become members
through association. This might be through a friend or a family member
who is already part of Opus Dei, or through being exposed to one of the
more “corporate” works, which can include schools and youth centers set
up by the organization. Though there are certainly those who declare their
intentions to join the group seemingly out of the blue, the majority of
people are recruited through a process of friendship and association.
 
Once this bond is formed, then there is a gradual process of exposure. If a
person has hinted to an Opus Dei member that they might be interested in
joining, then they will be invited to attend meetings, either evening
gatherings or retreats. At these events, the person will gain an insight into
the day-to-day reality of the religion, learning how it fits into members’
lives. Within the church, the code name for a recruit official joining is
“whistle.” When a person decides to “whistle,” the moment is treated with
the utmost seriousness. Opus Dei considers itself neither a hobby nor a
pastime. It demands serious commitment from members, so the decision to
“whistle” is regarded as a life-changing moment.
 

But if this decision is so important, where is the appeal for the everyday
person? What could prompt a layperson to make such a massive decision?
It might seem overtly simple to say that the call is a religious one. There are
those who say that God pushed them in a certain, specific direction.
However, there are often other factors at play. For some people, the writings
that Escriva left behind have provided an inspiration. Certainly, those who
have been initially interested in the church admit to having their curiosity
consecrated when reading his ideas and theories about religion and work.
Similarly, there is a notion that Opus Dei is able to offer a strain of religion
that is both serious and supportive of the devout Catholic approach to life.
Witnessing fist hand the devotion of the members, traditional Catholics
might be convinced of the organization’s authenticity.
 
Opus Dei differs from traditional religious orders in that there are no vows
to be taken upon joining, as you might expect when becoming a monk or
nun. Under Church law, a member’s status remains exactly as it was before.
Instead, Opus Dei solidifies membership using a more secular means. When
joining, recruits are asked to sign a contract, entering into an agreement.
The agreement states that the person will agree to live their lives in the
spirit of Opus Dei, supporting the activities and doctrine that the
organization sets out. In return, Opus Dei will provide spiritual formation
and guidance in the way of God.
 
Though the contracts differ from country to country and from language to
language, they are arranged in a basic formula. First, the person will
announce that they are operating under their own free will and that they
will, from this point onwards, dedicate themselves to the pursuit of sanctity
at all times. They also pledge to “practice apostolate” in accordance with
the “spirit and praxis of Opus Dei.” Then, they submit to remaining under
the jurisdiction of Opus Dei and dedicate themselves faithfully to the
“special purposes” of the organization. Agreeing to all of Opus Dei’s
traditions and laws, the person finishes the contract by offering to serve
under the Prelature (the local administrative branch) at all times.
 
In turn, the Church will offer their own contract. In return for the above
dedication, the representative of the Prelate will promise to fulfil a number

of obligations on the part of Opus Dei. There is a promise to “devote
constant care and attention” to spiritual, doctrinal, and other religious needs.
Then, there is a promise to “fulfil Opus Dei’s obligations to its faithful;”
that is to say, a promise to assist other members of the church in addition to
this single signee.
 
The use of the contract is an indicator of the unique relationship between
Opus Dei and its members. It’s been seen as a dubious practice by those
who are critical of Opus Dei, and in truth, it certainly differentiates them
from the other organizations within the Catholic Church. In theory, the
contract has little legal value. It does not permit, for example, members to
be representatives of Opus Dei in their day-to-day lives, nor does it attempt
to have any influence or control beyond spiritual guidance. But that has not
stopped the speculation.
 
The contract has received a lot of attention from critics, but at least some of
the critical speculation can be dismissed out of hand. In some of the more
conspiratorial corners of the internet, discussions about contracts signed in
blood and the selling of the soul have been linked with Opus Dei. Of all the
contracts that have been made public – and there is no clause or tradition
preventing them from being revealed – neither of these factors have been
present. They are simply part of the urban legend commonly associated
with Opus Dei.
 
But other critics often point towards the possibility that the “spiritual
guidance” that Opus Dei promises to provide can be corrupting. If, for
example, a member was in a particularly high-powered position, people
have pointed at the clauses within the contract and suggesting that the
organization might attempt to influence a person’s work for the benefit of
Opus Dei. This might be closing a big business deal or enacting a piece of
legislature, either of which could either be profitable for Opus Dei or could
ratify elements of their ideology. Opus Dei’s contract, the critics say,
provides them with the power to intervene and influence members in a
professional capacity. The Work of God, as suggested within the contract, is
one and the same as the work of the individual.
 

There is little evidence to support this claim, however. Indeed, those
members of the church whom we know to have held powerful positions
have not only dismissed the suggestion, but have declared that the opposite
is true. Luis Valls, for example, was both the chairman of Spain’s third
largest commercial bank and a member of Opus Dei. In charge of a
company worth almost $50 billion, he says he was never told what to do by
anyone within the organization. In fact, he claims, the spiritual guidance of
Opus Dei helped to keep him on the right moral track. Without Opus Dei,
Valls says, he would have been a “rascal.”
 
While it might not seem to be too controversial, this element of the Opus
Dei operation can be one of the most criticized. The recruitment of new
members is something that is often little understood and has caused a great
deal of speculation in many circles. How does the group pick is targets? Are
they too pushy and intimidating in their recruitment? What is their long-
term goal? We will examine some of these accusations in a later chapter, but
some people have made the claim that Opus Dei resembles a cult. As we
continue with our basic overview of the organization, this can be something
that is worth keeping in mind, before we directly address the issue later.
 
First, we should look at the idea of “whistling.” In its purest sense,
whistling refers to the act of writing a letter, asking to join Opus Dei. It’s a
formal process, known in documentation as “requesting admission.” The
term “whistling,” however, was used by Escriva himself, in reference to the
whistling sound made by steam escaping from a boiling kettle. Just as the
water had reached a boiling point and is ready to pour, the prospective
member has reached their own point of readiness. Age doesn’t really matter.
Whistling is possible from the ages of sixteen and a half upwards. However,
there is a requirement that an individual must be eighteen years old before
they can formally be incorporated into the church. Indeed, from fourteen
and a half years old, it is possible to register as an “aspirant,” in preparation
for more formal inclusion at an older age. Whistling is not guaranteed to
work. It’s not uncommon for prospective members to write a number of
letters before Opus Dei deems them ready to continue with their formal
application.
 

The next step is admission. Once the formal application has been approved,
there is a short ceremony for members. The process involves two members
of Opus Dei, typically a priest and a lay director. These two people will
listen to the prospective member’s verbal pledge to live their life “in the
spirit” of Opus Dei, who in turn will promise to provide means of spiritual
formation. This ceremony typically occurs six months after the whistling,
during which time the person has lived their life as an informal Opus Dei
member, following the ideas of the organization and being treated as a
member.
 
Once admission is complete, a person will move on to “oblation.” This
usually takes place eighteen months after a person has whistled, and it
marks the signing of the contract between an individual and Opus Dei. This
commitment is set for annual renewal, usually on the 19th of March. The
date is important in the Catholic Church as it is the Feast of St. Joseph, who
is said to be the patron saint of workers and Opus Dei alike. The oblation is
not considered a permanent agreement, though those who choose to break it
and turn away from Opus Dei are treated seriously. Within the church, this
is a “grave matter,” a seemingly purposefully broad statement. The oblation
is done privately in tandem with personal prayer. Once a member has
renewed their agreement, they are required to tell the organization. If they
do not, then they are automatically disavowed and are no longer considered
a member.
 
Being a member of Opus Dei is an ongoing commitment. Unlike many
other churches in which one might be able to dip in and out as it pleases,
there is a need for constant reapplication to the organization. One such
commitment is the “fidelity,” which takes places five years after the
completion of the first oblation. It’s a lifetime commitment to Opus Dei,
though it only needs to be made once. As soon as it is complete, then the
person is considered to be a permanent member of Opus Dei, part of the
“supernatural family.” After this point, leaving the organization becomes
more difficult. Departing members are required to write a formal letter,
though those who are more desperate to leave have been known to skip this
step. Due to the age restrictions on whistling and oblation, the minimum
age for the fidelity is 23, though there is no upper limit on age.

 
Once you have become a member, you will join the ranks of some 85,000
Opus Dei practitioners worldwide. These are the numbers kept by the
Vatican itself, which keeps track of the involvement of people within the
organization. Of the 85,000, just under 2,000 are priests. The ratio of priests
to clergy is close to roughly 45:1. But within the main body of the laity, the
membership can be broken down even further. The distinctions between the
categories of members in Opus Dei are usually arranged by the organization
in terms of how available a certain person is for church activities. Typical
distinctions based on careers, employment, or “grades” of devoutness and
holiness are not present. Instead, the categories are:
 
1. Supernumeraries and numeraries, and another subset, numerary
assistants
2. Associates
3. Cooperators (who are not members, but do support Opus Dei.)
 
It’s terms such as these that have often given people cause to compare Opus
Dei to a secret society. The idea of structured membership is something that
is present in groups such as the Freemasons, especially as the names for the
categories are not familiar to most. In fact, they are taken from Opus Dei’s
Spanish background, being the nomenclature used for the types of professor
at a university. It’s somewhat ironic that a stylistic choice that was meant to
make Opus Dei more relatable and ordinary has, in the 21st Century, had the
opposite effect.
 
Let’s take a look at the individual categories, starting with the
supernumeraries. This is the category that includes roughly 70% of Opus
Dei members. Due to the way in which categorization works, these are the
individuals whom the church considers least available. Whether it’s family
commitments or the like, supernumeraries have distinctly less time to
dedicate to the church. Because of this, they live in their homes, just like a
regular person might. In a marriage, it’s possible for both partners to be
supernumeraries or just one. For supernumeraries, spiritual direction is
received from an Opus Dei numerary – typically the director of the local
center – and confession is conducted by an Opus Dei priest.

 
In terms of public attention, the supernumeraries are perhaps the unheralded
majority of Opus Dei. While they are overwhelmingly in the majority, the
focus usually sways to the numeraries or the priests. There are some,
however, who claim that it is the supernumeraries who are the real force
within the church. In terms of Opus Dei’s objective of transforming the way
we live our everyday lives, the supernumeraries represent that policy in
action. The sheer number of supernumeraries is closer to the church’s long-
term objectives like setting up a charity school.
 
Part of the responsibility of the supernumeraries is the financial
contributions they are expected to make to Opus Dei. These are handled on
a personal basis. While the well-off might make large contributions, those
who are less financially privileged will not be expected to match their
contributions. These are handled on a “pay what you can afford” type of
arrangement. It’s something of a misconception that the majority of Opus
Dei members are upper-middle class, white collar workers. While this
might be true for many members, the organization spans far more of the
social spectrum than might be expected. This is what helps contribute to the
idea of the “hidden majority” that some have used to criticize Opus Dei.
 
In addition to being members of Opus Dei, it is not uncommon for
supernumeraries to continue to hold a place in other religious organizations.
They remain active in their local parishes and dioceses, with many actively
contributing to the community as members of the parish council, as lectors,
leaders of youth groups, and many other positions. Opus Dei, for these
individuals, is not an exclusive commitment and can function in tandem
with previous involvement in church organizations. However, if the
supernumeraries are the presentable face of the Opus Dei membership, then
it is the numeraries themselves who attract the vast majority of the attention
from the outside world.
 
The numeraries form roughly 20% of the Opus Dei membership. Chiefly,
they are comprised of members who have dedicated themselves to the Opus
Dei family. To be one of the numeraries, one must make a series of pledges.
These include commitments of celibacy, and in some cases, giving up a

career to work full time for Opus Dei. For the majority of numeraries,
however, a position outside of the church is common, though professions
typically involve some degree of professional expertise. This means that
many are surgeons, lawyers, writers, or similarly focused careerists. From
these professions, any money that is not required to live is passed to the
coffers of Opus Dei and used for church activities. For many American
numeraries, this has led to issues with the IRS, in which the taxmen find it
incomprehensible that people could make such large charitable donations,
sometimes as much as three-quarters of a yearly salary.
 
Numeraries are known to enjoy a more rigorous, extensive education in
religious, spiritual, and theological matters. Because of this, they are often
entrusted with a greater number of leadership positions within the church.
In the case of an Opus Dei center, for example, only a numerary is
permitted to take on the role of director. Sometimes, this education extends
to sending numeraries to Rome, so that they will be able to study theology
in a formal setting, often at the famous University of the Holy Cross.
 
Of all the numeraries, there is an even smaller subset who are known as the
“inscripti.” These Opus Dei members are trusted enough to offer doctrinal
and spiritual formation to other church members. They play a notable part
in the importance of the numeraries and Opus Dei in general. When the
organization is hoping to expand into a new area, a certain number of
numeraries and inscripti are required in order to lay the foundations for the
new center. The geographical expansion of Opus Dei depends upon these
dedicated members in order to maintain a certain level of religious and
spiritual commitment and consistency.
 

 
But the numeraries are also important in that it is often their practices that
draw the attention of those most critical of Opus Dei. As we will see later in
this book, a number of their most controversial practices involved self-
flagellation and corporal discipline. The “cilice,” for example, is a small
chain fitted with rows of metal spikes. It is fastened on the upper thigh of
the numeraries for a few hours each day (excluding Sundays and feast
days). The spikes dig into the flesh and cause the wearer pain. In addition to
the cilice, there is the “discipline.” The discipline is the name for the short
whip, used once a week during prayer time. The user whips the cord-like
device across their back during the Our Father, again causing pain.
 
Becoming a numerary is a demanding position. It not only requires a great
deal of spiritual and financial commitment, but the self-punishment aspect
of the practice stands out among almost all Christian denominations. It’s
this pain-inducing mode of worship that draws the attention of outsiders,
but as we will soon discover, it is done with a certain religious purpose. It’s
a demonstration of the commitment demanded of the numeraries by Opus
Dei and makes many people distrustful of their activities. However, the
numeraries do not work alone.
 
The numerary assistants are another subset of the Opus Dei membership
structure. Numbering close to 4,000 and all of them women, the numerary
assistants are another seemingly-strange branch of the Opus Dei
membership. These women are known for their full-time devotion to the

running of the Opus Dei centers and the other facilities that are owned and
operated by the Organization. While the numeraries might live in an Opus
Dei center while working a full-time job, the numerary assistants will
remain within the center and handle chores such as cooking or cleaning, as
well as the financial management of the center. The position has been
likened to that of a full-time mother, which is often the way the numerary
assistants themselves see the position.
 
The idea for this position has often been attributed to Escriva’s own family
life. The founder wanted all Opus Dei centers to have the feeling of a home
rather than an organization. In order to accomplish this, he decided that they
would require “a woman’s touch.” The women who fill these positions are
paid for their work, which is regarded by Opus Dei as a full-time position.
When carrying out the work around the center, numerary assistants typically
have a uniform that signifies their position. While cooking or cleaning in an
Opus Dei center, it’s possible to recognize the numerary assistants purely
through their choice of clothing.
 
But this is yet another position that has drawn negative attention to Opus
Dei. The role and the requirements of the numerary assistants has been
described as outdated and sexist, suggestive of a regressive view of women.
Opus Dei, say numerous critics, is responsible for promoting a submissive
and harmfully traditionalist view of gender roles. This is not helped when,
in defense of their organization, Opus Dei members have suggested that
they are not discriminating by simply noting women’s skills in the domestic
sphere. It is a skillset that they firmly believe men lack. Added to this, the
role of the numerary assistants is part of Escriva’s original vision for Opus
Dei and not open to debate. It’s perhaps not unexpected that such a hardline,
traditionalist branch of the Catholic Church should hold outdated ideas of
gender roles, but it certainly becomes another stick with which critics can
beat Opus Dei when required. The organization does not help themselves
with responses, but these practices often seem outdated rather than
suspicious in the minds of many of the more critical opponents of Opus
Dei.
 

The associates are a group within Opus Dei who are similar to the
numeraries. Just like the numeraries, they remain celibate, though they
often have family members and personal reasons as to why they live away
from Opus Dei centers. The most important distinction to make between
associates and numeraries is their living arrangements. Other than one
group living in the Opus Dei centers and one group enjoying more
conventional residence, they have the same spiritual expectations. They can
both work in almost any position, providing they do so in a manner that
complies with the organization’s view on work as a tribute to God. It might
be that an associate has younger brothers or sisters who depend on them
being at home, or that the associate’s particular career path has taken them
to a part of the world without a local Opus Dei center. It’s possible to move
between groups, going from being a supernumerary to an associate
depending on current circumstances.
 
An important role within the church that we have yet to mention is that of
the priests. With just under two thousand clergy members “incardinated”
into the Opus Dei organization, they are not the largest division within the
Catholic Church by any means. A central authority – known as the prelate –
resides in Rome and acts as the guiding figure for the Opus Dei priests.
Typically, an Opus Dei priest will carry out the conventional duties of a
Catholic priest, including pastoral care, running the parish affairs, and
organizing Church activities. They might occasionally hold teaching
positions in universities or seminaries. The vast majority of priests have
been recruited from the Opus Dei numeraries and differ slightly from most
Catholic priests in their relationship to the Church members. Whereas
traditionally, priests might be spiritual superiors and leaders, Opus Dei’s
clergy function in more of a support role.
 
The priests are assisted by a group known as the cooperators. Though not
technically Opus Dei members, the cooperators are “friends” of the
organization and will often offer their support in a number of ways. This
might be through prayer, through organizational assistance, or even through
financial donations. The cooperators do not have to be Catholic or even
Christian. In a move that has raised more than a few cynical eyebrows,
Opus Dei’s cooperators are often Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, or non-theists.

As a matter of fact, Opus Dei became the first Catholic organization that
had the right to enroll people who were not actually Catholics, a law passed
in 1950. This has caused criticism from people within the Catholic Church,
especially traditionalists. The claim is that such a move makes Opus Dei
appear as “indifferentist” (that all religions are of equal validity) and that
the order fails to recognize Catholicism as being the foremost among many
religions.
 
However, this has done nothing to dent the number of cooperators whom
Opus Dei count around the world. At last count, this number was as high as
164,000, of whom almost 60% are women. Furthermore, there are as many
as 900,000 people who are part of an even wider network and involved with
Opus Dei, taking part in events and activities, perhaps laying the
foundations for eventually being considered as official cooperators. These
people swell the ranks of the Opus Dei membership considerably, though it
is not only individuals who are counted.
 
As well as people, Opus Dei has registered almost 500 separate religious
communities who are counted as cooperators. These can be men and
women, such as communities of monks or nuns, who have formed good
working relationships with Opus Dei centers, even if they do not share
exactly the same beliefs. A shared spiritual background and a shared effort
in building strong bonds with local religious groups means that many Opus
Dei centers have fostered cooperative relationships with people and groups
in their area. All of this helps with the spreading of the organization’s
message.
 
With many diverse roles within Opus Dei and many different people
enjoying dissimilar levels of commitment, trying to pin down exact paths to
joining the organization can be difficult. Part of this mystery is why so
many find the group to be intriguing and different. While most churches
will accept anyone through their doors, Opus Dei’s recruitment is markedly
different from not only the majority of the Catholic Church, but other
religions as well. But this has not held them back. In the next chapter, we
will take a look at how the group has spread across the world, as well as a
closer look at the man responsible.


A Global Concern
 
Despite its relatively low membership numbers compared to many other
religious organizations, Opus Dei has become a global enterprise. Though
its base remains largely in Europe, its growth and expansion has been
somewhat remarkable for an organization founded less than a hundred years
ago. But where do the majority of their members reside?
 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the country with by far the most Opus Dei members
is Spain. The founder of the organization, Escriva, was a Spanish priest
whose once tiny organization has turned into a 35,000 strong group in his
home country, mostly in Madrid. This amounts to roughly 40% of the
global membership figures. Though Opus Dei was founded in the earliest
decades of the 20th Century, initial plans for expansion were hampered by
the political situation in Spain. The outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in the
1930s, for example, led to utter turmoil in the country and sank many of
Escriva’s initial plans.
 
By the 1940s, plans for expansion were set into motion. In 1946, for
example, Opus Dei moved into Italy, Portugal, and Great Britain, three of
the traditionally most important countries in Europe. This was followed a
year later by moves into France and Ireland. In 1949, Opus Dei began to
cross the Atlantic Ocean, and centers opened in the USA, Mexico, Chile,
Argentina, Colombia, and Venezuela. Throughout the 1950s, the
organization continued to expand in Europe and the Americas, moving into
Germany, Guatemala, Peru, Ecuador, Uruguay, Switzerland, Brazil, Austria,
and Canada. By 1959, the first steps were made into Asia and Africa, with
centers opening in Japan and Kenya, as well as El Salvador, Costa Rica, and
Holland.
 
 

 
 
Through the 1960s, Opus Dei expanded into Paraguay, Australia, the
Philippines, Belgium, Nigeria, and Puerto Rico, meaning it had a base of
operation on almost every continent. This expansion slowed in the 1970s,
with only Bolivia being added to the list, though the 1980s saw the Ivory
Coast, the Congo, Honduras, Hong Kong, Singapore, Trinidad, Tobago,
Sweden, Taiwan, Finland, Cameroon, the Dominican Republic, Macao,
New Zealand and Poland added to the list. It was a pattern continued
through the 1990s, a time in which Hungary, the Czech Republic,
Nicaragua, India, Israel, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovakia, Lebanon, Panama,
Uganda, Kazakhstan, and South Africa all became countries hosting Opus
Dei centers. In recent years, Slovenia, Croatia, and Lithuania have
welcomed Opus Dei. As you can see, over the past seventy years, the rate of
expansion has been impressive.
 
Despite the wide-ranging nature of the above list of countries, it is no
surprise to see that the bulk of the membership numbers for Opus Dei
comes from countries that have a longstanding relationship with

Catholicism. The list of countries that boast the most Opus Dei members
are (in order):
 
1. Spain
2. Mexico
3. Argentina
4. Italy
5. The United States of America
6. The Philippines
7. Colombia
 
As you can see, the top three are all Spanish-speaking countries, followed
by Italy (home of the Vatican) and the United States (one of the world’s
most populous countries). There are a number of countries that one might
expect to see on the list, but for one reason or another, they have not
embraced Opus Dei to the same extent.
 
The United Kingdom was one of the first places Escriva visited when trying
to expand Opus Dei. Indeed, London was one of his favorite cities, and he
was heard to refer to it as a “crossroads of the world.” Escriva even had
favorite museums and churches in the city, in particular the Anglican
Church of St. Duncan. The church held the tomb of the Roper family and
was the final resting place for the head of St. Thomas More, one of
Escriva’s heroes. But despite this love of the country and almost six decades
spent in Great Britain, Opus Dei has barely more than five hundred British
members. On average, they’re able to recruit fewer than ten each year. Part
of the reason for this might be the work of Cardinal Basil Hume, a priest
who warned about the dangers of Opus Dei in a particularly public manner.
As Hume’s words reached other bishops, and in turn, the Catholics of
Britain, the name of Opus Dei was tarnished before they could establish a
particularly strong foothold.
 
It’s worth comparing the relative failure in Britain to Opus Dei’s success in
countries like Peru. In this South American country, the popularity of Opus
Dei and of Escriva in particular is slightly astonishing. Despite its small size
and its unimportance in geopolitical terms, Peru accounts for close to 2% of

Opus Dei’s global membership, almost three times that of Britain. Among
these 1,600 people are 400 numeraries and just under 200 associates. There
are also 200 priests, 11 active bishops, and even 2 Peruvian Opus Dei
bishops who work overseas. This, in particular, is amazing, considering that
Peru’s Opus Dei bishops amount to roughly a third of the global total.
 
Peru represents what can happen when the power of Opus Dei is allowed to
flourish inside a country. Rather than traditional Catholicism, it’s easy to
note the prevalence of Opus Dei’s influence in the region of Canete. The
organization was given a Papal prelature in 1957, allowing Opus Dei to
invest the Vatican’s money in establishing Church infrastructure in the
country. The lasting legacy of this is not only that Opus Dei is overly
represented when compared to other countries, but that Escriva’s name is
held in high reverence throughout Peru.
 
But now that we know about the global reach of Opus Dei, one question
remains on many people’s lips. What exactly do Opus Dei members do? In
order to earn their reputation as one of the most controversial religious
bodies in the world, mustn’t their activities garner some attention from the
outside world? Again, this is difficult to ascertain. Thus far, we have
avoided stepping too far into the controversial secrets of Opus Dei. So far,
we have examined the skeletal structure of the Church, taking only a few
pauses here and there to note the more controversial elements. This
provides us with a firm understanding of the church, so that we will better
be able to explore the divisive elements in a later chapter. In much the same
way, in order to learn about why Opus Dei remains controversial, we must
learn about their activities and what it is that they do on a day-by-day basis.
 
Whenever you ask Opus Dei members what it is that they “do,” you’re
likely to receive a stock answer. We’re already covered the unique nature of
Opus Dei’s approach to work, in that everything they do should somehow
be directed towards sanctification and God. Accordingly, it’s not a surprise
to hear answers such as work, family, church events, and other general,
everyday activities. The only difference is that the members use even non-
religious activities to line their path towards holiness. So while even the
most mundane answer to the question “what do Opus Dei members do,”

might seem bland and uninteresting, every single response is imbued with
the particular theology of the organization. That is to say, Opus Dei
members might appear as though they are carrying out typical tasks, but the
manner in which they approach said tasks is very different when compared
to non-members.
 
However, while church members might view every activity as part of a
greater goal, there are some traditions, rituals, and processes that are taught
by the Opus Dei leadership and carried out by most members. Through the
course of a typical day, these might be used a number of times.
 
For example, for many Opus Dei members, the day begins with an offering.
The day itself is offered to God in a short prayer, repeating the phrase “I
will serve” as an indication of how the day’s work will be dedicated to God.
After this, members might partake in a daily mass, receiving communion in
the traditional Catholic fashion, and then having a praying of the rosary.
Following this, many members set aside thirty minutes during both the
morning and the evening to have a personal, mental prayer. At noon, this is
joined by an Angelus prayer or the Regina Coeli, depending on the time of
the year. Every day, members look inwards and examine their own
conscience. There is a meditation lasting roughly ten minutes, during which
time the individual will consider the recent spiritual teachings they have
received, as well as dedicating five minutes of each day to hearing a reading
from the New Testament.
 
Opus Dei members usually pay a daily visit to the Blessed Sacrament,
usually following the last meal of the day. This often involves the saying of
Our Father’s, Hail Mary’s, and Glory Be’s, all of which are prayers to make
up a “spiritual communion.” This is the Opus Dei term for any union with
Jesus Christ that does not involve the taking of the daily communion. As
well as this, there is a set of prayers that are all in Latin. These are named
the Preces, and they are said each day, invocating Jesus, Mary, the Holy
Spirit, Saint Joseph, Saint José Maria, the Guardian Angels, as well as more
conventional prayers for the Pope, the local bishops, anyone who is
working to spread the gospel, Opus Dei’s prelate, Opus Dei members, and
anyone else who might be deserving. Following this, there are invocations

to a number of Saints, such as John, Peter, Paul, Gabriel, Raphael, and
Michael.
 
As you can see, the amount of reflection, prayer time, dedication, and
tradition is above and beyond what is expected of most religious people. As
Opus Dei members believe that all of their working lives are part of their
religious offering, it can be surprising to see the amount of prayer and
conventional religious activity that is also required. But these are not the
only practices done by Opus Dei members. As well as the above, there are
also those who carry out more specific acts.
 
“Aspirations” is the name given to the short prayers that are said at regular
intervals throughout the day. These might be something like “Jesus, Mary,
and Joseph, I give you my heart and soul,” or “Jesus, I love you with all of
my heart.” Many of the wordings are handed down from the prelate of Opus
Dei, including a recent one that said “Everything with Peter to Jesus
through Mary.” Similarly, some members use holy water in order to purify
themselves before going to bed for the night. This can be combined with a
number of Hail Mary’s. Furthermore, the corporal mortification that we
have already alluded to is just another example of the kind of Opus Dei
religious dedication that really sets them apart from other organizations.
 
In addition to the everyday activities that the church encourages, Opus Dei
organize regular events designed to help with members’ religiosity. This
includes the “circle,” a class delivered by a layperson that focuses on some
theological element of Opus Dei, as well as containing a section that helps
members examine their conscience. This works in tandem with monthly
recollection meetings, which are made up of a few meditation sessions and
delivered by a priest. Once a year, supernumeraries attend Opus Dei
workshops. These can last several days, while numeraries typically have an
annual course that they can attend. Furthermore, there are often Opus Dei
retreats that can provide several days’ worth of religious education and
affirmation crammed into a short period. Sometimes, these retreats can be
conducted almost entirely in silence, encouraging deeper stages of
meditation. While these events are happening, members will continue to
receive spiritual guidance from associates and numeraries.

 
In order to learn about these practices, members will often receive a
document titled Catechism of Opus Dei. Now up to at least its seventh
edition, the document is roughly 130 pages long and is not distributed to the
general public. It is designed for internal use only, often being used to guide
prayer, meditation, and reflection meetings. It’s organized in a question-
and-answer format, designed to provide solutions to the issues faced by
members. The document has been published for many years and not
without controversy. Escriva himself had to write a short note in a previous
edition explaining why it was being withdrawn from circulation, citing the
“intense and hidden opposition to the Work” as the reason. The passage
does not go into depth on the exact nature of this opposition, but it was
enough for the church leaders to believe that the Catechism of Opus Dei
might be dangerous if it fell into the wrong hands. The modern edition of
the document contains a history of Opus Dei and a number of deliberations
on theological matters. If there was indeed controversial information being
distributed to members, it has since been removed.
 
For the numeraries of Opus Dei, life inside the center is even more
regimented. For example, they are required to attend a daily meeting known
as the “tertulia,” which has been likened to a family get together for those
who live in the building. Here, they will receive an education akin to the
seminary studies that a trainee priest might receive. The yearly retreats for
numeraries are often longer, sometimes taking as long as three weeks, such
is the intensity of the course. Added to their religious devotions, numeraries
are expected to make themselves available for Opus Dei-related activities.
This might be helping out in a youth center or organizing church-related
events. It might be helping to tackle unforeseen problems around the center
or helping with visitors and newer members. These kinds of tasks are
considered family activities and, again, are carried out with the same degree
of sanctimony and religious forethought.
 
At the same time as these smaller rituals, practices, and traditions are being
exercised, it is expected that all members of Opus Dei will have some kind
of employment. This is not a unilateral requirement, in that the type of
employment can vary on a case by case basis. When asking what it is that

Opus Dei does, work is an essential part of their belief system. That means
that the job might be a banker or a homemaker, but each role is approached
with a spiritual element. But in addition to this, there is the work that
members are expected to carry out on behalf of the church. This could
involve helping at the Opus Dei center or even serving at the national or
international headquarters. Whatever it is that they are doing, there is an
expectation from Opus Dei that all members will strive to work as hard as
possible and to achieve the highest standards available in every capacity of
their working lives.
 
Though these expectations might appear taxing to those who do not involve
religion in their lives to any great extent, Opus Dei members are often left
with some time free to themselves. At this point, they are essentially
allowed to do what they please. At least, in an official capacity, Opus Dei
members are allowed to spend their free time in any way they please, so
long as they apply the same devotional religious ideas to anything they
might try to accomplish. In fact, the Opus Dei doctrine is applied in almost
every area of life. Members are asked to consider the religious ramifications
of their careers, their friendships, their political decisions, their hobbies,
even the choices they make as a consumer. All activity should be carried
out with the Opus Dei doctrine in mind. While the church might not tell
people exactly what to do – who to vote for or what brands to buy, for
example – they will ask members to think about spiritual matters in every
facet of their lives. In that respect, everything an Opus Dei member does is
somehow colored by their religion.
 
Part of the devotional practice of Opus Dei’s doctrine includes work done
for the church. These projects can include youth centers, schools,
agricultural endeavors, and many other types of work. Often, taking part in
one of these projects will be accompanied by a doctrinal message on how
this work relates to the church and to God. In all, Opus Dei members have
worked on a huge number of projects around the world. These have
included:
 
The running of 15 universities for the benefit of 80,000 students.
Perhaps the most famous is the University of Navarra, located in

Pamplona, Spain, which allows students to study law, philosophy,
medicine, theology, economics, communications, and many other
subjects. In addition, campuses in Rome and Guatemala show that
these educational facilities are a global concern.
There are seven Opus Dei hospitals, institutions that employ over a
thousand doctors and fifteen hundred nurses. At any one time, they
could be treating as many as 300,000 patients. Locations include
Congo and Nigeria, providing health care in less-equipped regions.
Opus Dei runs eleven business schools with as many as ten thousand
students in locations such as Mexico, Barcelona, and Buenos Aires.
There are more than 35 primary and secondary schools run by Opus
Dei around the world, five of which are in the USA. Others are in
places such as Kenya and Japan.
Opus Dei has nearly 100 technical schools teaching vocational skills,
often located purposefully in poorer neighborhoods. These can teach
English and Spanish as second languages to children, teenagers, and
adults in countries such as Italy, Brazil, the Philippines, Peru, and
Guatemala.
Opus Dei provides residences to 6,000 students in at least 165
locations around the world, the majority of whom are not members of
the organization. These living quarters will often include libraries,
study areas, and academic assistance, as well as offering spiritual and
religious guidance. These are located in Holland, Spain, Taiwan, and
London.
 
As well as these Opus Dei-related institutions, there are others that are not
run by the organization, but rather are affiliated with them. That means that
two universities, a business school, 213 primary and secondary schools, 59
vocational colleges, an untold number of medical clinics, and 27
pharmacies have all received assistance in some form or another from Opus
Dei in recent years. The group is happy to discuss their involvement in such
matters, especially considering that many of these projects provide good PR
for a much-maligned organization. In addition, they provide many Opus Dei
members with potential volunteer work if and when they have the time to
spare. In addition to those projects listed above, it is not uncommon for
members to devise and implement their own ideas for charitable efforts in

the community. These might be subject to Opus Dei’s approval and might
receive backing from the group, though are rarely mentioned in official
documentation. Despite this, many of these projects will somehow adhere
to the organization’s theological principles.
 
The difference between the official and unofficial works in regards to Opus
Dei is significant. The former, commonly called “corporate works,” are
those that have an official relation to the organization.   Trying to
differentiate between these and the works that are simply carried out by
members is something that has troubled outside observers for a long time.
Both are staffed with Opus Dei members and carried out in the spirit of the
organization, so why the difference? Some have suggested that tax
liabilities in certain countries might be the reason, though Opus Dei denies
this. Instead, the official reasoning is three fold. First, it might be that
unofficial works are carried out by non-Catholics. Second, Opus Dei has
said that it does not want to stifle members’ creative instincts by providing
too many suggestions. Finally, it is said that there might be the possibility
that the secularity of Opus Dei’s works would be compromised. Despite
affiliation with the church, Opus Dei hopes that its agents and members will
be viewed as individuals, rather than people working on the organization’s
behalf. Escriva himself once announced his disgust at those who attempted
to use their Catholicism to attain special privileges, so Opus Dei attempts to
make this a non-issue. In doing so, however, they muddy the waters
between personal and official Opus Dei projects, something that can make
trying to keep track of the organization’s activities slightly more difficult.
 
However, everything we have seen thus far has very much been in the
public view. It’s not uncommon for large religious organizations to be
involved in charitable ventures, nor is it uncommon that they would involve
their members in such endeavors. But once you start looking closely at the
inner workings of Opus Dei (especially in relation to the Vatican), then the
picture begins to look very different. Firstly, we should examine what is
known as the personal prelature.
 
Perhaps the first encounter with the controversial side of Opus Dei in the
English-speaking world occurred in 1982. At the time, the media’s attention

was not focused in any way on the organization. Some people might have
known them as a particularly devout denomination within the Catholic
Church, but there was little attention paid to either Opus Dei or their
activities. This changed when Opus Dei was granted canonical status by
Pope John Paul II providing the organization with a “personal prelature,”
which is kind of like a personal, unique diocese defined by contract rather
than geography. The “prelate” refers to the man – usually a bishop – who is
chosen to run the prelature. It’s a strange part of the Catholic legislature but
one with important ramifications.
 
What it meant was that Opus Dei members were distinct within the Catholic
Church. On the normal matters of Catholicism, they would defer to their
local Catholic priest, whether they were in Nairobi, Rome, or Tokyo. So for
example, processes such as obtaining a marriage annulment would proceed
through the normal channels of Catholicism. But it amounted to a formal
recognition of Opus Dei’s rules and doctrines. Furthermore, it was a kind of
permission from the Catholic Church for Opus Dei members to be subject
to the prelature and its rules in parts of their lives that were not normally
governed by the Church. In other words, it put an official stamp on the
pervasive and somewhat controlling grip in which Opus Dei holds its
members. But that’s not the only reason the prelature was controversial. To
this date, the personal prelature granted to Opus Dei remains unique. No
other organization in the world enjoys such a privilege.
 
The history of the personal prelature can be traced back to the Second
Vatican Council, which took place in 1965. This was a massive examination
and modernization of exactly how the Catholic Church was organized, and
the establishment of the personal prelature was made possible during this
time. By 1983, the Vatican had published a new Code of Canon Law, a set
of rules for Catholicism that included Opus Dei as the one and only
personal prelature in the world. The move sent shock waves through the
religious community and was soon picked up by the wide world. People
began to open their eyes to Opus Dei and began to question just why this
small branch of the Church was being given such privileged positions.
 

For most people, the reason for Opus Dei’s favored status seemed to be
linked to their founder. Escriva had been trained as a lawyer, though his
graduating thesis at the seminary had concerned an “extraordinary case of
quasi-episcopal jurisdiction” as it pertained to a medieval Spanish convent.
As such, Escriva was one of the world’s leading scholars on the finer details
of the Catholic Church’s canon and judiciary. More than anyone, he knew
the rules and regulations right down to the fine print. It should be no
surprise that the history of Escriva’s Opus Dei’s organization can fill over
650 pages of legal history in the church, broadly documented in The
Canonical Path of Opus Dei: The History and Defense of a Charism.
 
It was in 1941 that Escriva’s organization was first approved and gained the
status of a pious union. This was followed by a merger with another group,
the Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, two years later. By 1947, the
organization had become a secular institute, free from the official oversight
of the Catholic Church. This placed Opus Dei in the perfect position for the
1982 declaration as a personal prelature. Most men would not have known
how to navigate the choppy waters of the Catholic bureaucracy, but Escriva
was a master.
 
Opus Dei members themselves, however, are keen to argue that their
growth was not a quest for special privileges. Instead, they suggest that they
sought to find a canonical means of protecting the original vision of their
founder. To give an example of how Escriva managed to turn the Catholic
codes to his advantage, take a look at the Code of Canon Law from 1917.
Canon 500 of this document declares that a secular institute is not permitted
to be composed of people of both genders. As such, the laws suggest that
Opus Dei should have been split into two distinct bodies, one for men and
one for women. By the time the personal prelature came into effect in 1983,
however, this requirement was removed. Opus Dei is the only personal
prelature and thus the only organization within the Catholic Church that
does not have to observe this rule (or many others.)
 
It’s this awarding of the canonical status that is difficult to underplay in the
history of Opus Dei. To the outsider, it might look like boring and insipid
disagreements over rules and regulations. But the Catholic Church is nearly

two millennia old and these laws have been observed for centuries. It is
these same laws that dictate the way in which religion is implemented to the
millions of Catholics around the world. That they should allow Opus Dei to
be exempt on one hand and so close to the Vatican on the other seems to
indicate that the organization – despite Opus Dei’s protestations – has
managed to wrangle a special set of privileges for itself.
 
Thanks to this privileged position, Opus Dei can occupy a unique place
within the Catholic Church. They are able to insist on their own singularity,
they are able to maintain a standoffish attitude with regards to other
religious and secular organizations, they are able to remain fussy and
demanding about the vocabulary and categories of the Church’s canon, and
their constant quest for approval from the highest authorities within the
Vatican ae much better explained. Once you realize that Opus Dei’s special
position within the Church grants them singular privileges, there emerges
an image of an organization that is not as confident as they might otherwise
appear. Opus Dei, as a personal prelature, walks a fine line and are
seemingly always worried about slipping to either side. They might fall to
the way of a religious order, which would distance them from the vast
majority of lay people who would see them as just another church. Or they
might fall too far the other way and be seen as a secular organization, which
would provide no room for priests or theology. Instead, Opus Dei’s concept
of the priests and the lay people as being constituent parts of a greater
whole is a finely balanced proposition. Importantly, it is not a part of the
Catholic tradition. Rarely in the history of the Catholic Church had the
ideas of Opus Dei been spoken about or adhered to. The personal prelature,
then, acts as a form of protection for this finely balanced proposition. It
provides Opus Dei with the traditional authority of the Catholic Church.
Rather than being a bureaucratic move for power, Escriva’s manipulation of
the canonical regulations provided protection for a fledgling religious order.
When viewed like this, Opus Dei looks much less threatening.
 
In the above section, a reference was made to the Priestly Society of the
Holy Cross. It can help to understand this organization better, especially in
terms of how it relates to Opus Dei. In simple terms, the Priestly Society of
the Holy Cross is an organization that unites both the Opus Dei priests with

priests from other dioceses. This association allows them to share and
discuss doctrine and spirituality, especially with regards to the Opus Dei
idea of formation. It’s something that is written into the laws of the Catholic
Church. Specifically, Canon 278 of the Code of Canon Law provides
diocesan priests with the right to join up with any spiritual association they
might choose. It’s a form of independence for the many priests of the
Catholic Church.
 
The matter was a personal concern for Escriva. So worried was he about the
formation of the Church’s priests that he came very close to actually leaving
Opus Dei \ in order to found a new organization that would permit the
uniting of priests as they saw fit. In the end, Escriva decided that he would
be able to accomplish this goal within Opus Dei and created a society that
united priests, whether they were in Opus Dei or not. Within this society,
only the priests formally acknowledged as being a part of Opus Dei are
bound by the prelate’s jurisdiction, technically referred to as the
“incardination.” This means that these priests come under the direct
authority of Opus Dei. Those priests who are incardinated into Opus Dei’s
prelature will then be considered numeraries, while those who are
incardinated in their own dioceses still will be counted as either associates
or supernumeraries. The distinction is typically made with regards to how
much time is available to dedicate to the Opus Dei activities, but all are
considered to be involved with the Opus Dei community.
 
It’s a vision established by Escriva, who deemed that diocesan priests (that
is, those who are not Opus Dei priests) would be able to sanctify their work,
but in order to do so, they might develop a strong relationship with the
bishop. For diocesan priests, their means of sanctifying work is to follow
the word of those further up the Catholic chain of command. That’s where
the Priestly Society of the Holy Cross comes in. It is not designed to replace
the bishop in this situation. The society does not intend to become the
primary point of reference for priests. Indeed, it’s even possible for bishops
themselves to be members of the society. Instead, the Priestly Society of the
Holy Cross hopes to promote holiness within its many members through the
fulfilment of their duties as priests. Just as a carpenter might turn his work
into a religious expression were he an Opus Dei member, the Society allows

for priests to do the same, using their position within the Church in a
different manner to the standard Opus Dei priests. While still fulfilling their
duties as Catholic priests, the Society offers the men a chance to learn Opus
Dei’s teachings at the same time.
 
The society was a creation of Escriva in 1943. Partly, it was designed to
ensure that priests were never in short supply for Opus Dei members. At the
time, Opus Dei was not the global organization it is today, so by using
Catholic by-laws and regulations to skirt around a few of the doctrinal
issues, Escriva was able to swell the ranks of his priesthood. Indeed, the
first ordinations within Opus Dei only occurred in 1944 – the three non-
smoking priests we mentioned earlier – and the same men became the first
members of the Priestly Society of the Holy Cross. Today, there are not
only just under 2,000 Opus Dei priests, but there are almost double that
number who are members of the Priestly Society.
 
It is a standing tradition within Opus Dei that the priests are ordained from
within. That means that the associates and numeraries who are already so
dedicated to the organization will likely become its next generation of
clergymen. This not only creates a particularly devout model of priest, but it
also means that the Vatican is not able to accuse Opus Dei of stealing their
priests. On becoming an Opus Dei priest, one is immediately entered into
the Priestly Society. At the same time, the prelate of Opus Dei is the
Society’s president general. It’s a regulatory quirk, however, that there is no
rank within the Society. Instead, diocesan priests are still considered subject
to their diocesan bishop. They are simply part of a Society built on equal
footing. Once again, Escriva was very careful in the way he organized and
constructed his organizations, walking the tightrope of permissiveness
above the vast history, tradition, and authority of the Catholic Church.
 
With all of these complicated doctrinal arrangements, many people are left
asking one important question: who exactly runs Opus Dei? Well, just like
its relationship to the wider Catholic Church, trying to answer this question
can be difficult. As might be expected from the organization that Escriva set
up, the statues and canons of Opus Dei are difficult to pick apart. However,
they are used to determine the internal governance of Opus Dei.

 
The ultimate authority within Opus Dei, unsurprisingly enough, is the
prelate. This position is the natural successor to Escriva, and thus far there
have only been two people who have held the post. Following the death of
Escriva himself in 1975, Alvaro del Portillo was chosen as his successor.
Portillo was later made a bishop by Pope John Paul II, in 1991, though he
was not a bishop when he took on the prelate position. Portillo died in 1994,
meaning that a vote was held and Javier Echevarria was elected to take on
the position of prelate, being made a bishop the following year. Of all the
positions within Opus Dei, prelate is the only one that holds a life term. The
men who have held the position have also had close ties. Portillo was
considered the closest collaborator of Escriva, while Echevarria was
Escriva’s personal secretary for many years.
 
Moving down the chain of command, things become more complicated.
Traditionally, the Catholic Church has a clearly defined structure, with the
Pope on top (in earthly terms) and then a clear organization all the way
down to the local parish level. In Opus Dei, however, this is complicated by
the organization’s doctrine. The priests, for example, will view the prelate
as their bishop. The relationship between the two positions is akin to that
between a conventional Catholic diocesan priest and their respective
bishop. Within the structure of Opus Dei, this is clear and simple. As soon
as a priest wishes to work outside those confines, however, he finds that he
must possess faculties from the respective diocesan bishop. In simple terms,
Opus Dei’s priests all answer to the prelate on matters related to Opus Dei.
As soon as their work extends outside the organization, however, they enter
into the traditional command structure of the Catholic Church, which can
get quite complicated.
 
The prelate does not work alone, however. He is assisted by two central
councils, both headquartered in Rome. The first is the General Council, the
main group for the men’s branch of Opus Dei, and the second is the Central
Advisory Council, which deals with the women’s branch of Opus Dei. Both
feed advice to the prelate in order to help him make decisions. In theory,
both councils are equal but are kept separate, with an almost taboo-level

restriction on them holding communications with one another. As such,
discussions between the two councils are handled in writing.
 
Since the days of Escriva, the women’s council has held just as much
weight as the men’s when discussions are held. The prelate entertains the
views and opinions of both councils and has traditionally not decimated
against one side. The councils themselves are put together in similar
fashion, being made up of Opus Dei members who have a history of
numerous projects with youth groups, supernumeraries, and numeraries.
These members rotate more often than the prelate position, so it is not
uncommon for the most respected, longest-standing Opus Dei members to
be invited to the position at one point or another and serve terms of eight
years.
 
 
In addition to this, two important positions are the vicar-general and the
secretary-general. By statute, these positions are filled with priests and are

common to both branches. Between the two councils, decisions on regional
delegates are put to a vote, whereby localized administrators are appointed.
In Opus Dei terms, “region” is often synonymous with country, in that
France and India would both be considered regions. Looking down to a
regional level, the structure remains largely the same. That is to say, there is
a regional vicar who is considered the authority, and he is assisted by a pair
of councils, one for women and one for men. If the region is particularly
large, such as the United States of America, then there are further
subdivisions, named delegations, which also have the same basic structure
of a vicar and two councils.
 
On a more general level, the regions are often split into distinct centers, of
which there are over 1,750 in the world. The centers are typically the
localized projection of Opus Dei. They have a director – who is not a priest
– and he is assisted by a local council. The minimum requirement for a
center is a director and two other members of Opus Dei. With the centers
typically segregated by gender, then there is little need for male- or female-
specific councils.
 
It can help to think of the center as the fundamental representation of Opus
Dei. These buildings are the rock on which the entire organization is built,
though it is not necessarily a physical place. Though many centers have
lavish buildings in London or Manhattan, others have been arranged around
a single residence or a workplace. The idea is that the center will assist with
the organization of the means of formation. It will also provide a level of
pastoral care to local members. The centers are only ever opened once Opus
Dei has the permission of the bishop in the local diocese who has the right
to visit the center under canon law. Once there, the diocesan bishop may
carry out the traditional inspections of the tabernacle or the oratory or even
the place where confession is held. Though this is permissible under
Vatican rulings, it is rarely pursued. For the most part, centers are allowed
to operate as they see fit.
 
On a grander organization level, every eight years sees the hosting of the
Opus Dei General Congress. These meetings are attended by
representatives from regions around the world, anywhere that Opus Dei is

present. The Congresses are used for examining the work of the prelature
and discussing potential directions and ideas for the future of Opus Dei. It is
possible for members from around the world to present their ideas to the
highest ranking member of Opus Dei, ideas which will then be discussed.
Should there be a need to choose a new prelate – in the case of death,
usually – then the General Congress is where the vote is held. In the past,
the death of the prelate has meant the immediate calling of a General
Congress in order to quickly resolve the leadership issue. The vote falls to
the priests who meet the right criteria – age, length of membership,
experience – and the vote is then passed along to the Pope himself for
confirmation. As such, this means that the position of prelate is conferred
by the Pope himself, a high honor indeed for a relatively small part of the
Catholic Church. Though women are not permitted to vote, it is the female
delegates who are responsible for choosing the candidates for the men to
vote upon. Once again, this seems to be in line with Escriva’s idea that the
two sexes should be equal but should remain separate.
 
The organization and power structures of Opus Dei not only reveal the
internal spiritual ideas that the group holds, but also looking at the history
of such structures can teach us about what makes Opus Dei stand apart from
many other groups. Despite their relatively small numbers, Opus Dei is
treated with a huge amount of privilege within the Catholic Church.
Members demand attention and seem to have carved out a niche for
themselves, based chiefly on Escriva’s manipulation of Catholic canon. As
we will see in later chapters, this understanding forms the basis of the
controversy inherent in Opus Dei. It is only through understanding the
basics that we are able to learn just how strange and different Opus Dei can
be. In the coming chapters, we will look closer at the more concerning,
controversial, and hidden aspects of the organization.


Controversy Reigns
 
For the vast majority of people, the words Opus Dei only become familiar
through the numerous controversial aspects of the organization. Now that
we have an understanding of how the church is structured and how they
approach the world, we can begin to look at how these fundamental
principles will cause so much consternation among the public. From claims
of extreme secrecy, to corporal mortification, to an influence in the political
world, we will now examine the controversial aspects of Opus Dei and
discover whether there is any truth to the rumors. In many cases, the issues
surrounding Opus Dei date back to the 1940s and have been addressed by
the organization on numerous occasions. However, the controversy endures.
 
Cloaked in Secrecy
 
The first issue we will address is the idea of secrecy. Opus Dei and secrets
have been linked for years, with the majority of headlines involving the
organization typically following the same template or pattern. There seems
to be a desire on behalf of the public to learn more about Opus Dei purely
because they are seen as keeping secrets from the public. There have been
various claims that Opus Dei is a secret society or that its work takes place
behind closed doors. But is this true?
 
As we are working in the confines of the English language, let’s have a look
back in time for the first mention of Opus Dei in the English-speaking
media. An article appeared in the March edition of Time magazine in 1957,
noting that three members of Opus Dei had become members in General
Franco’s fascist government in Spain. In the piece, Opus Dei members are
referred to as “the White Masons,” a hint towards their reputation for
secrecy. Ironically enough, such was the nature of Franco’s government that
the fiercely traditional Opus Dei is mentioned in the article as having
“liberal leanings,” at least in comparison to the fascist regime.
 

The White Masons is a concept that had held true. Even is the name itself
hasn’t remained as popular, the idea behind it remains. The Freemasons are
one of the most notorious secret societies in the world, with conspiracy
theories detailing their responsibility and involvement in all manner of
political machinations. It’s a feeling that has been applied to Opus Dei, not
only by the public at large, but also from within the Catholic Church itself.
Many of these accusations can be traced by to Spain in the 1930s and 1940s
when Opus Dei was competing with a number of other church
organizations.
 
The Masonic links go as far back as the late 1930s. At the time, a number of
Opus Dei members noted a drop-off in interest among young people. When
they asked around, they discovered that a rumor had been circulating stating
that the Opus Dei centers were emblazoned with Masonic and Kabbalistic
imagery, that the communion hosts had a strange smell, that praying
members conducted strange rituals including crucifixions of members in a
blood-ridden style, and that Escriva himself would levitate before his
congregation, hypnotizing his audience. Around this time, one of Spain’s
leading Jesuits accused Opus Dei of being “a secretive heretical society of a
Masonic stamp.”
 
These rumors spread through Spain like wildfire. By 1941, the fascists had
set up special courts to repress the Masons and other secret societies, a
move that led to Opus Dei being investigated, accused of being a “Masonic
branch connected to Jewish sects.” Eventually, it was archived with no
effect, but that didn’t stop the rumors. In 1942, a confidential report was
published that described Opus Dei’s secretive nature as being against the
aims of the Spanish government. People wanted to know what was
happening behind the closed doors of the relatively new group. Barcelona’s
civil governor investigated one member, demanding answers, claiming that
Opus Dei was akin to a “sect of illuminati.” In Valencia, they even sent a
girl to be tutored by Escriva in order to uncover information, such as
whether there existed secret tunnels beneath the Opus Dei center and
whether it hid Masonic symbols. In certain cities, book burnings were held.
Copies of The Way, written by Escriva, were thrown on the fires.
 

It didn’t take long for the rumors to reach the Vatican. A report was
prepared and handed to the Pope that described the “traces of a secret
tendency to dominate the world with a sort of Christian Masonry.” It should
be noted that similar accusations were levelled at the Jesuits, as well as the
Knights Templar, in the past. But the Vatican did nothing. Despite the furor
over the secretive approach of Opus Dei, no charges or allegations were
ever formally levelled. Instead, rumors and stories circulated about what
happened inside the Opus Dei centers.
 
Over the years, these accusations have resurfaced. The Vatican wrote to
Escriva in 1971 and requested a list of all Opus Dei members, as they were
concerned about rumors that the organization was “infiltrating” the Vatican.
Escriva complied. Such accusations bounced back and forth between
Catholic and secular spheres, with both sides concerned about Opus Dei’s
secrecy. In 1986, the Italian parliament mentioned Opus Dei in an
investigation into the influence of secret societies. It was eight months
before the organization was cleared by Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, himself a
staunch Catholic man. In defense of Opus Dei’s supposed secrecy, Scalfaro
pointed out that the organization’s Italian headquarters were stationed in
Milan, and he gave the address and telephone number for their information
desk. This, he suggested, was not expected from a secret society.
 
This contrasted with the findings of a Swiss court a few years later, when an
Opus Dei-related educational group found themselves in a dispute with a
newspaper. The court found that Opus Dei was indeed a “covertly”
operating “secret organization.” In 1996, a parliamentary commission in
France included Opus Dei on a list of 172 sects (or dangerous religious
movements) that operated in France. Though a number of French and
Italian bishops protested, the Vatican made no official comment. Two
months later, however, Pope John Paul II named a church in Rome after
Escriva. However, these claims of secrecy are not confined to the past. Still
today, people view membership in Opus Dei as being akin to being a
member of a secret society.
 
Perhaps the reason why the secrecy issue has become so central to criticism
of Opus Dei is because of the inability to discern membership with any

great accuracy. Across the world, and in Spain especially, there are many
Opus Dei members who work in conventional offices, progressing along
traditional career paths. Occasionally, you could be shocked to discover that
your normal, competent coworker is actually an Opus Dei member and you
never had any idea. This person might not go home every night to a family,
as you do, but he instead travels home to the local center, prays in silence,
unclasps the cilice belt that has been cutting into his leg for hours, and then
commences his weekly ritual of whipping himself while praying. To many
people, the idea that their co-workers could be involved in so alien a
lifestyle is shocking. To some, it is unwelcome.
 
On a surface level, there seems to be little way to tell if a person is an Opus
Dei member. Being involved in the organization is no great secret, and
many members will be happy to share. Others, however, have become
aware of the rumors and reputation and wish to keep their membership a
secret. Unlike many other Christian denominations, Opus Dei members do
not pride themselves on lapel pins and bumper stickers. Such an issue has
led to the spreading of many rumors.
 
In Spain, particularly, there is a list of ways in which you can supposedly
spot an Opus Dei member. One such theory is that members favor
Atkinson’s cologne, said to be Escriva’s personal choice. Similarly, there is
a rumor that Opus Dei businessmen can be identified by a missing button
on the sleeve of their suit jacket. Another is that members smoke Ducados
cigarettes, perhaps a reference to the tale of the three priests and an effort to
fit in. Speaking to actual members, however, these ideas are quickly put to
bed.
 
There are some theories that are a little less out there. Some say you can
spot Opus Dei members because they will own a small statue of a donkey.
It’s certainly not obligatory, but many Opus Dei centers do have donkey
statues, a common symbol throughout the organization, with Escriva having
compared himself to the donkey that carried Christ into Jerusalem. In a
similar vein, “Pax” is a common greeting between Opus Dei members, to
which the correct reply is “in aeternum.” This is not a foolproof method of
identification, however, as those who use it will need to know that the other

is certainly in the organization and will often simply avoid doing so around
people who are not Opus Dei members.
 
Indeed, most Opus Dei members adhere to what is known as “discretion.”
People do not advertise their Opus Dei membership in too brazen a fashion,
partly due to a desire to retain the secular nature of the organization.
Members are not meant to be like those in other religious orders; they don’t
want to appear religious. As well as this, Escriva warned against those who
might try to use their Opus Dei membership to advance their careers, so
many choose to not advertise the fact at all. Escriva also preached the idea
of “collective humility,” meaning that Opus Dei as an organization should
not seek out self-aggrandizement, something which was written directly
into the constitution of the order and forbids the wearing of “distinctive
insignia” and other such advertisements.
 
There’s even a canonical reason as to why Opus Dei might be more
withdrawn about membership. During the period between 1947 and 1982,
the organization was classified by the Vatican as a “secular institute.” This
meant that it was to be treated as being outside of religious life. By 1950,
changes in the regulations meant that members were technically in violation
of the Church’s laws. So as not to draw attention to the fact, many of the
upper echelons of Opus Dei decided that discretion might be the best
option. In the modern day, Opus Dei’s reputation might be reason enough
for people to keep quiet.
 
It’s also worth noting that Opus Dei members are not alone in their
discretion. There are many organizations within the Catholic Church that do
not openly broadcast their membership. Among these are the Missionaries
of the Kingship of Christ, the Community of Stain John, the Crusaders of
Saint Mary, and the Father Kolbe Missionaries of Immaculata. Few of these
groups have anything like the notoriety of Opus Dei, but their practices
could be described as similarly secretive.
 
But the secrecy does not just apply to membership. Over the last few
decades, the “secret statutes” have garnered a great deal of attention. These
statutes are the Vatican laws that have been approved by the Pope and that

govern Opus Dei as an organization. As a rule, access to these documents is
forbidden to the majority of people. A quick Google search will seemingly
confirm this, with many websites clamoring to discuss the hidden statutes
and what could possibly be contained within.
 
This is not entirely true, however. In 1982, a book titled The Canonical
Path of Opus Dei was published by the organization and contained a copy –
in full – of the statutes. There is a problem for most people, though, in that
the documents were published in their original form. That is to say, they
were written in Latin. Opus Dei has never officially offered a translation of
the statutes, so all inquiries to see such documents are directed to a set of
regulations that most people cannot read. Even then, translations can be
difficult. An unauthorized, unofficial translation may interpret laws slightly
differently than Opus Dei’s original. Many people have seen this as Opus
Dei’s dodging of the requests to see their governing laws. According to the
organization, the fact that the statutes are Vatican-created documents means
that it falls on the Vatican to offer a translation. Again, people have seen
this as dodging the issue.
 
In addition to the “secret statutes,” there are other internal documents that
are definitely kept hidden. There are many internal publications, magazines,
and leaflets that are designed for internal reading only. Many of these, Opus
Dei argues, need to be kept within the organization due to the fact that they
might be misinterpreted without the correct context. While come critics
have suggested that these internal publications – such as Cronica and
Noticias – are used to propagandize and rewrite the history of the
organization, Opus Dei themselves suggest that these pieces are simply
private collections of members’ memories and thoughts, not intended for
public consumption. Indeed, it is not impossible to obtain a copy of these
texts and many have made their way out of the various Opus Dei centers
around the world.
 
Regardless of how much information is allowed to leak out of the Opus Dei
centers around the world, people will remain curious about certain elements
of the organization. Often, Opus Dei’s notoriety feeds into this. People
become curious about the organization and hope to find out more, only to

discover a blocked path in their way. This naturally makes them even more
curious, to the point of being accusatory. As we shall see in the following
sections, however, withholding information might be the least secret, least
strange aspect of Opus Dei.
 
Pain Threshold
 
If you ask most people what they know about Opus Dei, chances are they
will give you an answer focused on mortification. Thanks to the huge
popularity of Dan Brown’s book, the Da Vinci Code, and the subsequent
film, many people in the English speaking world first heard of the
organization through a fictional character. One of the most shocking traits
of the Opus Dei monk in the book – at least, for the uninitiated – is the way
in which he inflicts pain upon himself as an act of prayer. Though Dan
Brown’s book has been criticized in many circles (for many reasons), this
much is true: mortification has long been one of the strangest parts of Opus
Dei and is certainly one of the most notorious.
 
Mortification, as it is understood here, involves inflicting physical harm
upon oneself in order to “tame the flesh” and bring the human experience
closer to that of Jesus Christ. But before we continue with this section, we
should clear up one important fact. Mortification is only practiced by a
small percentage of the Opus Dei membership, and even in this case, it is
often far tamer than depicted in many works of fiction. However, that does
not stop many of the more incendiary details from being repeated in the
main stream media. But what is the truth?
 
Bold claims about Opus Dei can be traced all the way back to its roots. As
early as the 1930s and 1940s, Escriva and his new group were accused of
many crimes, including heresy, Masonry, Kabbalah, ritualism, and even
having secret tunnels under their centers. But at the time, few people saw fit
to criticize the practice of mortification. At the time, it was a recognized
part of many spiritualist beliefs.
 

Just like the tools of Opus Dei’s mortification, other Church groups had
similar devices. The hair shirt is the name given to one such device, a rough
cloth garment inlaid with barbed chains and worn beneath the regular
clothes. The hair shirt was demonstrative of many Catholic practices from
before the 20th Century, the point being to inflict discomfort. Pope Paul VI
was known to use a hair shirt, for example, right up until the day of his
death. For monks during the 1930s and the 1940s, the time when Opus Dei
came into being, such a practice was commonplace for monks. In addition,
the whip known as the flagellum was another common tool, with Church
scholars as far back as the 10th Century praising its pain-inflicting abilities.
 
For some Opus Dei members, tools such as the cilice (the strap wrapped
around the thigh) are much like the rosary. Neither were invented by
members of Opus Dei. But such comments do little to address the fact that
mortification devices are not only out of favor, but are seen by the rest of
society as being destructive and harmful. Thus, it’s little surprise that such
antiquated and poorly thought of practices should attract attention to Opus
Dei. To those who are critical of Opus Dei, such behavior is an example of
the organization’s inhumane approach to religion. Though for those who
admire the group, it should be noted that Opus Dei’s refusal to bow to
modern tastes is commendable.
 
Trying to understand mortification as it pertains to the individual members
can be tough. Though all members of Opus Dei technically take part, only
around 30% are involved in the more headline-grabbing kinds of self-
inflicted violence. For the supernumeraries, mostly laymen and female
members, whipping oneself or wearing a cilice is hardly ever done. Instead,
they’re too busy with families and children, using their working lives to
sanctify their relationship with God. Often, they can have an entirely
different form of mortification. This might amount to chores, such as doing
the washing up when it isn’t your turn or doing a small favor for someone.
 
In terms of the remaining 30% of Opus Dei members, however, there is
little question that the mortification practices are violent in nature and
intended to cause pain. Let’s take a closer look at some of the most
common:

 
The Cilice, mentioned already, is a spiked chain. Members wear it bound
around the upper thigh for around two hours every day (excluding Sundays,
feast days, and other notable days). It is sharp enough to leave visible pin
pricks in the flesh once removed, which can add up to noticeable scarring
over time. Due to the nature of the device, most numeraries prefer to wear it
in the privacy of the Opus Dei center. When wearing it in day-to-day life, it
can be a visible sign, something that would contravene the idea of
discretion. There are reports of members who do wear the cilice during
everyday life, with these individuals often claiming that it can remind the
wearer of its presence during difficult times, providing extra concentration,
focus, and an affirmation of one’s relationship with God.
 
The Discipline, also mentioned elsewhere in this book, is the famous whip
used by Opus Dei members. There is often a lot of confusion as to the size
and nature of the device, but it is not the heavy, thick strip of leather that
most people expect. Instead, it’s more like a thin cord, often made using
macramé-weaving methods. Typically, it will be held in one hand and used
during prayer time. For the duration of a prayer such as a Hail Mary or an
Our Father, the Opus Dei member will whip themselves across either the
back or the buttocks at regular intervals. If a member so desires, they can
speak to their priest and ask permission to use the discipline more regularly.
 

 
Sleeping arrangements can often be a part of the mortification practices. For
female numeraries, this can involve uncomfortable sleeping arrangements,
placing a thin but hard board over the top of a normal mattress and forgoing
the use of pillows at least one night a week. For their male equivalents, this
can be a case of sleeping on a floor for one night a week or similarly going
without a pillow. Though much less attention-grabbing than other
mortification efforts, these practices are widely used throughout Opus Dei
and can provide high levels of discomfort.
 
In terms of eating, it’s possible to practice corporal mortification even
during meal times. This could be something small such as forgoing the use
of sugar or milk in one’s coffee, choosing not to have dessert or a second
course, and other variations on this theme. There are also designated fast
days, on which Opus Dei members will refrain from eating within certain
parameters. Theoretically, such practices should apply to all Catholics,
though few are as strict as Opus Dei members when it comes to observing
the traditions.

 
Silence is also a means of practicing corporal mortification. Every night,
many Opus Dei members will enter into a personal examination of their
own conscience. During this time, numeraries are often encouraged to stay
in complete silence right through until the following morning’s mass has
been completed. This self-imposed silence is just another way in which
members deny themselves privileges and remind themselves of their
relationship with God.
 
There are also many other practices that have come in and out of fashion
among Opus Dei members. In the 1980s, for example, many numeraries
were encouraged to partake in cold showers. This was eventually phased
out, though rumors have remained that Opus Dei centers do not have hot
running water. This is untrue, but it is an example of how the ideas of
mortification can feed into the social comprehension of Opus Dei.
 
So what of Escriva? Did the Opus Dei founder approve of the practice of
mortification? There are a number of references to these kinds of practices
in Escriva’s writing. At one point in The Way, he recalls the ways in which
saints such as Francis of Assisi, Benedict, and Bernard all exposed
themselves to uncomfortable situations. Elsewhere, he describes the human
body as the “enemy” and asks the reader why they treat this enemy “so
softly.” It’s an idea Escriva returns to later, writing in The Forge that “what
has been through the flesh, the flesh should pay back.”
 
As well as his writings, there are examples from Escriva’s own life that
point toward him approving of such practices. Stories have been told by
biographers of the man’s private praying sessions, which would often
describe in the detail the thick sound of the blows against his skin. By the
end, the witness remembers, the floor was “covered with blood.” But
whether Escriva recommended these practices to his followers is much
debated. It seems, at least, that Escriva was leading the way in terms of
mortification, even if he did not see it as an essential part of Opus Dei.
 
It’s a point of practice in Opus Dei to suggest that Escriva is not a figure to
be emulated. Now officially a saint in the Catholic Church, there’s little

need for every single member to believe that they could possibly emulate
Escriva’s own piousness. There are writings from Escriva that explicitly
state that those practicing mortification should never do so if it directly
endangers their lives or “embitters [their] characters.” Indeed, unlike
Escriva’s own floor-bloodying efforts, he explicitly states that the
cornerstone of penitence is love.
 
So if mortification is not essential to membership in Opus Dei, then why do
so many people practice it still? If you listen to the criticism and
conspiracies surrounding the organization, then it can be easy to overlook
the supposed justification for carrying out such rituals. There is a spiritual
goal behind mortification, one which members say is overlooked by the
more fantastical, tabloid nature of much Opus Dei coverage in the media.
Running a mile, they suggest, might bring about far more hardship and pain
for people than the wearing of a cilice.
 
Mortification has been a part of Catholicism from long before the arrival of
Opus Dei. Traditionally, it was part of the process of training people to live
virtuously and devoutly. Known as asceticism, the practice has become a
hallmark of the way Catholicism has been taught over the centuries.
Gradually, the body is trained to endure hardships. These can come in many
forms, and as we have already seen, they go in and out of fashion on a
regular basis. It might help to view mortification as a form of spiritual
exercise, gradually working oneself into better shape. It’s not exclusively
Catholic and could theoretically be practiced by a Muslim, a Sikh, or an
atheist. It’s even seen often in day-to-day life. For example, a parent
withholding dessert from a poorly behaved child would fit the bill. What
makes the practice particularly Christian, however, is the view that
mortification is a response to sin.
 
When a sin has been committed, it’s possible to use mortification in order to
revive a sense of penitence. It’s meant to kindle in the person a desire to
rectify a situation, to make up for their sin. There’s an idea that
mortification is the person physically reminding themselves that sin causes
wounds. These wounds are in the sinner, in the person they have sinned
against, and in God. That’s not to say that comforts and pleasant things are

inherently sinful, but rather than the acknowledgement that these things are
good. Conversely then, denying them to oneself is all the greater because of
this. It’s a sign of regret, showing God that you’re sorry that you’ve sinned,
and that you’re resolved not to do the same again.
 
There’s a second, deeper, spiritual level. Through mortification, a person is
able to unite themselves with the suffering of Jesus Christ. In particular, the
suffering that Christ endured during the crucifixion is replicated (on a much
smaller scale) in order to draw a person closer to their deity. There’s a
degree of atonement, sharing the burden of pain taht forms a large part of
the theological message of the New Testament.
 
For celibates, this kind of mortification is seen as a chance for them to “give
themselves” to God in as complete a manner as possible. For the majority
of Catholics, this is a silent, internal process. The things to overcome are
often abstract, such as hatred or pride. The difference with Opus Dei is that
they are able to make these challenges physical, translating the same kind of
theological issues present for most Catholics into something that is far more
sensational when viewed without context.
 
But it’s not only Opus Dei who practice mortification to this degree. Even
some of the most famous Catholics of the last hundred years have been
mortification advocates. Both Mother Teresa and Padre Pio were known to
wear a cilice and used the discipline at one time or another. Both are now
considered saints and neither were Opus Dei members. There is a
community of nuns (the Discalced Carmelite Convent of Saint Teresa) in
the Italian city of Livorno who construct mortification tools and sell them to
the Catholic community at large. Again, they are not associated with Opus
Dei in anything beyond the occasional business relationship.
 
So, in addition to Opus Dei, orders such as the Discalced Carmelites, the
Franciscan Brothers, the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception, the Mother
of the Church Monastery, and many more groups practice forms of
mortification. These organizations exist all across the world, though few
garner as many headlines as Opus Dei. The practice – in its more severe and

more benign forms – is likely far more common in the Catholic Church than
many people would care to imagine.
 
Despite this, the practice of mortification has inspired some of the most
stinging criticisms of Opus Dei. One of these is former numeraries Sharon
Clasen, who has left the organization and become of the best known writers
on Opus Dei and its practices. To Clasen, Opus Dei is a cult. Her
experiences in the organization have left a bitter, regretful, and painful taste
in her mouth. One of her biggest criticisms is focused on the practice of
mortification and how it affects people. The practices, she says, are
indication of the “annihilation of the self” that Opus Dei is attempting to
symbolically achieve.
 
Clasen can recall the time, shortly after she became a member, when she
was handed a little blue pouch. Inside were her cilice and her discipline,
ready for her to begin using. It was the first time she had seen either device.
After three years of wearing the cilice and using the discipline, she had
even been given classes and lessons on how to respond to people who might
question her about them. These answers were along the familiar Opus Dei
lines, suggesting that mortification was akin to heavy exercise. As well as
this, rumors spread through the centers of how Escriva himself had
practiced mortification, suggesting that he had fitted his discipline with
broken glass and razor blades. According to Clasen, the idea behind
spreading these rumors was to encourage a similar level of “devoutness”
among numeraries.
 
She goes on to tell a story about how she attempted to follow in the
potentially mythical footsteps of Escriva. While still at the center, Clasen
found herself some safety pins. She opened them out, exposing the sharp
points, and fitted them to the discipline she had been given. Using the
modified whip, Clasen said her prayers. It was something she only
attempted a few times, though it was far from unheard of among the Opus
Dei community. Though she has since left the organization, the sight of a
cilice can be enough to bring Sharon Clasen close to tears. She is not alone.
 

Another ex-member who has been critical of Opus Dei’s ideas about
mortification is John Roche. An Irishman who joined the organization in
1959, Roche spent fourteen years in the church, including time spent in an
Opus Dei center in Kenya. While official Opus Dei information states that
the more extreme versions of mortification is a rare occurrence and only
limited, Roche confirms Clasen’s version of events, suggesting that painful
practices are used with regularity and often to extremes.
 
What is perhaps worse is the way in which those who do not practice
mortification are treated by their fellow church members. Those who are
deemed not sufficiently invested in the practice of physical mortification
can sometimes be criticized openly. As stories circulate about how Escriva
drove himself to extremes of mortification, those who don’t show
willingness to follow in his footsteps can feel as though they are being
ostracized and targeted. Even if this is not official policy in the
organization, the reports of its widespread nature are damning.
 
Another former member critical of Opus Dei is Agustina Lopez de los
Mozos, who now runs a website that is designed to spread her views on the
organization. Agustina was a numerary assistant for eight years, from her
late teens until her mid-twenties. She was introduced to the cilice a short
time after requesting admission. Though it was still a short time before she
was given her own device, it’s telling that the mortification practices are
rarely revealed until after eager young recruits are firmly within the grips of
the organization.
 
According to Agustina’s story, the thinking regarding the cilice within Opus
Dei is that the tighter it is tied, the greater one’s “generosity” is held to be.
It’s almost competitive in the organization, with everyone eager to prove
their devotion and relationship with God. Thus, more and more people tie
the cilice tighter, wearing it for longer than the official recommendations
might suggest. Even though the time limit is given as two hours a day,
many people go beyond this. Many people wear a cilice every day,
alternating legs to give their wounds a chance to heal.
 

Under the official prescription, the cilice should not break the skin.
Agustina’s experience, however, describes how extended periods of
wearing the device would result in her removing bits of skin after every
session, leaving behind wounds that would often take days to heal. Before
they even had a chance to close, the wounds would be exposed to another
cilice session only a short time later. When Agustina tried to wear the cilice
around her waist – hoping that it would be less visible and less painful – she
was admonished by the numerary who had given it to her.
 
When asked for comment about these punishing practices, Opus Dei
officials have described the advice given to the above members as “errors.”
But there is little doubt that these kinds of practices do happen, and
accordingly attract more and more attention to the church. With the
sometimes shocking degrees of self-afflicted-violence that are evident
among members, this attention is perhaps overwhelmingly negative. In the
defense of Opus Dei, they did not invent, nor do they claim any exclusivity
over violent mortification practices. However, there seems to be a very
evident culture within the organization that proliferates and spreads
practices that endanger the health of members. However, while these
actions might get more of the attention in the press, there are greater
structural problems that exist within Opus Dei. Aside from the headline-
grabbing nature of mortification, it is the subject matters of the next
sections that should cause greater consternation.
 
Women’s Place
 
It’s impossible to deny the fact that the Catholic Church has long has a
troubled history of gender equality. A quick glance through the opening
passages of the Bible is all one needs to confirm this, with the entire
premise of original sin being predicated on the easily tempted nature of the
world’s first woman. Throughout the centuries, the Church’s patriarchal
stance has long been a reflection of a similar stance across all of Western
civilization. Though there have undoubtedly been women within the
Church who have done a great deal for female suffrage, it is only in recent

times that the Church has purposefully made a move towards being
inclusive.
 
However, this book is not about the history of the Catholic Church. Just as
Opus Dei often reflects the best and the worst aspects of traditional Catholic
views, their treatment of women is one of the most criticized dimensions of
the organization as a whole. Opus Dei’s treatment and views regarding
women are often one of the unmentioned issues. With mortification
grabbing all of the headlines, this gender inequality can often be forced to
take a backseat. But how big of an issue is it?
 
There has long been a sensation among those on the periphery of Opus Dei
that the organization hides some hostility towards women. It’s often an
unspoken sensation, something that rumbles beneath the surface. For some,
it is an extension of a centuries-old patriarchy, while for others it is a
reflection of the group’s fear of sexuality and the female gender. This, they
say, has translated into a view of women that treats them as second class
citizens, even if they are Opus Dei members.
 
Looking at the raw figures for Opus Dei, this might seem strange. At least
55%, a solid majority, of the members are female. For those sympathetic to
Opus Dei, the argument is that the Church’s two systems of governance – a
branch for men and a branch for women – guarantees a systemic equality.
The female members, they argue, receive the same theological, spiritual
teaching, and formation as their male counterparts. Indeed, in certain
regions, there are women who hold positions that would place them on a
higher administrative rank than men. But still, there is the feeling that Opus
Dei does not view both genders to be equal.
 
Like all matters pertaining to Opus Dei, it can help to think about what
Escriva considered to be the correct path. On the whole, his discussions on
the matter seem to be in favor of permitting women the exact same rights
and privileges as men. For example, he faced criticism in some circles for
his encouragement that women should study for theology degrees. While he
seemed to come down heavily on the side of equal rights, however,
Escriva’s views were not entirely conclusive. In some respects, he admitted

to a belief that a “distinction” should be retained regarding the juridical
capacity for receiving holy orders. He did admit, on another occasion, that
without women, Opus Dei’s work would collapse. But despite what their
founder proclaimed and despite seeming attempts to provide women with
an institutional (but separate) equality, there still persists the same notion
that women are not on the same standing as men.
 
One of the best places to start when examining this issue is the numerary
assistants. These are women who have devoted their whole lives to Opus
Dei and often to carrying out the domestic care duties associated with
running one of the organization’s centers. Cooking, cleaning, handling the
laundry – the women’s position within the organization seems to tally with
the traditional patriarchal view of the housewife. In creating the position,
the founders of Opus Dei seem to have transplanted the inherent inequality
of 1930s Spain society and institutionalized it. The result was an official
position of women in which they were tasked with domestic chores. While
the rest of Western society seems to have moved forward with regards to
women’s place in the “domestic sphere,” Opus Dei has not.
 
However, this role is not one given to all women in Opus Dei. Of the
47,000 female members, only 4,000 are actually numerary assistants. The
vast majority are actually supernumeraries, meaning that they will likely
enjoy a life outside of the Opus Dei centers. This might mean that they are
lawyers, doctors, or possibly even homemakers for their own families. But
often these members are among the least visible. As is the case with
mortification, it’s the minority within the organization who seem to garner
the most attention. Perhaps that is because many people not involved with
Opus Dei would be shocked to discover that the organization proudly
enjoys an entire class of membership (exclusively female) whose job seems
to be entirely involving domestic service.
 
But that’s not the end of the criticism. Those who are unimpressed by Opus
Dei have commented on the fact that the recruitment of numerary assistants
seems to draw exclusively from society’s poorer classes. In doing so, these
underprivileged women are told that such a role is the vocation given to
them by God and that they should relinquish any ideas of marriage and

children. Instead, they should focus on serving Opus Dei (and thus serving
God). Once they have been recruited, these women often work incredibly
long hours. Accordingly, the critics suggest that Opus Dei is taking
advantage of these women, using religion almost as a force of cheap,
patriarchy-approved labor.
 
Of course, such a summation often dismisses the wishes of the women who
possess an honest dedication to Opus Dei and view their work as a
numerary assistant as a form of devotion. To these people, it is an honor to
work in the Opus Dei centers. But such an honor is one that is available
only to women, bequeathed upon them by a male-orientated order. In line
with Escriva’s original visions, the role of the numerary assistants is one
that is an archaic relic of Opus Dei’s moment of creation, one out of place
in the modern world.
 
Another familiar Opus Dei argument in favor of the status quo is that the
arrangement plays on natural predilections. To Opus Dei, it seems only
natural that women enjoy an “instinctive aptitude” for domestic chores such
as cooking and cleaning. Furthermore, it is an aptitude that the majority of
men do not possess. The argument is just as antiquated as the arrangement
itself, though it seems to be one that is routinely made. The position of the
numerary assistants does not seem to be going anywhere. As Opus Dei
becomes more famous for embodying the traditional conservatism of the
Catholic Church, such positions are part and parcel of their success. To
them, the notion of a male numerary assistant is absurd. There exists – at all
times – a reluctance to change any part of the organization from the
blueprint which was laid down by Escriva himself. As society moves
further and further forwards, Opus Dei is increasingly left behind.
 
But as well as the numerary assistants, the desire to keep both genders
separate for as long as possible permeates much of the Opus Dei structure.
As much as possible, the organization hopes to keep men and women
separate. There are separate centers (where possible) for men and women,
with even shared buildings having separate entrances. During events, there
is separation. During retreats, there is separation. Schools are not only

exclusive to male or female students, but the faculty is also divided along
gender lines. The desire to keep men and women separate is near constant.
 
There are many stories about the lengths that church members go to in order
to avoid interaction between men and women. We’ve mentioned a tendency
to put everything in writing when communicating between male and female
branches of the organization, but many members and ex-members have
personal stories about how extreme this notion can be. One story tells of
how an IT technician was told by Opus Dei members that there should be
two separate phone lines installed in the building, as well as separate
computer systems. Even though it was set to cost twice as much to install a
computer and phone system for each gender, Opus Dei were happy to
commission the work.
 
To those outside of the confines of Opus Dei, this separation seems
somewhat bizarre but mostly harmless. Catholics, even traditionally
inclined Catholics, have noted their amusement at Opus Dei’s stance on
separation. As per usual, the organization defends its actions by citing
Escriva, not wanting to alter the structure as the founder saw it. A
reluctance to modernize, in this instance, has drawn criticism from feminist
organizations as well as secular groups. But when it comes to separation,
the reaction to Opus Dei is typically one of pity and confusion rather than
revulsion. It is widely accepted outside of the organization that Opus Dei
possesses an inherent issue with women. Occasionally, this is
acknowledged and excused by Opus Dei itself, but it seems unlikely to be
an issue that they are likely to address in the near future. Until then, the role
of the numerary assistants and the extent of the gender separation is likely
to remain evidence of the systemic, institutional misogyny that exists within
Opus Dei.
 
Follow the Money
 
In criminal investigations, there is an old mantra that is repeated like
gospel. If you want to find out who is pulling the strings, follow the money.
For Opus Dei and those investigating the organization’s strange place

within the religious landscape, this mantra is particularly telling. Despite
their relatively small size and membership numbers, Opus Dei is renowned
for its somewhat astonishing financial muscle. To say it punches above its
weight in financial terms would be an understatement. So, following the old
police saying, if we want to find out why Opus Dei seems to be both
controversial and important, then we should follow the money. The only
problem is, tracing the organization’s funding can be incredibly tough.
 
There have been rumors since the 1960s that Opus Dei has long been a
“major player” in the market for Eurodollars. This is only a small part of the
back story concerning Opus Dei and their finances, but it forms a good
starting point. Why would a nominally conservative Catholic denomination
be speculating on currency markets? One investigator – Canadian journalist
Robert Hutchinson – wrote a book on the matter. He could recall being
perplexed by the appearance that Opus Dei had a greater value of assets
than General Motors. Whenever Opus Dei is confronted with the suggestion
that it might be dabbling in such financial markets, Hutchinson reports a
constant stream of shrugged shoulders and bewildered denials. For the
Canadian, this was enough to prompt comparisons between the modern
Opus Dei and the Crusader-era Knights Templar, a Catholic organization
that had one of the first international banking organizations in the world.
 
However, much of Hutchinson’s work is speculation. His investigations
have yet to uncover the single piece of evidence that ties together the entire
picture of Opus Dei’s finances, leaving him to speculate on the values and
nature of the organization’s portfolio. His writing, though, reflects a
widespread belief. Even at the most liberal end of the estimation spectrum,
Opus Dei’s holdings have been said to total $2.8 billion. While only a
fraction of General Motors annual revenues, it’s still leaps and bounds
beyond what many would expect for a religious group less than a million
people strong.
 
There has been a noted decision within the Catholic Church during the 20th
Century to ally themselves with the poor and disenfranchised. Since the
convening of Vatican II and the creation of the “Gaudium et Spes”
document, the Church has tried to actively distance itself from its lavish,

rich past. Thus, once again, Opus Dei is more indicative of the more
traditional qualities of the Church. In this case, it would be the extreme
wealth concentrated in a relatively small group.
 
It’s an issue that serves to highlight the difference in how Opus Dei
perceives itself and how it is perceived by the outside world. If you believe
spokespeople for it, then Opus Dei has no desire to become a financial
heavyweight and would much rather own as little as possible. This, they
say, would detach them from Earthly wealth. But does this hold up to
scrutiny?
 
In Rome, Opus Dei owns and operates their central offices, split into men
and women’s sections. The annual operating budget for the buildings is $2.7
million. This might pale in comparison to the $260 million needed to run
the Vatican each year, but then Opus Dei’s offices are not a global tourist
destination, nor do they house some of the greatest works of art created by a
person, nor do the administrators have to cater to a billion plus people
around the world.
 
Opus Dei’s headquarters might seem like an expensive outlay, but they do
not own all of their property around the world. Sometimes they lease,
sometimes they rent. Sometimes, the buildings are owned by local churches
or shell companies. In a similar sense, the organization’s more secular
endeavors – the schools, universities, and other enterprises – are often
owned and attributed to lay people. These are members of Opus Dei, and
the enterprises are operated as Opus Dei officially sanctioned endeavors,
but they are not technically owned by it. While Opus Dei insists that this
allows them to remain secular and independent from the vast wealth needed
to run such matters, critics have suggested that such practices simply allow
Opus Dei to hide the true extent of their assets.
 
There has long been a dispute about the purview of Opus Dei. The
organization itself maintains that any business ventures owned and operated
by its members will be entirely their own enterprises. Opus Dei might
provide a spiritual guidance or doctrine that helps guide members through
the world of business, but the organization will remain separate at all times.

This is an idea that has been outright dismissed by critics such as Michael
Walsh. Walsh suggests that distinguishing between members’ businesses
and Opus Dei’s own is useless, listing a number of reasons.
 
First, he claims, all profits made by numeraries’ businesses will accrue to
Opus Dei anyway. Even supernumeraries who own businesses are often
pressured into giving up most of their profits. Second, Walsh believes that
every major business decision taken by an Opus Dei member will be
discussed at length with the director of their local center before starting.
The communication channels are totally open, and the organization always
knows what its members are doing. These are accusations that Opus Dei
denies.
 
Due to the insistence on secularity in Opus Dei, getting even the most basic
financial information from the organization is sometimes almost
impossible. There has been a suggestion from within it that the secular
reasoning is not the only one for Opus Dei putting its businesses in
members’ hands. Without creating a central “pool” of Opus Dei funds, there
is nothing that could be mismanaged or misused. Doing so limits Opus
Dei’s exposure to potential trouble. Spreading the organization’s supposed
wealth across a large body of trusted individuals is a form of protectionism,
from both financial misappropriation and investigative critics.
 
Part of the reason as to why people struggle to believe Opus Dei’s claims of
dedication to poverty lies in the properties they use. Centers can be found in
wealthy, upscale neighborhoods, and it’s not uncommon for such buildings
to be lavishly decorated. Even if those inside might be taking cold showers
and sleeping on the floor, the outward appearance – the customer-facing
part – of Opus Dei is resolutely wealthy. Though it might counter with
claims that not all centers are in wealthy neighborhoods or that the centers
themselves are actually owned by a member, it’s difficult to satisfactorily
explain why it seems to have such untold resources at its disposal.
 
There seems little doubt that Opus Dei is a wealthy organization. The group
contains members who control businesses worth a huge amount while still
fundraising and collecting revenue themselves. It’s an organization who has

its own multimillion-dollar investment portfolio, as well as assets scattered
around the world. We know that there is a huge amount of money involved,
but tracking it down can be difficult. Opus Dei is very careful about limiting
their exposure. As such, we should begin to look at the ways in which their
wealth is transferred into influence. Through a variety of means, Opus Dei
has risen up as one of the major players in the world of Catholicism and
religion as a whole. While we might never be able to follow the money
directly to the source, we can track down the places where that money is
most influential.
 
The Church and the Government
 
Throughout this book, we have examined the differences of Opus Dei when
compared to the traditional Catholic Church. To pretend that they are distant
relations would be a lie. Opus Dei and the Vatican have always been close.
In this section, we will explore their relationship.
 
The majority of this section will focus on recent history. We should start by
establishing a few facts. First, during the pontificate of Pope John Paul II,
no other group seemed to be as approved by the Church as Opus Dei. It was
during this time that it became a papal prelature, and a short time later,
Escriva was made a saint. Second, Opus Dei officials have been
instrumental in shaping recent Vatican doctrine. In 2001, for example, a
well-known Opus Dei priest was among those behind “Dominus Iesus,” a
document that described the “gravely deficient” situation other religions
found themselves in with respect to Christianity. Third, reports in 2004
highlighted the controversy in comments that were attributed to Pope John
Paul II. Upon seeing the film the Passion of the Christ, the then-Pope is
reported to have said, “It is as it was,” a major endorsement. The
controversy stems from both whether this was actually said and the fact that
the film’s assistant director is not only an Opus Dei member, but was also
personally baptized by Pope John Paul II when he was still the Bishop of
Rome. These incidents, along with many others, amount to give an idea of
the amount of power and influence Opus Dei enjoys within the walls of
Vatican City.

 
Taking a broader look at the picture, and connections begin to emerge. It’s
possible to draw links between Opus Dei, the Vatican, and any number of
conservative political causes. In the majority of incidents concerning the
Church, it’s not uncommon to find that Opus Dei members are at the core of
the side closest linked to traditional, conservative beliefs. Any time the
Church veers in this direction, it’s easy to see why people believe this is
Opus Dei’s influence shining through.
 
There are even rumors that have persisted around Vatican City that Opus
Dei is mounting a plan to take over many internal Vatican organizations,
including the Vatican Radio broadcast service. Currently, the radio station
costs a great deal of money to broadcast to hundreds of millions of people
every day. Opus Dei could swoop in as a financial backer and take on the
costs itself, in exchange for a tighter control over the content that is
broadcast. There are similar rumors about taking over Vatican-backed
universities and schools. Opus Dei has already enacted a similar plan by
taking over convents and seminaries that need financial help. All of the
rumors are denied by Opus Dei, but they will not seem to go away.
 
Though he is now deceased, the bond between Opus Dei and Pope John
Paul II is seen by many as having been the launching pad for much of Opus
Dei’s recent success. The personal prelature is the most famous example of
this relationship and drove many English-language press outlets to
investigate further. John Paul II spoke officially on Opus Dei a number of
times, always positively. He seemed to approve of much of the
organization’s work and was an admirer of Escriva. It’s a close relationship
that continued after the death of one Pope and into the reign of the next.
Though it might be too early to discern the current Pope’s relationship with
Opus Dei, we can be confident that little happens within the Church without
the organization’s approval.
 
Having existed for close to two millennia, it’s no surprise to learn that there
are multiple cliques and groups within the wider Catholic Church.
Whenever a new cardinal is elected, it’s common for priests in Rome to ask

about his parish. They don’t mean the area he administers, but rather which
friends he has within the Vatican. Opus Dei is one of the growing groups.
 
Looking at it from afar, Opus Dei involvement seems to be limited.
Officially, there are less than ten high-ranking Vatican officials who are
Opus Dei members. At the time of writing, there are two cardinals and
twenty bishops who are officially Opus Dei members. But it is impossible
to quantify those who are sympathetic to the Opus Dei cause or consider
themselves traditionalists in some degree. With Opus Dei being thought to
represent the best of the latter, conservative movements within the Church
are often associated with Opus Dei to some degree. For example, there are a
further fourteen bishops who are members of the Priestly Society of the
Holy Cross. If you’d like to know more about who has connections and
sympathies to Opus Dei, then a quick flick through the Annuario (the
annual Vatican yearbook) is often enough. Again and again, the entire
suggestion seems to revert back to the idea of the White Masonry.
 
The personal prelature, the canonization of Opus Dei’s founder, the
presence of Opus Dei cardinals and bishops, and the personal relationship
between the organization and the last few Popes certainly points towards
Opus Dei possessing a special privilege in the Catholic Church. Indeed, the
process of making Escriva a saint was considered especially quick, with just
twenty-seven years passing between his death and his canonization. As a
point of comparison, it took Joan of Arc around six hundred years to
achieve the same. The cost of turning Escriva into a saint cost more than a
million dollars, and not everyone within the Catholic Church approved of
the canonization, with some voices concerned that critical witnesses to the
process were not heard. In some cases, it has been said that Opus Dei’s
influence and power ensured the process was completed, making their
founder into a saint.
 
Turning Escriva into a saint is not just an example of how Opus Dei
managed to wield its influence. Such a move was important, as it provided
Opus Dei with something like a divine blessing. Having its founder be a
saint conferred on Opus Dei a huge amount of respect and power within the
Catholic Church. The name of Escriva was transformed, changing from the

founder of a strange denomination into a one of the Catholic Church’s most
respected individuals. He is now not only venerated within the Church, but
also the Opus Dei founder’s name is now a means to an end. With many
members happy to pursue a more conservative agenda, the backing of a
saint means that Opus Dei could have a big say in the policy of the Catholic
Church moving forwards.
 
By this point, the influence of Opus Dei within the Vatican seems almost
confirmed. For an organization of their size, at least, they punch well above
their weight. Less than a hundred years old, wielding a large amount of
financial muscle, and with the backing of Saint Escriva, they have risen into
an unlikely position of influence. When compared to the Jesuits (often
labelled as their traditional rivals), one might think that Opus Dei has done
exceptionally well to rise to power so quickly. But this section has dwelled
on what happens within the Church. What happens when Opus Dei tries to
influence the secular world?
 
Opus Dei has a long history of involvement in conservative politics. It has
been a criticism made by many that it has chosen to ally itself with a
number of controversial regimes. We’ve already discussed how Opus Dei
has come to resemble the traditionalist, conservative line in Church matters,
but this also seems true of its secular activities, even though the
organization might deny that there is a cohesive, driven, political effort. But
there’s a famous saying within the organization, often attributed to Escriva,
that says that “Opus Dei does not act; its members do.” Even if the founder
was against a single political party, even if members are supposedly
independent, there is no denying the influence Opus Dei has had on the
world’s political stage.
 
In recent years, for example, Opus Dei has had strong ties with American
politicians and one-time Presidential front-runner, Rick Santorum. In the
organization’s native Spain, Opus Dei members have recently been minister
of defense, a national police chief, and a leading financial official. Peruvian
congressmen have been Opus Dei members. Italy has had Opus Dei
members of parliament. Poland has had leading politicians who have been
Opus Dei members. In Chile, it was the mayor of the capital city and the

leader of one of the biggest political parties. The two things that they all had
in common were Opus Dei membership and a lean towards the conservative
side of the spectrum.
 
One of the best examples of Opus Dei’s controversial dalliance with politics
is perhaps a result of Escriva’s insistence that his Church remain free from
such matters. At the end of Spain’s fascist era, the Vatican was behind the
decision to form a Christian Democratic Party. Escriva outright refused to
take part. This has led some people to label him as a fascist sympathizer. To
others, the reality was that Escriva both wished to remain isolated from
politics and wanted to focus on his mission to have Opus Dei declared a
personal prelature. What is true, however, is that the death of Escriva has
seen a relaxation in the organization’s tendency to take political sides.
 
As mentioned previously, there is little doubt that Opus Dei’s politics lean
to the right. This is true both within the church and within secular
communities. Their stance on political stalwarts such as gay marriage,
abortion, and other right wing viewpoints leaves little doubt on where they
stand in a current political climate. This is likely a result of the organization
steadfastly refusing to modernize, clinging to the views Escriva imposed on
it since the early days. As time passes, Opus Dei is closer towards the far
right than ever before. As more and more people begin to see Opus Dei as
the religious defendant of many right wing issues, its support will only
grow. Even if people do not become members themselves, those of a
conservative alignment will offer their support and their backing to an
organization that they believe is standing up for the views they share. In that
alone, Opus Dei is becoming essentially a political entity. Such an issue
leads us neatly into the last section in this guide, in which we hope to
answer the question of whether Opus Dei can be accused of being a cult.
 
Is Opus Dei a Cult?
 
Most of this book has been leading up to this one question. For many
people, hearing about Opus Dei and its sometimes shocking practices can
immediately prompt comparisons with other cults. Certainly, listening to

ex-members of Opus Dei, there are many stories of cult-like behavior. But
the truth is not quite so clear cut.
 
One of the biggest differences between Opus Dei and the majority of cults
is tradition. Looking at most of the Christian-centric cults, most will prompt
a turn away from tradition and a move towards new ideas. Opus Dei rigidly
clings to traditional beliefs, but it differs from traditional Catholicism.
Often, the organization can be said to compromise the freedom of
conscience its members possess. Criticisms include allegations of mind
control, of breaking apart families, of making it difficult to leave the
organization, and that the very existence of Opus Dei harms the Catholic
Church.
 
A key difference between Opus Dei and most cults is the backing it receives
from the Vatican. Most cults will be offshoots of organized religion, very
rarely operating in tandem with the typical believers. But that does not
mean that Opus Dei does not achieve the same results. The allegations of
mind control often concern pluralism, of the tendency of all Opus Dei
members to eventually sound and appear the same. Once cut off inside the
centers, people are said to become like “clones.” Combine this with the
mortification and the religious devotion, and it’s easy to see why the cult
comparison is made.
 
Reports from ex-members describe an unexpected change in conditions
once they become members. We mentioned earlier how many of the more
extreme mortification tools came as a surprise to numeraries who had just
whistled, but even the conditions in the centers themselves are often not
adequately explained until it is too late. Even if the Opus Dei centers appear
lavish, they often mask harsh living conditions. Many ex-members have
said that, if the entirety of their experience had been adequately laid out to
them, they would not have joined.
 
Another cult-like practice involves confession. Members are encouraged to
admit their sins in confession, a practice that has fallen out of favor in
mainstream Catholicism. Once they have done so, the priests and Opus Dei
members’ advise methods of atonement. Psychologically, it can make

people dependent on the practice as they look to quell the guilt that the
religion induces in them. Furthermore, they are often encouraged to admit
their failings in front of a group, something that can be an emotionally
harrowing experience. Add in the monitoring of all mail that passes into the
center, the limited amount of financial freedom given to members, and a
limit on access to all forms of media, and it’s easy to see how people get
stuck inside the cultish bubble.
 
In fact, the confession process has been labelled one of the Opus Dei’s most
troubling practices. Unlike traditional Catholicism, priests are encouraged
to keep track of their subject’s confessions. In Scientology, this practice has
been heavily criticized, with the unmentioned threat that secrets will be
released to the public should a person decide to leave the religion. Though
this is yet to happen in any large scale with regards to Opus Dei, the
implication is certainly present. The organization argues that this is not
policy, and that it cannot be found anywhere in the statutes. While this is
true, the proliferation of such a practice means that it happens anyway.
 
Another big issue is money. Numeraries can often contribute up to 22% of
their salary to Opus Dei. This includes food, shelter, clothing, and the right
to stay in a center. But it also includes donations to the organization and
payments for courses and events throughout the year as well as spiritual
guidance. It leaves them with little money to spend living anywhere other
than a center and often means that they have little in the way of savings.
Not only does this make leaving Opus Dei more difficult, but it also means
that – come retirement – the numerary is dependent on Opus Dei for
assistance.
 
Perhaps the hallmark of a cult can be how difficult it can be to leave. In
Opus Dei, however, there is a relatively large departure rate among those
who whistle and then choose not to stay on, estimated at being between 20
and 30 percent, though this number drops significantly as the member
progresses deeper into Opus Dei. Leaving is difficult, though. If a member
is having doubts, they are warned that departing would be an offence
against God. It’s a heavy sin to leave the organization, which is especially
problematic if those joining are likely to be among the most religious. As

well as that, former members have listed constant phone calls, personal
visits to the work place and the home, and a flood of letters asking the
person to return to Opus Dei. Even allegations of professional sabotage and
harassment have been made. For those who have friends only inside the
organization, members are encouraged to sever all ties and thus induce a
“social death” in the person hoping to leave.
 
Reports of broken spirits, severed connections, shattered families, and
emotional discombobulation for those who try to leave Opus Dei certainly
tie in with the issues faced by many people who try to leave cults. The
response from the organization itself, however, is that leaving can be
incredibly simple. Indeed, before the fidelity stage (i.e. when a person
pledges their life to the group), all they have to do to leave is not renew
their contract. Opus Dei keeps a register of ex-members who remain on
good terms, whose accounts are used to counter balance the negative
stories.
 
It remains difficult to say whether or not Opus Dei is a cult. There is often
fine a line between the practices of mainstream religion and niche cults. It is
this fine line that Opus Dei often walks down. On some occasions, it leans
heavily to one side, while on other occasions, it leans heavily to the other.
But it seems to possess the ability to right itself and remain upright at all
times. Due to the way in which Opus Dei is now integrated into the
Catholic Church, there will often be a backlash against those who attempt to
label them as a cult. However, it is certainly more extreme than most
mainstream religions. Perhaps it is best to recognize that Opus Dei is
unique. This does not make what it does necessarily permissible, nor does it
make it evil. But it is important to remain aware of the organization’s true
nature.


Conclusion
 
Trying to figure out Opus Dei is an ongoing problem for many people. The
organization has gone from strength to strength in a relatively short amount
of time, creating a distinct new brand of Catholicism while it does so. In an
age when the Church has made a concerted effort to modernize and focus
on the poor and disenfranchised, Opus Dei often feels like a throwback to a
different era. Its members are conservative, traditional, and possess utter
conviction in their beliefs.
 
Perhaps this is why so many people are so keen to label Opus Dei as a cult.
It’s no question that its recruiting tactics, its financial strength, and its
mortification practices seems completely out of place in our modern
society. But you don’t have to travel back too far to find a time when this
was simply the normal practice for the Catholic Church. That is Opus Dei’s
greatest strength and its greatest weakness.
 
Opus Dei reminds us of the cult-like devotion inspired by the world’s most
popular religion, reminding us of the many centuries when the Church was
not quite so sympathetic to the cause of the less fortunate. While this might
worry those who do not appreciate the history of Catholicism, there are
those who are glad that such a body still exists. Until such time that we’re
able to resolve this conflict, Opus Dei will not only get more popular, but it
will come under increased scrutiny. However, as long as we know the
history and the truth about it, we should be in a good place to react to its
development.


Further Readings
 
Agamben, G. (n.d.). Opus Dei: An Archaeology of Duty.
Allen, J. (2005). Opus Dei. New York: Doubleday.
Allen, J. (2006). Opus Dei. London: Penguin.
Escrivá de Balaguer, J. (2006). The way. New York: Image/Doubleday.
Hahn, S. (2006).  Ordinary work, extraordinary grace. New York:
Doubleday.
Oates, M., Ruf, L. and Driver, J. (2009). Women of Opus Dei. New York:
Crossroad Pub. Co.
Tapia, M. (1998). Beyond the threshold. New York: Continuum.
Walsh, M. (2004). Opus Dei. [San Francisco]: HarperSanFrancisco.
 


Image Credits
 
Adam Weishaupt - Source: Author unknown. Public domain.
 
Adolph Freiherr Knigge - Source: Author unknown. Public domain.
 
Scan of Illuminati pamphlet from 1788. Creative commons licence.
 
Freemasons' Hall – 1809 - Thomas Rowlandson (1756–1827) and Augustus Charles Pugin (1762–
1832) (after) John Bluck (fl. 1791–1819), Joseph Constantine Stadler (fl. 1780–1812), Thomas
Sutherland (1785–1838), J. Hill, and Harraden (aquatint engravers)
 
T. Schweighart, Speculum sophicum Rhodostauroticum (1604)
 
Eugène Delacroix - Liberty Leading the People – 1830
 
Scan of one dollar bill from United States of America
 
Cross of Opus Dei – Creative Commons
 
Tomb of San Josemaria Escrivá de Balaguer - Sergio Calleja
 
Cilice – Creative Commons
 
Opus Dei in the world – Creative Commons
 
Opus Dei’s Manhattan Headquarters - Permission was granted through the Opus Dei communications
director in the US, Mr. Peter Bancroft
 
The Discipline - travail personnel, photo prise au fr:Musée Unterlinden (Colmar, France)


Your FREE Gift!
 
Thank you again for buying and reading my book. Don’t forget to get your
FREE gift, The Most Haunted Places in America. Click here to get it.
 
 
Click here to download your FREE copy!


Also by Conrad Bauer
 
Just click on the cover to check them out.
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
To visit Conrad Bauer’s page on Amazon, please click here


Review
 
Thank you so much for purchasing and reading Secret Societies. I really
hope you enjoyed it. As a self-published author, I always like to know what
the readers think. If you have time, please review my book on Amazon by
following the link below.
 
 
 
 
The above link directs to Amazon.com. Please change the .com to your own
country extension.


 
[1]
                "The Knights Templar | In Praise Of The New Knighthood". www.templarhistory.com.
[2]
The Omne Datum Optimum. www.knightstemplarvault.com
[3]        The History Channel, Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, video documentary, November 7, 2005, written by Marcy
Marzuni
[4]        Kahn, David  (1996). The Codebreakers. Scribner. p. 823. ISBN 978-0-684-83130-5; Probst-Biraben, J.H.; Maitrot de la
Motte-Capron, A. (1939-08-01). "Les Templiers et leur Alphabet Secret". Mercure de France (in French). CCXCIII. pp. 513–532
at 522, 530. (referenced in Kahn's Codebreakers) ; Gunon, Ren (2005). Studies in Freemasonry and Compagnonnage. Translated
by Henry D. Fohr. Sophia Perennis. p. 237. ISBN 0-900588-51-9.
[5]        Gary Lachman, Politics and the Occult: The Left, the Right, and the Radically Unseen, page 41 (Quest Books,
2008). ISBN 978-0-8356-0857-2
[6]
Sean Martin, The Knights Templar: History & Myths, 2005. ISBN 1-56025-645-1
[7]
Lost Worlds: Knights Templar, July 10, 2006, video documentary on The History Channel
[8]        https://archive.org/stream/historyofinquis03leah#page/262/mode/2up  Vol. III Ch. 5 par 2; The Trial of the Knights
Templar, Malcolm Barbor, 1978
[9]
Les Templiers, une chevalerie chrétienne au moyen-âge, Alain Demurger; Barbor, Malcolm. The Trial of the Templars.
1978 p.178 para 1 p. 179 para. 1.
[10]     The History Channel, Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, video documentary, November 7, 2005, written by Marcy
Marzuni
[11]
Pastoralis Praeeminentiae was the papal bull.  Sean Martin, The Knights Templar: History & Myths, 2005. ISBN 1-56025-
645-1, p 120.
[12]
Malcolm Barber, The Trial of the Templars, 2nd edn. (Cambridge, 2006), pp. 2, 217–58.
[13] Frale, Barbara (2009). The Templars: The Secret History Revealed. ISBN TBD. p. 66.
[14]
 Frale, Barbara (2009). The Templars: The Secret History Revealed. ISBN TBD. p. 71.
[15]
 Frale, Barbara (2009). The Templars: The Secret History Revealed. ISBN TBD. pp. 55-59.
[16]
 Frale, Barbara (2009). The Templars: The Secret History Revealed. ISBN TBD. p. 66.
[17]
                "Historian attacks Rosslyn Chapel for 'cashing in on Da Vinci Code'". The Scotsman. 3 May 2006.
[18]
The Eye in the Triangle, Israel Regardie, June, 1993; Rollins, James (2010). "What's True, What's Not". The Skeleton Key.
pp. 1–2.
[19]
Sabazius X° and AMT IX°. History of Ordo Templi Orientis.
[20]
 http://www.osmth.org/templar-legacy
[21]     The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail  (1982), Born in Blood: The Lost Secrets of Freemasonry Hardcover John J.
Robinson, Born in Blood: The Lost Secrets of Freemasonry Hardcover   (1989), Michael Baigent The Temple and the

Lodge   (1991), Coppens, Philip. The Stone Puzzle of Rosslyn Chapel. Frontier Publishing/Adventures Unlimited Press (2002).
[22]
Dan Brown, The Da Vinci Code.
[23]
National Treasure.
[24]     Masons, Templars and the Holy Grail: Historical Conspiracies and Popular Culture
[25]
Baigent, Michael; Leigh, Richard; Lincoln, Henry (1983). Holy Blood, Holy Grail.   New York: Dell. ISBN 0-440-
13648-2
[26]
 Juan García Atienza, The Knights Templar in the Golden Age of Spain: Their Hidden History on the Iberian
Peninsula   (Destiny Books, 2006)
[27]
 Hancock, Graham (1992). The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost Ark of the Covenant. New York:
Crown. ISBN 0517578131.
[28]
 D. Scavone: "Joseph of Arimathea, the Holy Grail and the Edessa Icon," Arthuriana  vol. 9, no. 4, 3-31 (Winter 1999)
(Article  and abstract) ;Scavone, "British King Lucius, the Grail and Joseph of Arimathea: The Question of Byzantine Origins.",
Publications of the Medieval Association of the Midwest 10 (2003): 101-42, vol. 10, 101-142 (2003).
[29]
Taylor, R.E. and Bar-Yosef, Ofer. Radiocarbon Dating, Second Edition: An Archaeological Perspective. Left Coast Press,
2014, p. 165
[30]
 Joan Carroll Cruz, Saintly Men of Modern Times, Our Sunday Visitor, 2003, ISBN 1-931709-77-7, p. 200; "Pope Francis
and the Shroud of Turin - National Catholic Reporter"; Pastoral Visit of His Holiness John Paul II to Vercelli and Turin, Italy, 23–
24 May 1998 .
[31]
Barber, Malcolm. The New Knighthood, p. 332.
[32]
Newman, p. 383
[33]
Owen, Richard (26 April 2009). "Knights Templar hid the Shroud of Turin, says Vatican". The Times.
[34]
  Charles G. Addison, The History of The Knights templar, the Temple Church, and The Temple, page 224 (Longman,
Brown, Green, and Longmans; 1842).
[35]
Ian Wilson, The Turin Shroud, (Victor Gollancz Ltd; 1978 ISBN 0-575-02483-6)
[36]
Abbas and Templecombe – a history
[37]     Hancock, G: The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost Ark of the Covenant, Toronto: Doubleday, ISBN 0-671-86541-2
[38]
Fendel, Hillel (2009-06-25). "Holy Ark Announcement Due on Friday", Aruta Sheva (Israel International News).
[39]
Brian Haughton, Haunted Spaces, Sacred Places: A Field Guide to Stone Circles, Crop Circles, Ancient Tombs, and
Supernatural Landscapes, page 142 (Career Press, Inc., 2008). ISBN 978-1-60163-000-1; Louis Charpentier, Les Mystères de la
Cathédrale de Chartres (Paris: Robert Laffont, 1966), translated as The Mysteries of Chartres Cathedral (London: Research Into
Lost Knowledge Organisation, 1972).
[40]
Karen Ralls, The Templars and The Grail: Knights of The Quest, page 99, pages 163-164 (Quest Books, Theosophical
Publishing House, 2003). ISBN 0-8356-0807-7. Citing Patrick Byrne, Templar Gold: Discovering the Ark of the Covenant   (Blue
Dolphin Publishing, Inc., 2001). ISBN 1-57733-099-4
[41]
J. Salmon, A Description of The Works of Art of Ancient and Modern Rome, Particularly In Architecture, Sculpture &
Painting, Volume One, page 108 (London: J. Sammells, 1798); Debra J. Birch, Pilgrimage To Rome In The Middle Ages:

Continuity and Change, page 111 (The Boydell Press, 1998). ISBN 0-85115-771-8
[42]     Legend Hunters - Ark of the Covenant  (FactualTV - Knights Templar Documentary)
[43]
                The History Channel, Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, video documentary, November 7, 2005, written by Marcy
Marzuni
[44]
 Gary Lachman, Politics and the Occult: The Left, the Right, and the Radically Unseen, page 41 (Quest Books,
2008). ISBN 978-0-8356-0857-2
[45]
 Sean Martin, The Knights Templar: History & Myths, 2005. ISBN 1-56025-645-1; Lost Worlds: Knights Templar, July 10,
2006, video documentary on The History Channel; Julien Théry, "A Heresy of State : Philip the Fair, the Trial of the 'Perfidious
Templars', and the Ponticalization of the French Monarchy", Journal of Religious Medieval Cultures 39/2 (2013), pp. 117–148
[46]
Karen Rall (2003). The Templars and the Grail. Quest Books. p. 26; Tim Wallace-Murphy (2004). Templars in America.
Weiser Books. p. 17; King, Dennis (12 May 2010). "The Oak Island Legend: The Masonic Angle". CrititalEnquiry.org; Sora,
Steven. The Lost Treasure of the Knights Templar (Inner Traditions/Destiny, 1999). ISBN 0-89281-710-0
[47]
S. Brent Morris (2006). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry. Penguin. p. 194
[48]
 Karen Rall (2003). The Templars and the Grail. Quest Books. p. 26; Nicholson, Helen (2001). The Knights Templar: A
new history. Phoenix Mill Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire UK: Sutton Publishing Limited. pp. 12,191–92. ISBN 0-7509-2517-5.
[49]
Karen Rall (2003). The Templars and the Grail. Quest Books; Tim Wallace-Murphy (2004). Templars in America.
Weiser Books
[50]
 Whipps, Heather. "For Sale: Island with Mysterious Money Pit"; Nickell, Joe (March 2000). "The Secrets of Oak
Island". Skeptical Inquirer.
[51]
 Conlin, Dan Pirates of the Atlantic: Robbery, Murder and Mayhem off the Canadian East Coast, Halifax: Formac
Publishing (2009).
[52]
 Sora, Steven. The Lost Treasure of the Knights Templar   (Inner Traditions/Destiny, 1999). ISBN 0-89281-710-0;
Ronnstam, Daniel. "The Duel Cipher". The Oak Island Project.
[53]
 King, Dennis (12 May 2010). "The Oak Island Legend: The Masonic Angle". CrititalEnquiry.org.
[54]
 Phy, Paul "Oak Island - The Reasons for expecting there is Treasure there." Yarmouth Hearld, February 19, 1863;
Forks, J.P. (August 20, 1857). "Correspondence". Liverpool Transcript. Liverpool, Nova Scotia: S. J. M. Allen; Crooker, William
S. Oak Island Gold (Nimbus Publishing, 1993) ISBN 1-55109-049-X; McCully, J.B. "The Oak Island Diggings." Liverpool
Transcript, October 1862; Nickell, Joe (March 2000). "The Secrets of Oak Island". Skeptical Inquirer.
[55]
 McCully, J.B. "The Oak Island Diggings." Liverpool Transcript, October 1862; "Oak Island Treasure - the world's greatest
treasure hunt"; Snow, Edward Rowe. True Tales of Buried Treasure, (Dodd and Mead, 1951) ASIN B000OI2EFC.
[56]
 McCully, J.B. "The Oak Island Diggings." Liverpool Transcript, October 1862
[57]
 The History Channel, Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, video documentary, 7 November 2005, written by Marcy
Marzuni; McIntee, David (2016). Fortune and Glory: A Treasure Hunter’s Handbook.

[58]
 Bowdoin, H. L. "Solving the Mystery of Oak Island" Colliers Magazine, 19 August 1911 p. 19; Lamb, L. (2006). Oak
Island Obsession: The Restall Story. p. 207.
[59]
 The History Channel, Decoding the Past: The Templar Code, video documentary, 7 November 2005, written by Marcy
Marzuni; Bowdoin, H. L. "Solving the Mystery of Oak Island" Colliers Magazine, 19 August 1911; Doyle, Lynn C. "Nova
Scotia's Treasure Island." MacLean's 1 June 1931; Khatri, Vikas, World Famous Treasures Lost and Found, 2012; D'Arcy
O'Connor, The Big Dig: the $10 Million Search for Oak Island's Legendary Treasure, 1988; Ellerd, Kerry. "Finding Buried
Treasure: It's an Expensive Business." Montreal STAR 6 February 1971;
[60]
French, Carey. "Treasure Island? Fabled Booty Eludes the Fortune Hunters." The Globe and Mail   19 November 1983;
Crooker, William S. Oak Island Gold (Nimbus Publishing, 1993) ISBN 1-55109-049-X
[61]
DesBrisay, Mather Byles. "History of the county of Lunenburg". Internet Archive. Toronto : W. Briggs; DeMille,
James. "The Treasure of the Seas". A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook; Vanderbilt Harris, Reginald. "The Oak Island
Mystery". Toronto Public Library. McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1967; Driscoll, Charles B. (1929). The Oak Island Treasure. p. 685.
[62]     "Statement of Harry W. Marshall"
[63]
 Crooker, William S. Oak Island Gold   (Nimbus Publishing, 1993) ISBN 1-55109-049-X
[64]
Joltes, Richard (August 2002). "Appendix: Woods Hole Explores Oak Island". CriticalEnquiry.org. p. 1; King, Dennis
(February 2010). "A Solution To The Mystery Of The Oak Island Five Finger Drains". CriticalEnquiry.org.
[65]
Nickell, Joe (March 2000). "The Secrets of Oak Island". Skeptical Inquirer; Bowdoin, H. L. 1911. Solving the mystery of
Oak Island. Collier's Magazine, 18 August. Cited and discussed in Harris 1958, 110–120; O'Connor 1988, 63–66; Faribault, E.
Rudolph. 1911. Summary Report of Geological Survey Branch of the Department of Mines; Atlantic Advocate. 1965. Article in
October issue, cited in Crooker 1978, 85–86.; O'Connor (1988, 172–173)
[66]
King, Dennis (12 May 2010). "The Oak Island Legend: The Masonic Angle". CrititalEnquiry.org; Sora, Steven. The Lost
Treasure of the Knights Templar (Inner Traditions/Destiny, 1999). ISBN 0-89281-710-0
[67]
 Nicholson, Helen (2001). The Knights Templar: A new history. Phoenix Mill Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire UK: Sutton
Publishing Limited. pp. 12,191–92. ISBN 0-7509-2517-5.
[68]
BBC - Legacies - Myths and Legends - Scotland - Lothian - From Jerusalem to Rosslyn?: The Templars in Scotland. (2004).
http://www.bbc.co.uk/legacies/myths_legends/scotland/lothian/
[69]
Read, Piers Paul (2014). The Templars (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press.
[70]
Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[71]
Sean Martin, The Knights Templar: The History & Myths of the Legendary Military Order, 2005. ISBN 1-56025-645-1;
Helen J. Nicholson (1 January 2004). The Crusades. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-32685-1.
[72]
 Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[73]
 Markale, J. (2003). The Templar treasure at Gisors (1st ed.). Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions; Baigent, M. & Prebble, S.
(2007). The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail (1st ed.).: Ulverscroft.
[74]
Malcolm Barber, Victor Mallia-Milanes (2008). The Military Orders: History and heritage. Ashgate Publishing
Limited. ISBN 978-0-7546-6290-7; Valerie Alaniece (1995). Les Templiers et leurs commanderies: L'exemple d'Avalleur en

Champagne. D. Gueniot. ISBN 978-2-87825-117-3; Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London:
Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans; http://www.libdeau.fr/ ; Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The
Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[75]     Hancock, G: The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost Ark of the Covenant, Toronto: Doubleday, ISBN 0-671-86541-2
[76]     The Exodus and the Return. Hidden Lighthouse.
[77]     Napier, Gordon (2011). A to Z of the Knights Templar: A Guide to their History and Legacy. The History Press.
[78]     Michael of Albany, HRH Prince Michael of Albany,  Walid Amine Salhab (2006), Knights Templar of the Middle East:
The Hidden History of the Islamic Origins of Freemasonry, Weiser Press.
[79]     Hancock, G: The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost Ark of the Covenant, Toronto: Doubleday, ISBN 0-671-86541-
2; Napier, Gordon (2011). A to Z of the Knights Templar: A Guide to their History and Legacy. The History Press.
[80]     Michael of Albany, HRH Prince Michael of Albany,  Walid Amine Salhab (2006), Knights Templar of the Middle East:
The Hidden History of the Islamic Origins of Freemasonry, Weiser Press.
[81]
 Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.; Hugh
Kennedy (2001). Crusader Castles. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79913-9.
[82]
 Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.; Hugh
Kennedy (2001). Crusader Castles. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79913-9.; Ibn Khaldun. The Mediterranean in the
14th century : rise and fall of Empires.
[83]     Castles of the Knights Templar. Ninth Templar.
[84]
Juan García Atienza, The Knights Templar in the Golden Age of Spain: Their Hidden History on the Iberian
Peninsula   (Destiny Books, 2006). ISBN 978-1-59477-098-2
[85]
Friedrich Rahlves (1966). Cathedrals and monasteries of Spain. Kaye.
[86]
Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[87]
Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[88]
Paul F. Crawford (2010). The Debate on the Trial of the Templars (1307-1314). Ashgate Publishing.
[89]
S. Boularand, P. Giraldez, L Ventola, M Vendrell Saz. “Templar Joint Repointings: Materials, Techniques, and Paint
Decoration in Miravet Castle, Spain.” Archaeometry. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4754.2010.00568.x.
[90]
Helen J. Nicholson (2004). Knight Templar, 1120-1312. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-670-6.
[91]
Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[92]
Hilowitz, Beverley (1974). A Horizon guide: great historic places of Europe. American Heritage Pub. Co. p. 119. ISBN 0-
07-028915-8.
[93]
Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[94]
Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[95]
Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.

[96]
Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[97]
Helen Nicholson (2001). The Knights Templar: a new history. Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-2517-4.
[98]
Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights Templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans; Karen Ralls
(2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the Order of the
Temple. New Page Books.
[99]     http://www.theknightstemplar.org/portugal/. The Knights Templar.
[100]  http://www.theknightstemplar.org/portugal/. The Knights Templar.
[101]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[102] Anthony Emery (2000). Greater Medieval Houses of England and Wales, Volume II. Cambridge University Press.
[103] Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education.
[104] Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[105] Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education; Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights
templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[106]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books; Helen Nicholson (2001). The knights templar:a new history. Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-
2517-4.
[107] Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education; Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights
templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[108] Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[109]  Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[110]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books; Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education.
[111]  Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education; Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights
templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[112]  Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education.
[113]  Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[114]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books; Faith, Juliet. The Knights Templar in Somerset. The History Press. pp. 59–
86. ISBN 9780752452562.
[115]  News and Events, Keele University. http://www.keele.ac.uk/history/newsandevents/  .
[116]  Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[117]  Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans.
[118]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books; Charles Greenstreet Addison (1852). The Knights templar. London: Longman, Brown,
Green and Longmans.

[119]  Evelyn Lord (2004). The Knights Templar in Britain. Pearson Education.
[120] S. Harrison, "The Icknield Way: some queries", The Archaeological Journal, 160, 1–22, 2003.
[121] P.H.Blair, An Introduction to Anglo-Saxon England   (Cambridge,2003),p.256
[122]  Billy Colfer (2004). The Hook Peninsula, County Wexford. Cork University Press; John D'Alton (1838). The history of the
county of Dublin. Hodges and Smith.
[123]  http://www.irishmasonichistory.com/the-knights-templar-and-ireland.html
[124]  Billy Colfer (2004). The Hook Peninsula, County Wexford. Cork University Press.
[125]  "Temple House Manor & Castle". History of Temple House.
[126]  "Temple House, County Sligo". National Inventory of Architectural Heritage; "INTRODUCTION TEMPLEHOUSE
PAPERS" (PDF). Public Record Office of Northern Ireland
[127]  Helen J. Nicholson (2004). Knight Templar, 1120-1312. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-670-6.
[128]  Knights Templar in Dalmatia Croatia. Secret Dalmatia.
[129]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[130]  Helen Nicholson (2001). The Knights Templar: a new history. Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-2517-4.
[131]  Karen Ralls (2007). Knights Templar Encyclopedia: The Essential Guide to the People, Places, Events, and Symbols of the
Order of the Temple. New Page Books.
[132] Dent, JD. Baldwin II.  History Bookshop; Adrian J. Boas, Archaeology of The Military Orders: A Survey of The Urban
Centres, Rural Settlements and Castles of The Military Orders in The Latin East (c.1120-1291) (Routledge, 2006). ISBN 0-415-
29980-2; Louis Charpentier, Les Mystères de la Cathédrale de Chartres (Paris: Robert Laffont, 1966), translated The Mysteries of
Chartres Cathedral (London: Research Into Lost Knowledge Organisation, 1972); Read, Piers Paul (2014). The Templars (1st
ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press.
[133] Robinson, John J. (1994). Dungeon, Fire and Sword. Michael O'Mara Books. ISBN 1-85479-956-8; Burl, Aubrey.
(2002). God's Heretics. Sutton. ISBN 0-7509-2572-8. 
[134] Hugh J. Schonfield, The Essene Odyssey: The Mystery of The True Teacher and The Essene impact on The Shaping of
Human Destiny   (Element Books, 1984). ISBN 0-906540-49-6


