

THE 
SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
IN 
TIBET AN BUDDHIST SECTS 
ALEXANDRA DA VID-NEEL 
AND 
LAMA YONGDEN 
Foreword 
by 
Alan Watts 
Translated by 
Capt. H. N. M. HARDY 
CITY LIGHTS BOOKS 
1967 

© 1967 by Alexander David-Neel 
Sixth Printing, November 1972 
This translation from the French (originally published by the Maha Bodhi 
Society in Calcutta in 1964) has been reviewed by the authorforthis first City 
Lights ei:lition. 
CITY LIGHTS BOOKS are published at the City Lights Bookstore, 261 
Columbus Avenue, San Francisco, California 9413 3 

THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
IN 
TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 


FOREWORD 
by Alan Watts 
For several years I have referred to this, hitherto, rare and 
inaccessible work as the "1-told-you-so-book," because it 
has often been implied that I have invented my ex-
planations of Buddhism out of thin air, thus falsifying 
its authentic teachings. Mme. Alexandra David-Neel 
is a Frenchwoman now (in 1967) one hundred years 
old who has travelled and studied extensively in Tibet, 
who adopted the lately deceased Lama Y ongden as her 
son, and who has recorded her experiences in such ro-
mantically entitled works as Initiations and Initiates 
in Tibet and Mystics and Magicians in Tibet, both of 
which first appeared in English translation in 19 31. 
The present volume has a similarly "esoteric" title, rem-
iniscent of the fantasies of H. P. Blavatsky, Talbot 
Mundy, James Hilton, and "Lobsang Rampa," who-
with a very superficial knowledge of Tibetan Buddhism-
have given us an image of Tibet as the secret stronghold 

of the most mysterious and adept masters of the occult 
and magical sciences, depicting the high-ranking Bud-
dhist monks, or lamas, as super-technicians in the exer-
cise of psychic powers far beyond the reach of ordinary 
mortals. 
Yet, despite the occultist flavor of its title, The 
Secret Oral Teachings in the Tibetan Buddhist Sects is 
the most direct, no-nonsense, and down-to-earth ex-
planation of Mahayana Buddhism which has thus far 
been written. Specifically, it is a wonderfully lucid 
account of the Madhyamika (or "middle-way") School 
of Buddhism, a method of meditation and enlightenment 
which was worked out sometime between 150 and 
250 A.D. by the great Indian sage and pandit, Nagar-
juna. ~'lore detailed and scholarly studies of this method 
may be found in T. R. V. Murti's Central Philosophy of 
Buddhism (Allen and Unwin, London, 19 55) and in 
Edward Conze's marvellous translations of the Prajna-
paramita literature, published by the Buddhist Society 
of London. Mme. David-Neel, however, writes for the 
non-academic student who wants simply to practice 

and experience this method as a way of overcoming the 
hang-ups (klesa) which follow from the illusion that 
one is, in fact, ari individual ego, separate from the eter-
nal and inconceivable Ground of all existence. 
It is especially important for Westerners to under-
stand that high lamas, Zen masters, and Hindu gurus in 
the discipline of yoga are human beings, not supermen. 
We must not put them, as we have put Jesus Christ, on 
pedestals of reverence so high that we automatically 
exclude ourselves from their states of consciousness. Man 
may have potentialities of all kinds for the psycho-
technology of clairvoyance, telekinesis, precognition, and 
telepathy (not to mention epipathy, catapathy, apo-
pathy, and peripathy). Power-games of this kind are not, 
however, the main concern of Tibetan Buddhism. On 
the contrary, the point is to realize that by virtue of what 
you always are, have been, and will be, there is no need 
whatsoever to defend yourself or prove yourself. 
Sausalito, California 
August 1967 


PREFACE 
This book gives the reader a "report" on the 
corpus of teachings, called by the Tibetans Sangs W ai 
Dam ngags,X that is to say: ''Secret Teachings". 
The way in which we should understand the 
adjective "Secret" applied to these Teachings is ex-
plained in the following pages, as well as the manner 
in which thev are transmitted. 
" 
I have been careful to show them in an entirely 
objective way ; whatever opinion I personally may 
hold should not be expressed in a presentation which 
does not aim at propaganda and only purposes to 
make known some of the doctrines held by an elite 
of Tibetan intellectuals who are not easily accessible 
to foreign investigators. 
It is open to each of my readers to form his own 
opinion of the theories he will find in this book. He 
can reflect and meditate on them if he so wishes. In 
every sphere the task of the investigator consists solely 
in offering to his hearers a number of facts likely to 
widen their knowledge. 
1 Tibetan spelling: Gsang wai Gdam Ngag. 

To the late Lama YONGDEN, my 
adopted son and the faithful com-
panion of 40 years of adventurous 
travels and study in the East, who 
helped me to collect these informa-
tions in Tibet. 

THE LAMA YONDGEN 


THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
CHAPTER I 
It is a long time since the idea of writing this 
book occurred to me. One fine summer afternoon I 
had explained my plan to a learned Tibetan who led 
a life of contemplation in a little house on the rocky 
side of a mountain. He was not encouraging. 
"Waste of time," he said. "The great majority of 
readers and hearers are the same all over the world. 
I have no doubt that the people of your countrY. .. are 
like those I have met in China and India, and these 
latter were just like Tibetans. If you speak to them 
of profound Truths they yawn, and, if they dare, 
they leave you, but if you tell them absurd fables 
they are all eyes and ~ars. They wish the doctrines 
preached to them, whether religious, philosophic, or 
social, to be agreeable, to be consistent with their con-
ceptions, to satisfy their inclinations, in fact that they 
find themselves in them, and that they feel them-
selves approved by them." 
The Master had nothing to teach me on this 
point. Hundreds of times, in the West, I had heard 

2 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
men and women express the desire to find a religion 
which would satisfy them, or had seen reject a 
doctrine with the remark: "It does not satisfy me." 
What, then, was that something that wanted to 
be agreeably caressed, satisfied ?-It was the collection 
of false notions, of unreasonable propensities, of feel-
ings of a rudimentary sensuality which is disguised 
under the appearance of a puppet named "I". I 
thought then of the devotees who intoxicate them-
selves with incense and the stirring sonorousness of 
the organ in the half shadows of our cathedrals, 
believing themselves to be on the way to spiritual 
heights. 
I thought of all those; whatever might be 
the religion or secular faith to which they belong, 
who thrill at the sound of certain names, of certain 
words which are but empty noises devoid of reality. 
"In general," continued the Master, "we distin-
guish three kinds of individuals: those whose intelli-
gence is completely dull; those whose intelligence is 
of average quality; able to understand some Truths 
:which are specially evident ; those endowed with an 
intelligence better equipped for acute perceptions, 
who are fit to penetrate below the surface of the world 
of physical phenomena and grasp the causes which 
are at work there.1 
1 These three degrees being called respectively: thama, ding and 
rab . • . . written thama, hbring and rab. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
3 
"It is enough to direct the attention to these last, 
to say to them: 'Look from this point of view, con-
sider that' and they perceive what is to be perceived 
there where they have been told to look; they under-
stand what is really the thing which one has pointed 
()Ut to them. 
"One may proclaim on the high road the Teach-
ings considered secret, they will remain 'secret' for 
the individuals with dull minds who will hear what 
is said to them, and will grasp nothing of it but the 
sound. 
"It is not on the Master that the· 'secret' depends 
but on the hearer. A Master can only be he who 
opens the door : it is for the disciple to be capable of 
seeing what lies beyond. Teachers exist who are 
able to discern the degree of intellectual acuteness of 
those who desire their Teaching, and they reserve 
the detailed explanation of certain doctrines for 
those whom they judge able to understand them. It 
is thus that the deep Teachings, transmitted orally 
from Master to disciple for many generations, have 
been passed on and preserved from oblivion. You 
have heard them. Do with them as you think fit. 
They are very simple, but, like a powerful battering-
ram, they run counter to the wall of false ideas rooted 
in the mind of man and the emotions which delight 
him casting him into suffering . . . . . Try!" 

4 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIDNGS 
Then, I remembered what the ancient Buddhist 
Texts tell us about the hesitation of the Buddha 
before beginning His Mission : 
"I have discovered a profound Truth, difficult 
to perceive, difficult to understand, accessible only 
to the wise. 
"Human beings busy themselves in the vor-
tex of the world and find there their pleasure. 
It will be difficult for men to understand the law 
of the concatenation of causes and effects, the 
suppression of the samskaras2 •••• 
"Of what use to reveal to men that which I 
have discovered at the price of laborious efforts? 
Why should I do so ?-This doctrine cannot be 
understood by those filled by desire and hatred 
. . . . it is mysterious, deep ; hidden from the 
vulgar mind. If I proclaim it and men are 
unable to understand it, the only result will be 
fatigue and annoyance for me." 
"And as He thought thus, the Venerable 
One3 felt inclined to remain quiet without preach-
ing the Doctrine." 
2 The samskaras are the mental formations, the ideas, the con-
ceptions that one forms, and which depend on ignorance. See below 
for a detailed explanation. 
s Bhagavan is a respectful title used in speaking to religious 
personalities. The Sannyasins (Hindu ascetics) use it among them-

IN TIBET AN BUDDI:llST SECTS 
5 
At this point the Texts, with Oriental imagina-
tion, tell of the intervention of a God, Brahma Saham-
pati, who put into words the thoughts springing up 
in the mind of the Buddha. 
Brahma Sahampati exhorts the Buddha to con-
quer His hesitation : 
"May the Venerable One preach the Doc-
trine I There are beings whose spiritual eyes are 
hardly darkened by light dust, these will under-
stand the Doctrine. In the land of Magadha4 
a false doctrine has prevailed up to the present, 
elaborated by men whose minds were contam-
inated (by ignorance). Now open to them the 
gate of Immortality (literally, of the deathless). 
"Arise, 0 Victorious One! Travel through-
out the world, 0 Chief of Pilgrims (beings who 
wander in the round of successive births and 
deaths). There are some who will understand 
Thee." 
selves. This title is also given to certain Gods. Bhagavan means: 
glorious, illustrious, revered, etc. English writers have, in most cases, 
translated this word by "Blessed One". French writers have given 
an identical translation with "Le Bienheureux" which does not 
correspond to the real meaning of Bhagavan. "Venerable" is nearer 
to the meaning the Indians give to Bhagavan when they use this word. 
4 The ancient kingdom of Magadha in Central India, which was 
the scene of the Buddha's activities. 

6 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
"Then the Buddha cast a supremely clair-
voyant look over the world. He saw some beings 
whose spiritual eyes were hardly covered by thin 
dust. He saw some whose minds were keen and 
others whose minds were dull. 
"Just as in a pond, among lotus flowers born 
in the water, some do not emerge from the water 
and bloom in the depths, others grow to the sur-
face of the water, and others emerge from the 
wat~r and the water does not wet their flowers,. 
so the Buddha, casting His eyes on the world saw 
some beings whose minds were pure from the filth 
of the world, beings with keen minds and others 
with dull minds, beings of noble character, good 
listeners and bad. When He had seen these 
things he spoke to Brahma Sahampati, saying: 
"Let the Gate of the Eternal be open to 
all! Let him who has ears to hear, hear!" 
I doubt whether the divine Brahma Sahampati 
judged me worthy of his intervention. Nevertheless, 
I have ventured to apply to myself the advice which 
he once gave to the Great Sage of India, and depending 
also on the permission which was given me on the 
threshold of a Tibetan hermitage, I shall attempt to 
summarise this collection of theories and precepts 
named "sangwa", the secret mystical doctrine, closely 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
7 
bound up with the idea of Zhang tonft transcendent 
insight. 
The teachings of all the lYlasters who left nothing 
written and even those of the numerous Masters whose 
authentic works we possess have always given rise to 
interpretation, to developments which, in some cases, 
have added to and brought out the significance of the 
original doctrine, and in others have falsified the initial 
meamng. 
I have said elsewhere6 that an account of the 
Buddhist Doctrine can be given on two pages, and I 
have, in fact, given in tabular form covering two pages, 
the fundamental Teaching of Buddhism. All schools 
of Buddhism, without exception, accept them and take 
them as the basis of what they consider legitimate 
developments and interpretations of them. 
To discuss this legitimacy is not always easy. 
The Buddha insisted strongly on the necessity of 
examining the propositions put forward by Him, and 
of understanding them personally before accepting 
them as true. 
The ancient texts leave no doubt on this point: 
"Do not believe on the strength of_ traditions 
5 Spelt respectively in Tibetan: gsang wa and lhag mthong. 
• In "Buddhism, Its Doctrines and Methods"-John Lane, the 
Bodley Head, London. French edition 'Collection du Rocher-Pion, 
Paris. German edition Brockhaus, Wiesbaden. 

8 
THE SECRET ORAL TEAClllNGS 
even if they have been held in honour for many 
generations and in many places ; do not believe 
anything because many people speak of. it; do 
not believe on the strength of sages of old times ; 
do not believe that which you have yourselves 
imagined, thinking that a god has inspired you. 
Believe nothing which depends only on the author-
ity of your masters or of priests. After investiga-
tion. believe that which you have yourselves tested 
and found reasonable, and which is for your good 
and that of others."7 
Elsewhere, after conversing with some of His 
disciples, the Buddha concluded : 
"If, now, you understand thus, and see thus. 
will you say : We honour, the Master and it is 
out of respect for Him that we speak thus?'' 
"We shall not do so." 
"What you say, 0 disciples, is it not only that 
which you have yourselves recognized, yourselves 
understood.?" 
"It is exactly that, Venerable." 
During the centuries subtle Indian and Chinese 
philosophers have largely availed themselves of the 
freedom of thought and interpretation which was 
'KaUima Sutta. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDinST SECTS 
9 
allowed them. They have used it with skill and we 
have profited by the stories of astonishing contests of 
polemics. 
The Tibetans did not fail to imitate them, and 
one can recognize in their guarded oral teachings an 
interesting conjunction of Indian philosophy and the 
special mentality of the Yellow races. On the other 
hand, the best informed contemporary adepts of the 
Sect of Meditation (Dhyana) called Ts'an in China 
and Zen in Japan, readily agree that their doctrine is 
Buddhism understood by the minds of the Yellow 
race. 
This admixture of different mentalities has left in 
the Buddhism of secret teachings in Tibet a special 
quality of transcendent rationalism, a strict intellectual 
equilibrium which completely differentiates it from 
the popular religion as also from the emotional mysti~ 
cism of certain Mahayanist schools. 
It is evident that the great majority of those who 
call themselves Buddhists have not been able to rise 
to the mental level of the Teaching of the Buddha. 
Most of them have built up for their own use 
various kinds of Buddhism which are anything but 
Buddhist and, in their ignorance, they uphold, often 
with bitterness, their belief and their absurd practices 
as the expression of the purest orthodoxy. 
The more intelligent see clearly the illogicality of 

10 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEUNGS 
these "varieties" of Buddhism, but they submit to 
them, accepting them as an indispensable concession 
made to the mental weakness of the "mass'' and 
because they wish to group a "mass" of individuals 
under a label which does not suit them. 
A very learned Japanese who shows a very special 
indulgence-may I say a tenderness-towards these 
degenerate forms of Buddhism, express himself 
thus: 
"We may sometimes ignore the claims of 
reason and rest satisfied, though usually uncon-
sciously, with assertions which are conflicting 
when critically examined, but we cannot disregard 
by any means those of the religious sentiment 
which finds satisfaction only in the very fact of 
things. If it ever harboured some flagrant con-
tradiction in the name of .faith it was because its 
ever pressing demands had to be met with even 
at the expense of reason." 
Elsewhere the same author wrote: 
"The inflexibility of karma is more than poor 
mortal can endure.''8 
8 Professor D. T. Suzuki in "Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism", 
pp. 218 and 283. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
11 
That is possible, that is probably true of most of 
those about us, but who compels these weak-minded 
people to call themselves Buddhists ?-Is it not open 
to them to attach themselves to other doctrines which 
offer them tales apt to flatter their sentimental tenden.., 
cies ?-In so doing they need not fear any eternal 
damnation, but only the distressing momentary 
accidents which the mistakes they commit in their 
physical and mental activity, their deeds and thoughts, 
may bring upon them. 
The Tibetan Masters who pass on the traditional 
oral teachings repeat insistently the fact that these 
teachings are for the use of individuals in the rab 
category, that is to say endowed with superior and 
excellent intelligence, the "lotus whose flowers grow 
above the level of the water" accordinig to the 
picturesque comparison quoted above. 
The object of these teachings is not to amuse the 
simple-minded, those charitably called in the Tibetan 
Scriptures the "children", it is meant for the strong 
to make them stronger,, for the intelligent to make 
them more intelligent, for the shrewd to develop their 
shrewdness and to lead them to the possession of 
transcendent insight (lhag thong) which constitutes the 
real enlightenment. 
It is for such reasons that the explanation of the 
doctrines and methods which make up this corpus of 

12 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEITNGS 
teachings is reserved for certain class of disciples, and 
this fact has caused it to be called secret. 
This Buddhism of a Tibetan elite is genuinely of 
Buddhist inspiration and dates from the most brilliant 
period of Buddhist philosophy. Its teachings are con-
sidered to be traditional having been handed down 
from Master to disciple in an uninterrupted line. 
Those initiated in the secret teachings declare that 
these latter do not spring from a supernatural revela-
tion but are the fruit of intellectual and spiritual 
investigations made by men who also combined with 
them investigations on the material plane. 
On this point the advantage given to us by the 
data supplied by modern science is worth noting; an 
advantage helping us to understand the theories put 
forward by the Secret Teachings. 
The men who 
thought of these latter must have been endowed with 
superior faculties of understanding ; they possessed 
transcendent insight: lhag thong. 
Although the mythical personage Dorji Ghang9 
is often named at the head of the list of those who 
transmitted the teachings, he is there in a symbolic 
sense insomuch as he is the "bearer of the magic 
sceptre", the dorji representing the power conferred 
' Tibetan spelling: rdor rdji htchang; his Sanskrit name is 
Vajradhara: "He holds the Thunderbolt sceptre", like Zeus among 
the Greeks. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
13 
by the traditional teachings. Even if some people may 
be tempted to consider Dorji Chang as a real person, 
disseminator of special doctrines, none would venture 
to suggest that he was the author of such teachings. 
The attainment of transcendent insight is the real 
object of the training advocated in the traditional Oral 
Teachings, which do not consist, as so many imagine, 
in teaching certain things to the pupil, in revealing to 
him certain secrets, but rather in showing him the 
means to learn them and discover them for himself. 
The Masters of the secret teachings say that the 
truth learned from another is of no value, and that 
the only truth which is living and effective, which is 
of value, is the truth which we ourselves discover. 
If this- were not the case, it would be enough for 
us to read the innumerable works in which philo-
sophers, savants and doctors of the different religions 
have explained their views and to choose from among 
them one which agrees with our own ideas and to 
which we can cleave. This is what is done by most 
of these individuals whom the Tibetans classify in the 
intermediate category of the average-minded. 
This stage should be surmounted. It is not 
enough to see with eyes which, according to the words 
used in Buddhist Texts, "are only covered with a thin 
film of dust", however thin this film may be; it is a 

14 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
question of removing the last trace of dust which 
interferes with sight. 
Literally, lhag thong, means to see "more", to see 
"beyond", to see "extremely", "supremely''. Thus, 
not only to see more than that which is seen by the 
mass of mankind who are crassly ignorant, but to see 
beyond the bounds limiting the vision of cultivated 
minds, to bring into being the third eye of Knowledge 
which the adepts of tantric sects place in the centre 
of the forehead of their symbolic Gods. 

CHAPTER. IT 
The faith commended to their faithful by all 
religions, and considered by them as a virtue essential 
£or him who hopes for eternal salvation, is nowise 
approved in the Secret Teachings. Based on the advice 
given by the Buddha to His disciples, the primary 
recommendation that the Masters give to neophytes 
is : "Doubt I " 
Doubt is an incitement to research, and research 
is the Way which leads to Knowledge. 
It does not follow from the above that he who 
undertakes to follow the Path of the Secret Teachings 
is thrown wholly on his own resources. By no means. 
He is put face ·tO face with certain facts, facts which 
have always seemed to him so obvious that he has 
never given them a moment's thought, and the 
Master says to him: "Now investigate whether these 
facts which you accept as representing a reality are, 
truly, real. Examine them attentively and at length, 
putting aside all preconceived ideas, empty your mind 
of all the opinions which it has harboured concerning 
these facts; doubt that which you have mechanically 
admitted up to the present, look as you would look 
at quite new things, those which form your physical 

16 
TIIE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
environment ; you will then investigate the mental 
reactions to which they give rise. 
To examine the people among whom we find 
ourselves, to investigate the manifold phenomena 
which continually arise and disappear around us, and 
then to reach the point at which we examine the 
spectator of this spectacle, whom we call "I", that is 
truly an interesting programme which promises un-
foreseen discoveries. 
To whom should we address our questions to 
obtain information about the world? 
From whom 
have we received that knowledge which we already 
possess?-
The reply is : from our senses. 
We have seen, heard, tasted, smelt, touched 
various objects, either material or of a more tenuous 
nature. 
We have given names to these various 
objects, we have classified them in series of similar 
objects, we have built up, with them, a world which 
has become familiar to us in the same way as we 
furnish a house in which we live. 
It is now a matter of shaking off the sluggishness 
created by the habit of busying ourselves without 
curiosity in our world, persuaded that the nature of 
its paraphernalia is perfectly known to us. 
It is a matter of suspecting the information given 
us by our senses. Is this information true ?-Do not 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
17 
we ourselves add, on our own authority, various accre-
tions for which our senses are in no way responsible? 
Let us see: 
You happen to be in a vast, bare plain, and in 
the distance you see a fleck of green standing out on 
the yellow sand. What is the size of the fleck which 
you see ?-Measure it in comparison with an upright 
object at eye-level, a ruler or even your finger. 
To 
what height on the ruler or on your finger does the 
green spot come ?-Mark this height. It may be 
equal to the top joint of your little finger or even 
smaller ; it may be just a point. 
If you have not already done it, you can, pro-
visionally, stop at this very rudimentary experiment. 
What have you seen ?-You have seen a green 
spot of the size which you measured. You have seen 
that and nothing more. To say that you have seen 
a tree in the distance is incorrect. Your eyes did not 
show you a tree with leafy branches able to. shelter 
you from the sun's rays. The idea of the tree and Its 
representation in your mind are the results of mental 
activity which has been set in motion by the sight 
of the tiny fleck of green. 
Many elements have been combined in this 
activity. One can put, in ·the first case, habit, memory. 
Other green spots seen in similar conditions have led 
to the finding of a tree at the end of a plain. This 

18 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
has been remembered. In a general way one knows 
also that distance gives a dwarfed image of objects 
seen, and this too has been remembered. 
Nevertheless these are ratiocinations and not the 
fact of having seen a tree. It is probable that walk-
ing towards the green spot, he who saw it will find 
a tree, but this is not certain. The fleck of green may 
be found to be a building painted green, the green 
canvas of a tent, or something else which is not a tree. 
A higher degree of probability, if not certainty may 
be attained if, to the perception of the colour green, 
were to be added that of outlines suggesting the 
shape of a tree. But again, how many times will not 
the mental activity, applied to the sensation of seeing 
a green spot, go astray?-Dazzlement caused by the 
sun, mirages, can cause us to see not only green spots 
but trees and many other objects although these have 
no corresponding substance. 
In short, what kind of information has been 
given to us by the fact of having seen a green spot?-
It has simply made us conscious of having felt a 
~ensation. A sensation, nothing more, all the rest is 
interpretation. In the same way, all our perceptions, 
those to which we give names and assign form, colour, 
or no matter what attributes, are nothing but inter-
pretations of a fugitive contact by one of our senses 
with a stimulus. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
19 
Thus we are led to contemplate the co-existence 
of two worlds: that of pure contact not coloured by 
the screen of "memories", and that created by the 
mental formations (the samskaras) : the interpretation. 
The first of these worlds represents Reality, and 
is indescribable ; we cannot think anything, cannot 
imagine anything about it without "interpreting" and 
thus destroying its character of Reality. 
Reality is 
inexpressible and inconceivable. 
The second of these worlds is that of mental 
formations set in motion by the contact-stimulus. It 
is the world in which we live. To say that it is not 
real does not mean that it is devoid of existence.1 
* 
* 
* 
How is the phenomenal, tangible world rep-
resented in the Oral Secret Teachings? 
The tangible world is movement, say the Masters, 
not a collection of moving objects, but movement 
itself. There are no objects "in movements", it is the 
movement which constitutes the objects which appear 
to us : they are nothing but movement. 
1 Tsong Khapa, founder of the Sect of Gelugspas (called Yellow 
Hats after the colour of their hat) insists on this point which puts 
him in opposition to the ultra-idealists represented nowadays by the 
Sect of the Dzogschen-pas. 

20 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
This movement is a continued and infinitelv 
J 
rapid succession of flashes of energy (in Tibetan tsal 
or shoug). All objects perceptible to our senses, all 
phenomena of whatever kind and whatever aspect 
they may assume, are constituted by a rapid succe-
ssion of instantaneous events. 
Each of these momentary happenings is brought 
about by manifold causes and multiple conditions 
acting together. Here one should not think that the 
event is distinct from these causes and conditions. It 
is these which, together, constitute the event. Apart 
from them there is no event. 
This word event must not be taken in the sense 
in which it is understood in ordinary language, that 
is to say as ·meaning a fact of exceptional importance 
as when one speaks of a "historical event". Event 
here means "something which happens". 
These 
"somethings" arising instantaneously and in series, 
these rapid flashes of energy are sufficiently like one 
another during the series to remain imperceptible to 
us, then suddenly occurs, in this series of moments, 
~ different moment which catches our attention and 
makes us think that a new object has appeared. 
This process is often explained by comparing it 
with the grain which remains apparently inert in the 
barn, then one day shows a .germ, that is something 
differing from the grain. However, the inertness of 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
21 
the grain of corn was only in appearance. 
That 
whi«h we saw as a lifeless grain was a series of com-
binations of causes and conditions, a series of separate 
instants among which occurred other "instants" which 
we saw as a germ. 
Some people say that the germ is a transforma-
tion of the grain. The Secret Teachings do not seem 
to encourage this opinion. 
The germ, they say, 
exists in dependence on the grain according to the 
classical Buddhist-formula: 
"This existing, that 
arises" which is not to be understood as meaning that 
this is the father who has begotten that by a transmis-
sion of substance. 
This is only the occasion which 
rendered possible the app·earance of that. 
There are two theories and both consider the 
world as movement. One states that the course of 
this movement (which creates phenomena) is conti-
nuous, as the flow of a quiet river seems to us. The 
other declares that the movement is intermittent and 
advances by separate flashes of energy which follow 
each other at such small intervals that these intervals 
are almost non-existent. 
As to the existence of matter which is motionless 
and homogeneous, this is flatly denied. 
* 
* 
* 

22 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIIINGS 
Although brief and incomplete, the. summary 
which I have just sketched of the doctrines laid down 
in the Oral Teachings concerning the nature of the 
world, allows us to revert to the indications which our 
senses give us, to examine them in greater detail. 
When you look at an object, what happens?-A 
contact of the organ or sight with an exterior object. 
This contact lasts only for a flash. When you think 
that you are looking for a long time, what in fact 
happens is a series of repeated contacts, each one of 
which lasts only for an instant, and of which none is 
identical with the previous one. 
Why not identical? 
For several reasons, of which the principal one 
which includes all the others, is that-as has already 
been explained-nothing that exists is motionless, and 
that phenomena, whatever they may be, consist in a 
succession of changes following each other with a 
speed which is far beyond our faculties of.perception 
and understanding. 
Well then, the material organ called the eye 
which consists of an aggregate of a large number of 
cells2 is not motionless. The cells which compose it 
are in perpetual movement ; they are sensitive, indi-
2 The expression "cell" is mine. A Tibetan would say doul ten 
(rdul phren) or doul ta (rdul phra), two terms corresponding also to 
molecule and atom, and also figuratively, to a grain of dust, and, in 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
23 
vidually, to numerous influences brought to bear on 
them by agents exterior to them3 and undergo 
numerous changes depending on the nature of their 
own evolution. The eye, at the moment of the second 
contact, is not identical with the eve which underwent 
-
the first contact, and it continues to change during the 
repeated contacts. 
In fact, what these contacts have brought to us 
when we believed we "looked at length" is a series of 
images. The rapidity of the contacts caused us to see 
them as a single image. 
In the same way, the object at which we were 
looking is itself not a homogeneous and motionless 
block. It is a "universe" formed by a large number of 
particles in movement. What has been said above of 
the cells which form the eye applies equally to those 
which constitute the object at which we have been 
looking. In their incessant dance they also undergo 
changes due to their own evolution and changes caused 
by exterior agents. Again, they move away from or 
near to each other, forming different arrangements, 
any case, serving to express the idea of infinitely small particles which 
constitute the body. They translate the Sanskrit words: anou and 
paramanou. 
3 The word exterior should not be understood here as applying to 
agents existing outside the eye. The exterior agent may be for a 
cell, its neighbour more or less close, existing in the same aggregate, 
that ·is to say in the substance of the eye. 

24 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEINGS 
different patterns. It follows that the object envisaged 
changes, in reality, from one moment to another. 
Although tlle majority of men are misled by the 
illusion which hides from them the forces at work 
both in the organ and in the object with which it is 
in contact, it does not follow that all men share the 
same error to the same degree. 
"Transcendent insight", lhag thong, may come 
into play here. We can easily admit that our senses 
are very unreliable guides because they are not suffi-
ciently acute; we may even admit that they are wholly 
unsuited to allow us to perceive the ultimate basis of 
phenomena, but it is also reasonable to believe that 
our senses are susceptible to education and that their 
acuity can be increased. To what degree can this be 
done?-It is impossible to forsee it, but it is reason-
able to suppose that we have by no means reached the 
limit of perception of which our physical and mental 
faculties are capable. 
What has been said about the sense of sight and 
its object, naturally applies as well to other senses : 
the ear, a little universe in motion like the eve, and 
J 
to its object, sound; to odo:urs and to the nose; to 
taste and to the tongue ; to the sensations felt by the 
contact of our skin with a foreign body. In every case 
it is a question of the meeting of two aggregates in 
motion, and also, in every case, it is a matter of a 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
25 
sensation followed by an interpretation which brings 
it into the realm of consciousness while distorting it. 
Can we propound the question : 
Among these 
multiple and intermingled contacts, which one gives 
us real knowledge?-We must beware of the word 
real which, when we use it, simply corresponds to an 
idea that we ourselves develop, to a manner of under~ 
standing which is peculiar to us or which we have 
adopted on the suggestion of others. In any case, no 
experimenting can put us in touch with Absolute 
Reality for it is with his senses that the experimenter 
perceives the progression: of the experiment he carries 
out, and its results ; now his senses, as has just been 
explained, only gives him various series of sensations 
which he interpretes in his own way. It is probable 
that this way of understanding is always very different 
from the reality. 
But is there a Reality, a unique Reality in the 
absolute sense ?-What can we know of it and what 
meaning would it have for us who do not belong to 
the world of the Absolute but to that of the relative? 
Reality is synonymous with Existence. 
That 
which is real, that which exists, is that which produces 
effects. How, then, do we know that a thing produces 
effects ?-We know it when we perceive them, when 
we feel the effects. Now each of us feels the sensations 
which the composition of his being allows him to feel ; 

26 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIDNGS 
A man neither feels nor perceives exactly as a mosquito 
or a plant does. A being other than human : a God, 
a Demon or no matter what other being, does not 
perceive as we do. 
The extent, t}:le gradation, the 
strength, the nature of the sensations and the percep-
tions differ according to the constitution of the organ 
of contact of different beings. It follows therefore that 
that which is real, which exists, which produces effects 
for one, does not affect the other, has no reality, no 
existence for him. 
Each sphere, each world, each order of beings 
possesses a Reality of its own because it produces 
effects in this special sphere and for this order of 
beings. 
We must beware of ideas. and judgments based on 
our human mentality, on our human senses and of 
relating and gauging according to our measure that 
which exists in the infinity of space . 
• 
* 
* 
One can very well apply to the Oral Teachings 
what has been said above concerning the discohtinuity 
of the movement which is the world. This teaching 
is not expressed in a consequent and methodically 
arranged manner, as we might be tempted to wish. 
The subjects explained are interlaced, repeated, seen 

IN TmETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
27 
from various points of view. It is rare that a graduated 
"course" is given to a particular student. The teaching 
is composed rather of separate interviews often taking 
place at very long intervals. My observations consist 
in assembling the summaries of conversations I have 
heard. Each of my readers must connect together 
those of these summaries which are most interesting 
to him. 
As I have stated at the beginning of this book. 
the method employed in the Oral Teachings is to 
suggest to the enquirer various subjects for refiexion 
and it is. for him to make what he can of them. For 
some people the theories which they have touched will 
serve as a key to open the door to a field which until 
that moment, had been closed to them, while othets 
will turn the key in their hands without putting it in 
the lock, or even will not suspect that there exists a 
door to open. This comparison is in accordance with 
the thought of the Masters who impart the Oral 
Teachings. 
Relying on the preceding explanations, I feel that 
I may return to the subject of contacts in order to 
develop it and insist on certain points. 
It has been said that the contact of a sense with 

28 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
its object is made up of a series of evanescent contacts. 
It has also been stated that during these contacts both 
the sense-organ and the object with which it is in 
contact undergo changes because both are aggregates 
of particles in movement. 
The intensity of the different contacts varies. 
Only some among them awake an echo in the mind, 
this echo being translated into the idea which occurs 
to us: 
"I have seen a horse" ,-"1 have seen a tree, a 
man" .-"1 have heard the gong being beaten"-"! 
have eaten an apricot" ,-"1 have smelt the odour of 
burning wood" ,-"1 have touched silken materials",-
~'1 have been pricked by a thorn", etc. 
We see, hear, taste many things of which we are 
not conscious and the lower an individual is in the 
scale of physical and psychic development, the smaller 
is the number of his conscious perceptions. 
It is not a rare occurrence to have seen a landscape, 
day after day, for a long time, and then suddenly to 
pick out, in this familiar landscape, some object 
which one had never seen, the sharp point of a chorten4 
showing above a hill, or the mouth of a cave in a 
rocky cliff. These things have always been there, our 
gaze has rested on them many times, our organs of 
sight have received an impression of them, but this 
has not been strong enough to make us see them 
• Chorten, a religious monument often seen in Tibet. 

.IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
29 
consciously. Other conditions having occurred, the 
impression has been strengthened and we have seen. 
The competition of the senses among themselves 
also causes the temporary predominance of one or the 
other which smothers the sensations caused by the 
others. 
An individual listening intendy to a noise which 
concerns him, the galloping of horses which he thinks 
are ridden by brigands and coming towards him, will 
not feel the sting of insects, a cold wind, etc. 
Does this mean that these contacts which fail to 
bring about enough mental activities to make us con-
scious of the kind of sensation felt, give rise to no 
effect of any kind ?-By no means. Nothing which 
happens remains without effect. 
Thus we are led to the examination of what can 
be these effects, that is to say what becomes of these 
numerous contacts of which we are not conscious. 
We must add to the contacts due to the activity 
of our five senses those which result from th~ activity 
of. our mind which is considered by Buddhists as the 
sixth sense. This last category includes the opinions, 
theories, doctrines, ideas in general which we have 
formed during our education,. conversations which 
we have had or heard, reading which we have done, 
and so on. Among these contacts made by our sixth 
sense-the mind-as among those made by our 

30 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
physical senses, a large number, have lightly touched 
our mind without making a mark in it, or perhaps 
the impressions having been too faint, we have for-
gotten· them. 
However they are by no means dead for they 
have engendered descendants of a mysterious kind, 
and these descendants, that is to say, their effects, may 
manifest their existence even after a long interval. 
Nevertheless we should not imagine that the 
forces set in motion by the physical or psychic con-
tacts of which we have not been conscious, remain 
stored in a purely latent state in some kind of im-
material receptacle, awaiting conditions favourable 
for their manifestation. 
Some people hold an opinion of this kind and 
speak of a: "receptacle of consciousness" in a way 
which makes a sort of individual or cosmic deity 
of it. This opinion is contradicted in the Oral 
Teachings. 
The forces caused by the contacts, both those of 
which we were conscious and those of which we were 
unwitting, give ·rise to manifold flashes of activity 
which are in evidence on different planes, and, at the 
same time, to multiple actions and reactions between 
these different forces themselves. 
The interplay of the contacts and of their effects 
must not be envisaged in reference to ourselves alone. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIUST SECTS 
31 
The innumerable contacts of all kinds which con-
tinually occur in the universe and the equally innu-
merable and varied effects of these contacts, constitute 
another exchange of energy whose influence operates 
on all beings and in al_l spheres. 
In order to follow the theories which we are 
examining more closely, it is better to say: "There 
are in reality no contacts happening in the universe. 
The universe is movement and this movement is 
made up of contacts. The contacts and their effects 
are the universe". 
In the same way, on the restricted scale of our 
individuality, it is this movement of contacts and their 
effects which is our individuality, that which we call 
our ','self". 
Let us return once again to the facts within reach 
of this "self" which presendy we shall see disappear 
like the "water of a mirage" or "the casde in the 
douds". 
The contact begets an idea. 
The birth of an 
idea may certainly depend on the contact~ but never-
theless there is no certainty that the contact is the 
sole cause of the kind of idea which follows it. 
We can compare the contact to a shock, but in 
the infinitesimal lapse of time between this shock and 
the arising of the idea which attaches a name to the 
object of the contact, a phenomenon happens. 

32 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
This phenomenon may be compared to the inter-
position between the pure contact and our conscious-
ness, of a screen on which figures are painted. 
What is this screen ?-The Tibetan calls it 
pagtchags (in Sanskrit vasana) which means propen-
sity, inclination, habit, but more exactly: memory.5 
The role played by education in the conscious-
ness which arises from our perception has been 
pointed out by western psychologists. 
In an article on the way in which individuals 
perceive colours, Dr. Charles Hill6 expresses doubt as 
to the exactitude of perception of a child who says the 
grass is green. Has the child really the impression 
that he sees the colour green when he looks at a lawn, 
or does he repeat "the grass is green" as a result of 
suggestion?-He has been told that "grass is green" 
and so he sees it green. 
In the as yet restricted field of research to which 
the student is still limited, he will primarily examine 
the habit which we have of associating the notions of 
certain forms, certain colours, certain sounds, certain 
t:astes, with certain particular stimuli. 
This habit is in no way personal. It is rooted. 
from their beginning, in the beings whose organ of 
contact are similar to our own and which therefore 
• Another meaning of viisana is "force", "vital impulse". 
6 Article in the "Continental Daily Mail" of August, 1950. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
33 
are liable to be affected in the same way by the same 
stimuli. It is impossible for us to know the reactions 
of beings constituted in a different way. It is, how-
ever, reasonable to think that in the same world, as 
we have just said, different worlds are perceived by 
different beings according to the nature of their 
respective organs of perception. 
The mechanism of the phenomenon may be 
summarised as follows : we know that when a con-
tact takes place it consists of a series of intermittent 
contacts among which some produce a shock which 
gives rise to a sensation. This sensation has already 
been felt by the individual and by those of his species 
and the response made to it in analogous circum-
stances arises like a screen on which the habitual 
response to that kind of sensation is pictured in 
images : a horse, an apricot, a gong, a thorn or some 
other thing. 
Does that mean that in absolute truth our senses 
have made contact with a real horse, a real apricot, 
etc.? There is no proof of this, for the only existing 
proof depends on the evidence of the senses, evidence 
which only repeats the inexactitudes formerly regis-
tered. We cannot presume any thing more than the 
existence of a stimulus which has caused the sensa-
tion that we have felt, a sensation which we have 

34 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
interpreted in our own way, adding to it images of 
our own invention. 
Should we then believe that we have been taken 
in by a pure mirage? Not entirely. Probably the 
stimulus corresponds to something, but this some-
thing, that is to say the object? of some kind with 
which one of our senses has made contact, remains 
unknown to us. 
Without any correspondmg material object exis-
ting, we see in dreams images of horses, apricots, etc. 
resulting from the memories we have of these objects. 
In the following chapters we shall examine different 
theories current on this subject . 
... 
... 
... 
The Tibetans did not fail to note that when 
from a distance we see a hunter fire a shot we see 
the flash before we hear the noise of the shot. This 
observation, however, does not seem to have impelled 
them to. have followed up their investigations on this 
subject and to work out any, more or less, coherent 
theories about the respective velocities of light and 
sound. 
' Here, we should not attach to the word "object" the idea of 
materiality which it implies when we think of a stone, a tree or an 
animal. In this content, the "object" is rather a force, a particular 
flash of energy which our senses have met. 

IN TmETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
35 
Nevertheless, the idea that the picture of the 
world which we behold really represents the condi-
tion of things happening at the moment when it 
appears to us, is plainly held to be doubtful in the 
Secret Teachings. These Teachings tend to believe 
that the images we see are images of that which has 
been and which is no longer. In other words that we 
see the images of dead things. 
It may be interesting to compare, on this point, 
the data of our modem science with the conjectures 
found in the Secret Teachings. 
Under the heading "If we were on a star, what 
would we see of that which exists on the earth?"-
Alexander Ananoff, a distinguished member of the 
French Astronomical Society, wrote: 
"On account of the enormous distances 
which separate us from the stars and the length 
of time which the light of a star takes to reach 
us, the image of the star which we see, is the 
image of this· star which started out, several 
thousand years ago, from the point where the 
star was situated at the moment, and which is 
only now imposed on our retina. 
"Thus we may conclude that, in most cases, 
it is the phantom of a star which we see. It is 
even possible that we are looking at a star which 

36 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
does not exist any longer, in which case we may 
think that to study astronomy is to study the 
history of a past which has disappeared. 
"If we found ourselves on a star, and if, 
from there we could see the life on our planet, 
we should not see modern civilisation. 
We 
should for example see the events occurring in 
Egypt in the time of the Pharaohs." 
To prove that the image of an object which we 
perceive is not exacdy identical with that shown at 
the moment at which a conatct, visual or other, 
occurred,. the Teachings point to the theories which 
deny any character of stability and solidity to mate-
rial bodies. These theories have been briefly ex-
plained in the preceding pages. 
Although the interval of time that they consider 
elapses between the moment when we perceive the 
image of an object and that at which the image of 
it "left", may be infinitely short, the principle 
involved is the same as that which relates to the 
thousands of years taken by the image of the star to 
reach us. 
In both cases the conclusion is : "those things we 
see are· im~ges of the past". 
The student is also told to think over the follow-
ing problem : ought we to consider events as a series 

IN TIBETAN BUDDlnST SECTS 
37 
of pictures passing before a motionless spectator or 
ought we rather to believe that a traveller is marching 
along a picture gallery, contemplating, one after the 
other, the scenes represented by them. 
This same problem is set to the Chinese of the 
Sect of Meditation,8 and they seem to have found an 
answer to it in the following declaration which is 
famous in their Sect: 
"I am on the bridge, and 0 marvel! It is not 
the river which flows, it is the bridge which moves 
over the torrent." 
The bridge which moves over a motionless torrent 
may be understood as the traveller walking past a 
succession of images which are the events, but prefer-
ably, it is the mind in continual motion which imagines 
the river (the torrent of events) flowing under the 
bridge, and which imagines the bridge itself. 
Do these events already exist? Are they planted 
along the traveller's road like the motionless milestones 
which mark out our highways? 
In this case would it suffice for the traveller to 
journey fast enough for him to contemplate the scenes 
which were out of eyeshot of these individuals who 
had either remained stationary or who were moving 
slowly, that is to say, for him to see that which is the 
8 Ts'an in China, Zen in Japan, Dhyana in Sanskrit. 

38 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
future for these individuals who were behind him on 
the road? 
I have heard this traveller compared to a horse-
man. The faster his horse carries him, the sooner 
will he see such and such a river, a mountain and the 
people living in their neighbourhood which the slower 
foot-traveller will only see on the morrow or the day 
after. 
On the other hand, would it be possible to go 
backwards, to retrace one's steps and then to con-
template scenes from the past? 
On this point the Secret Teachings include 
various disconcerting statements such as that about 
the moving bridge and others like it. But, exactly 
like the Ts'an Masters, those who impart the Secret 
Teachings warn their pupils that these statements 
are in no way dogmatic. They aim at producing a 
mental shock, an upsetting of our habitual ideas 
which forces us to see an aspect of things which has 
never appeared to us and the possibility of the 
existence of the exact opposite of that which, up till 
then, we had considered as unassailable truth. 
According to the picturesque expression of an 
adept of the Ts'an Sect, one must come "to see the 
Pole star in the southern hemisphere". 
As to the possibility of having a vision of things 
to come, the point of view of the Secret Teachings is 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
39 
examined later.9 Let us say at once that, based on 
the theories of the impermanence of phenomena, 
their instantaneousness and the multiplicity of causes 
on which they depend, these teachings state that the 
future cannot be seen except under the aspect of 
probabilities, never under that of certainty. The 
example given is often that of a seed from which 
probably a sprout will come, without however, there 
being any certainty of this, for it may dry out or, 
perhaps from some other cause, it may be that the 
seed will not produce any sprout. 
The future like the past represents a relative 
conception which relates to an individual imagined 
as remaining motionless. It is relative to this indi-
vidual supposed to be fixed to a definite spot and at 
a definite moment, that time and space exist. If I 
·say "distant'' my estimate really means "distant from 
me" or far from an object chosen by me and sup-
posed, equally, to be fixed in a certain place. 
It is the same if I say "it is a long time", when 
the estimate of time is based on the fact of my 
existence, or on that of an object selected by me, and 
at a certain fixed moment. 
What. is meant by "it was a thousand ·years ago" 
or "yesterday"? What is meant by "near" or "at an 
9 In Chapter IV. 

40 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
incalculable distance"? These terms mean nothing 
in themselves; far or near can only mean far from 
or near to something, a thousand years or yesterday 
can only be a thousand years or yesterday in relation 
to something. 
Is there any reason for lingering to discuss 
problems of this kind ?-The Masters who inculcate 
the Secret Teachings do not think so. These discus-
sions, like other similar ones, may be useful as mental 
gymnastics, useful to make the mind supple, but they 
have no utility because the objects providing the 
subject on which our mental cleverness is exercised, 
have no real existence. 
What has to be understood is that theories and 
doctrines of all kinds are the fabrication of our mind. 
It is capable of fabricating some of them diametri-
cally opposed to each other and one will be no truer 
nor less true than the other because they are all 
based on false perceptions or, at best, relative ones 
which are only of value for an observer constituted 
as we are, placed where we are, and such perceptions 
have no absolute reality. 
The celebrated philosopher Nagarjuna 10 was a 
past-master in the arts of baffling our mental habits, 
of proving to us that the contrary to that which we 
10 The founder of the ¥adhyamika School of Philosophy. About 
th<' second century C.E. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
41 
consider true could be equally true, and that, very 
often, both were absurd. In this fashion, he showed 
clearly the futility of our opinions which are inherited 
and upheld without even having examined the proofs 
on which they are said to be based. 

CHAPTER III 
The Buddhist Scriptures state that the first 
sermon of the Buddha consisted mainly of an explana-
tion of the theory of the "Interdependent origina-
tions" (Pratitya samutpada)1 known also as the doctrine 
of the twelve causes.2 
All the schools of philosophy which have deve-
loped in Buddhism, whether of realistic or of idealis-
tic tendencies, have adhered to this. The philosopher 
Kamalasila3 described the pratitya samutpada as "the 
Jewel of the Buddhist Doctrine". 
The Chain of "Interdependent Originations" is 
as follows: 
1 In Tibetap. rten hbrel yen lag btchu gnis. 
Pronounced: 
Ten 
del yen lag chu gni. A good example of ~e difference which exist& 
between spelling and pronunciation in the Tibetan language. 
2 The twelve nidiina. 
3 Kamalasila. A celebrated Buddhist philosopher of the sixth 
century. He belonged to the Monastery of Vikramasila in the land 
of Magadha (Central India). During the reign of King To tsong 
.detsen {Khri srong ldehu bstan), he went to Tibet and there competed 
in public controversy against a Chinese monk, an adept in the 
doctrine of non-activity. Kamalasila defeated his opponent and the 
latter was expelled from Tibet. In reading the story of this debate, 
in the Tibetan texts, it seemed to me that the arguments of the 
Chinese were superior to those of Kamalasila, but each time I 
suggested this to the Doctors of Philosophy of the Universities of 
Lhasa, they became angry ... which did not alter my opinion. 

Ignorance 
Samskara (mental formation or 
pounds). 
Consciousness 
Name and form (Body and Mind) 
com-
Sphere of the Senses (senses and their 
objects ; the mind being counted as 
the sixth sense). 
Contact 
Sensation 
Desire-thirst 
Prehension 
Existence (becoming) ... 
Birth 
Old age-Death 
... 
In Sanskrit 
avidya 
samskara 
Vijnana 
Nama-rupa 
Sadayatana 
sparsha 
vedana 
trishna 
upadana 
bhava 
jati 
jara-marana 
In Tibetan 
Pronunciation 
marigpa 
du che 
namparshespa 
ming tang zug 
kye tched toug 
reg pa 
tsorwa 
sedpa 
lenpa 
sidpa 
kyewa 
ga-shi 
Spelling 
rna rig pa 
hdu byed 
rnarn par shes pa 
rning tang gzugs 
skierntched trug 
regpa 
tsorba 
sredpa 
lenpa 
srid pa 
skye ba 
rga-shi 
z 
~ 
~ 
I 
~ 
CIJ 
t;rj 
~ 
r:n 
~ 

44 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
The terms used in this enumeration lead them-
selves easily to the vicissitudes of individual lives, 
and this is usually the interpretation accepted by the 
Hinayanist Buddhists (the Theravadins of the 
Southern School). For them, the series of twelve 
causes concern individuals: men or animals, but 
more especially human beings. 
I remember having provoked astonishment and 
formal denials from Sinhalese and Burmese Bud-
dhist Monks by hinting that the "Chain of Inter-
dependent originations" could-at least in its princi-
pal·Iine-apply to the evolution of a plant as well as 
to that of man. 
In reality, although the well-read among them 
deny it, some of those who call themselves Bud-
dhists-· Mahayanists of the Northern countries as 
well as Theravadins of the South-have practically 
remained attached to the belief in a jiva! that is to 
say in an ego, an entity which transmigrates from 
life to life, forsaking its material body at the moment 
of death "as one throws away wornout clothing to 
put on new clothes".5 
• The equivalent of that which Westerners call the soul. Jiviitman 
is the principle which gives life to the body, and ~hat which, accord-
ing .to the Hindus, is reincarnated. The Jiviitman is, according to 
the Vedanta, the Paramatman in its individualised form. 
• Bhagavad Gita II, 22. 

IN TmETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
45 
This belief is, however, formally and continually 
denied by the Doctrine of the Buddha, of which 
Doctrine the negation of the ego is the fundamental 
article and marks it off from the orthodo~ Hindu 
doctrines. 
The Buddhist creed, as a matter of fact, consists 
of two short, incisive statements : 
"All aggregates are impermanent" 
"All things are devoid of self (atman: "ego" or 
"soul")". 
This means that if we discard the component 
elements which form that which we call a man, a 
horse, a tree, a mountain, a star, or no matter what, 
if we abstract the qualities which make them percep-
tible to us, we discover nothing which is distinct from 
these constituent elements, from .these qualities, we 
do not, in any way, find the man, the horse, the 
mountain in itself. These names apply only to a 
collection of elements. 
The classic example given in Buddhist Texts is 
that of the waggon which consists of a collection of 
wheels and their spokes, a pole and so forth, ... or 
the house which c;:onsists of a frame made of beams, 
of rafters, of a roof and so forth . . . but the waggon 
in itself, the house in itself, where are they? . . . 

46 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
In the same way, if from a man you take away 
the physical form, sensation, perception, mental acti-
vity and consciousness, what remains? 
Where will 
you find the man existing in himself outside the 
corporality and mentality? 
In the Secret Teachings great importance is 
attached to propounding this negation of the ego as a 
fundamental doctrine. Those who lag behind in the 
belief in an ego, it is said, do not understand the 
meaning of the Teaching, they are in no way Bud-
dhists, they cannot attain to liberation, to salvation, 
for without understanding (of a transcendent insight) 
of this absence of any ego, they will not perceive the 
means by which to go beyond being and non-being. 
None of those who profess Buddhism denies this 
creed and all repeat it in one language or another6 
but in most cases it is "without having understood the 
meaning of the Teaching". 
To the ego which is denied by the Buddhist Scrip-
tures, some have substituted a current of elements 
making their way as a group, as a bundle, very 
8 The original formula in Pali is: Sabbe sankharii aniccii; Sabbe 
c;ankharii dukkhii; Sabbe sankhara anatta, which means: 
All com-
pounded things are impermanent ; All compounded things are suffer-
ing; All things (everything in general) are devoid of an ego (of a 
"self" of their own). The Tibetans split into two the last part of 
the statement and say: "There is no ego in the individual; there 
is no ego in anything". 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
47 
much, apparently, like the quanta of a Western 
science. 
This current called santana7 in a way plays the 
part of individual life. The Thera Nyanatiloka8 stated 
to me one day that Nirvana consisted in the extinction 
of this current of activity when it ceased to be 
nourished by Karmic contributions due to the activity 
of the individual. According to his opinion, that which 
we consider to be an individual is a particular current, 
a special santana. Of course the learned Bhikkhu 
denied the existence of a j'iva or ego existing apart 
from the santana. The phenomena which made up 
the current were discontinuous events following on in 
a procession without being attached one to another 
like a parade of ants. 
As for me, this current which seems to flow in 
isolation while preserving its identity among the 
numerous other currents, seems to depend on an un-
tenable theory. The Tibetan Masters of the Oral 
Teachings will not admit it either. 
1 Santana is a Sanskrit word meaning a continuous flow, a line, 
a succession. 
I have discussed ~e theory of the santiinas in "Bud-
dhism : its Doctrines and Methods". 
8 Nyanatiloka is the name "in religion" of an erudite German 
orientalist who has lived for more than forty years in Ceylon as a 
Buddhist monk. He has published many books, translations of the 
Pali Scriptures, of the canon of Southern Buddhism and original 
works. 

48 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
Those who interpret the Chain of Originations as 
relating to the life of the individuals explain it in the 
two following ways or in some similar manner : 
I 
I-PAST LIFE 
Ignorance. 
Samskiira 
(mental 
acti-
vity). 
II-PRESENT Lll'E 
Knowledge. 
Material 
existence-
mentality. 
Organs of sense and the 
mind (sixth sense). 
Impression 
received 
by 
the senses. 
Sensation. 
Desire. 
Grasping attachment. 
Actions. 
m-FtmJRE LIFE 
Birth. 
Old age. 
II 
I-PAST Lll'E 
lllusion. 
Samskara =Karma. 
II-PRESENT LIFE 
First moment of a new life, concep-
tion. 
The five elements which constitiute 
existence. 
In the embryo before the formation 
of organs of sense. 
Formation of the organs. 
The organs and the consciousness 
begin to co-operate. 
Distinct sensations. 
A wakening of the sexual instinct: 
beginning of a new karma. 
Different pursuits in life. Life, that 
is to say, different kinds of con-
scious activity. 
m-FtmJRE LIFE 
Rebirth. 
New life-old age, Death. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
49 
On the contrary, in the works of Mahayanist 
writers we find interpretations of the Pratitya Samut-
pada which give a cosmic meaning to it, and at once 
a question occurs: "Why are the twelve links of the 
chain of Interdependent Originations understood 
differently in the Siitras which mention them and in 
the philosophic works which explain them?" 
Vasubandhu, 9 dealing with this question, replies : 
"Because in the Siitras, the Chain of Interdependent 
Originations is set forth in a popular way for the use 
of the mass of hearers and in a way suitable, for their 
degree of understanding, that is to say as relating to 
individual life, while the works which give explana-
tions of it are aimed at its deep meaning." 
Thus we see that Vasubandhu distinguishes be-
tween a wholly exoteric explanation and one which 
goes more deeply into the subject. 
The Tibetans have their habitual classification of 
the outer doctrine chi and the inner doctrine nang. 
They add to them the Sangs wai Damnags which they 
consider as a body of secret Doctrines. Secret in the 
sense that only especially perspicacious minds can 
attain them. 
The Masters who expound the Oral Teachings of 
this category do not fail to advise their pupils to make 
9 Tibetan name lgnen (spelt dbyig gnien). He lived in the fifth 
century. 

50· 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
themselves familiar with the "inner" interpretation 
(nang) of the Chain of Interdependent Originations. 
Its entire signification is stated in technical 
phraseology in the declaration: "This existing, that 
arises'' or again: 
"There is no real production, only 
interdependence". An explanatory formula is expressed 
as follows: 
"There is nothing which is produced by 
its own self (which is the cause of its own appearing). 
Nothing appears which is produced by another thing. 
Nothing came into existence by chance, but that 
which comes into being exists in dependence on 
causes." 
The Theory of Interdependent Originations is 
closely bound up with that of the instantaneousness 
and impermanency of all phenomena, which consist, 
as has been mentioned above, of discontinuous flashes 
of energy. The term "interdependent" indicates also 
that it is not a matter of a direct line. 
Care has to be taken not to believe that this which 
exists engenders that which arises ; it has not the time 
to· do so, so to speak, because the flashes of energy are 
of. too short duration to permit a real act of production. 
Moreover, nothing is produced by one single cause; 
the combination of several causes is always necessary 
to bring about a result. The seed without the co-opera-
tion of earth, dampness, light, etc. will never become 
a tree. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDEUST SECTS 
51 
The fact that the Theory of Interdependent Origi-
nations aims at bringing to light is simply that the 
temporary existence of certain phenomena is necessary 
in order to bring such and such another phenomenon 
into existence. 
None of the flashes of energy which constitute 
the world manifests itself without depending on the 
existence of other flashes of energy as ephemeral as 
itself, and which take the place of causes for it on 
favourable occasions. 
In the Mahayanist interpretation of the Chain of 
Interdependent Originations t;his is broadened. Birth, 
decrepitude, death, are no longer represented as the 
stages of life in the human individual who is born, 
develops. grows old and dies, to be reborn and recom-
mence a similar course, going through the alternations 
of agreeable or painful sensations. It is a question of 
an universal law of impermanence in virtue of which 
everything which arises, being the result of a com-
bination of various elements, must necessarily disinte-
grate when causes, other than those which produced 
the constitution of the whole, arise. 
The last words addressed by the dying Buddha to 
His disciples were : "All that which is produced,. com-
posed, is perishable." 
The law of impermanence governs the suns to the 
depth of fathomless space just as it governs the life of 

52 
THE SECRET ORAL ~EACHINGS 
the tiniest insect or the smallest grain of dust. It is not 
enough to understand that Birth, Decrepitude and 
Death happen according to such progression as our 
weak senses are capable of inregistering. The process 
is continual in all beings, in all things: in the sun or 
in the grain of dust, each atom which constitutes it 
individually lives the perpetual drama of birth, old 
age and death. 
The cycle of Interdependent Origins thus takes 
place in everything, everywhere, in the infinitely small 
as in the infinitely great. Its development does not 
take place progressively in time ; the twelve causes 
listed are always present, co-existent and interdepen"' 
dent, their activity is interconnected, and they only 
exist one with the other. 
In fact, the "Interdependent Origins" are in no 
way a description of incidents occurring to a being 
which would exist apart from them. Each being is 
the "chain of interdependent origins" as this latter is 
the universe and outside its activity neither being nor 
universe exists. 
The Master who passes on the Oral Teachings to 
a pupil does not omit to explain clearly to him the 
theories which I just have summed up briefly and 
many others which have been elaborated by the 
subtle Buddhist philosophers of India and China 
and by Tibetan authors such as Gampopa, Jam yang 

IN TIBETAN BUDDlliST SECTS 
53 
Shespa, various leaders of the Sect of the Sakyapas, 
and so on. The Master encourages his pupil to study 
the vast philosophic literature available to him in the 
libraries of the great Monasteries. He does not scorn 
learning. He is often himself a distinguished scholar, 
but the usefulness of learning, in his opinion, does 
not transcend that of a profitable mental gymnastic 
calculated to render flexible our intellectual faculties, 
calculated to bring about critical tendencies, suspicion 
and doubt, this first step towards investigation and 
knowledge. 
The student is then put in touch with the 
elements of the Sang wai Damngag and new inter-
pretations of the Chain of Interdependent Origins 
are suggested to him. 
From the statement of the first terms: Ignorance, 
Samskara, appeal is made to the attention of the 
pupil. 
What is it to be ignorant? It is not to know. 
However ignorance can never be total. One may not 
know a certain thing, but at the same time, one 
knows _other things. In the final analysis, he who is 
aware that he "does not know", possesses by that 
very fact, the knowledge of his existence, whatever 
may be its nature. 
Cannot we then envisage this incomprehensible 

54 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
ignorance which begins the series of the Twelve 
Causes as being erro;neous knowledge, false views? 
Instead of imagining Ignorance10 as a kind of 
vague, occult power hidden in the depths of space 
and eternity, original source of the sorrowful pilgri-
mage of beings through samsara, can we not recognize 
that this "not-knowing" is purely "our own" in the 
sense that it is an integral part of our being? 
What is it that produces ignorance, what is it 
that keeps it alive? It is our activity made up of 
physkal acts and mental acts. 
Although based on a philosophical conception of 
the world which is entirely different from that which 
inspired the author of the Bhagavad Gita, the Oral 
Tibetan Teachings agree with the Hindu poem in 
saymg: 
"Nothing can remain, not even for a single 
moment, without acting. Everything is compelled 
to do so by the very nature of the elements of 
which it is composed (by the natural functions of 
its being)." 11 
What are the agents which urge us to action?-
They are the senses which produce perceptions and 
10 Tibetan: ma rig pa =nescience. 
Sanskrit: avidya which has 
the same meaning. 
11 Bhagavad G'ita ill, 5. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
55. 
sensations, and we have seen in the preceding chapter 
that our senses give us incorrect information. They 
lead us into error, and if we are deceived by them we 
are cultivating ignorance. 
For lack of access to 
reality not only do we "not know" but we erect on 
our wrong information various wrong views, and the 
structure of a fantastic world. 
These mental constructions, based on the irre-
pressible activity of our mind and on ignorance, are 
the samskara or "compounds" ; the duched (hdu 
byed), that is to say, the "collections", the "assem~ 
blages", as the Tibetans name them. 
These "collections" are kept up by the faith 
which we have in their reality and by the use we 
make of them. It is thus that a kind of illusory 
reality is given to the world which we build up in 
holding it to be exterior to ourselves, whereas it 
emanates from us and dwells in. us in dependence 
on the illusion of which we are the victims. 
It is in our own mind that the "Chain of Inter-
dependent Originations" evolves, turning back on 
itself with these three factors : ignorance-desire--
act, supporting one another. 
Instead of considering the pratitya samutpada 
as a law which rules us (an exoteric opinion-cht) or 
holding that we are ourselves this chain of origins 
"flowing like a stream" (esoteric Teaching-nang) we 

56 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
can make a further advance with the Secret Teachings 
only if we understand that if we are the chain, we are 
at the same time its creator. 
"I know you 0 builder of the house, 
From now on you shall build no more."12 
The pupil is left to meditate on this point and 
the Master goes on to examine anothel' theory, but a 
long time may elapse in the interval. 
u Dhammapada, 154. 

CHAPTER IV 
Having rapidly enquired into what is told us of 
the "Interdependent Originations" we may return to 
the examination of the theories concerning "memories" 
which was begun in Chapter II. 
In later Buddhism, that 'is to say between the Vth 
and the Vlth centuries, an important place has been 
given to the theories concerning the alaya vijnana. 
These theories were not exactly invented at this period 
for their seeds already existed previously, but their 
bringing into prominence and their development were 
the work of the Doctors of the Mahayana. 
Alaya is a Sanskrit word which means dwelling, 
receptacle, store. We meet it in the well-known name 
of the high mountain chain which separates India 
from Tibet: Himalaya, that is to say, dwelling or 
receptacle of the snows. Alaya vijnana is then a 
receptacle of the consciousness. 
The alaya vijnana, receptacle of consciousness, is 
not mentioned in Tibet in the popular teachings of an 
elementary kind. We find it in the kind called nang, 
"inner" teachings, and in the sangs wai damnags, 
teachings which are oral and secret. 
What is told us about it? 

58 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACF.ITNGS 
Every action, either physical or mental, every 
movement occurring either on the plane of gross matter 
or on the plane of the mind, causes an emission of 
energy.1 To use the established expression, it produces 
a "seed" .2 
This seed, in the same way as all material seeds, 
tends-given favourable circumstances-. to produce a 
being3 of the same species as that of the parent who 
has transmitted the seed. The seed of an oak tends 
to produce an oak, the seed of an animal, dog or bird, 
tends to produce a dog or a bird. 
Likewise, the innumerable energy-seeds launched 
into the universe by Desire, Aversion, Love, Hatred, 
and the actions ccmsed by these feelings, by attach-
ment to individual existence with the material activity 
" 
which it excites in order to preserve that individual 
existence to perpetuate it, to increase its power and 
eri.large its sphere of action, all these seeds tend to 
reproduce the counterparts of their parents either 
psychic or material. 
In order that the seed should be sown, it is in no 
way necessary that the feelings we experience should 
1 In Tibetan choug or taal (rtsal) in Sanskrit: shakti. 
2 In Tibetan sa bon, in Sanskrit: bija. 
3 By "being" one should not understand only an animated being, 
but in general, something which exists, which is, whatever may be 
the material or subtle nature of this ''something". 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
59 
be materialized in action. The aspirations which we 
entertain without realizing them, those also which 
we restrain, our thoughts of whatever kind they may 
be, unceasingly give out seeds. Furthermore, the 
hidden activity, always at work in spite of ourselves 
in the subconscious part of our being, is one of the 
most powerful sources from which are thrown out 
these seeds. 
It is necessary to go further, say the Secret 
Teachings, it is necessary to understand, to grasp, to 
see that there is not a blade of grass, not a grain of 
sand4 which is not a "sower" of seed by the activity 
of its physical life and by that of a psychic life, 
peculiar to its species, which we must in no way 
imagine as similar to our own. 
There cannot happen the least movement-in 
this world which is movement-without this move-
ment starting other movements, other manifestations 
of energy tending to repetitions, in dependence on 
"memories" ( vasana) or, as the Tibetans call them, on 
propensities (pag chang). Each of our physical or 
mental movements is the fruit of causes coming from 
~The atoms (dul ten, spel: rdul phran) compared to grains of 
sand or dust of which the Masters of the Secret Teachings say that 
each of them is a world which comprises myriads of beings and 
where a drama of life and deaths, similar to that of which we are 
aware in our world, takes place. 

60 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIDNGS 
the whole universe and has its repercussions in the 
whole universe. Thus opens up the working, without 
beginning, or end, of the activity which is the 
Universe. 
According to one of the theories concerning the 
energy-seeds thrown out in the Universe, these are 
stored up in a receptacle (alaya) where they remain 
in the state- of latent energies which, in order to 
manifest themselves, only await the appearance of 
suitable conditions, just as the seed stored up in a 
barn will not develop until it is put in contact with 
damp earth. 
Nevertheless, 
suitable 
conditions 
continually 
appear ; thus while some seeds flow steadily into the 
receptacle, other seeds equally steadily flow out in the 
form of habits, of propensities, of "memories" .(vasana) 
either of a physical or of a psychic kind which 
encourages the repetition of material actions or mental 
activities which have occurred previously. 
What are the "conditions" which allow the ger-
mination of the seeds? They are themselves the pro-
duct of seeds, for nothing exists outside the round of 
actions and their fruit, of the enchainment of causes 
and the effects, the cause being the effect of the 
preceding cause and the effects becoming the cause of 
another effect. 
According to the expression of certain Doctors of 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
61 
the Mahayana, the alaya is "an uninterrupted nver 
with a continuous current". 
This comparison of the "river _which flows" takes 
us far from the idea of an abode or receptacle of the 
seeds, which calls up rather the idea of immobility, of 
stagnatiOn. 
Others have, however, retained in a greater or 
lesser degree, in different forms and under different 
names the idea of immobility. A world which is 
nothing but movement makes them dizzy, they feel 
themselves out of their depth and, not finding the solid 
support to which they long to attach themselves, they 
imagine it, ending by transforming the alaya into the 
womb (garbha) containing beings, an equivalent of 
the Brahman of the Vedanta philosophy. 
The Oral Secret Teachings assume a very different 
position in that they are based on the fundamental 
impermanence of all phenomena and on the fact that 
these_ are compounded of various aggregates. The 
seeds, products of mental activity which may or may 
not be associated with a material activity, and which 
include different elements, cannot be considered 
permanent. Like all formations they consist of suc-
cessive, fugitive instants. Hence what sort of recep-
tacle or of abode can one imagine which would 
contain in a waiting state, that is to say, in a state of 

62 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEITNGS 
repose, that which is elusive, having no appreciable 
duration? 
In truth, there exists only the perpetual flow, 
both continuous (it never stops) and discontinuous (it 
consists of distinct moments), of flashes of force; 
causes and effects which engender each other in such 
a way that the parent-cause can never know its off-
spring-effect for it disappears while the latter emerges, 
or rather, it is its disappearance itself which consti-
tutes its effect : the new phenomenon. 
Lending some support to the theory of the alaya 
receptacle, V asubandhu5 stated : The act ends imme-
diately after being born, thus one cannot admit that 
it can itself produce the fruit, but it transmits to the 
root of consciousness (mula vijnana) virtualities, ener-
gies or seeds which will produce its fruit. These 
virtualities are called vasana (memory). 
It is this "root of consciousness" which receives 
the impressions comparable to the receptacle out of 
which some have almost made a mystic personality. 
We shall see how it is regarded in the Oral Teachings. 
However, let us consider a declaration of Hiuen 
Tsang6 raffirming the idea of Vasubandhu that the 
6 Vasubandhu, an eminent Buddhist philosopher, who lived 
between the 5th and 6th century C.E. Some say during the 4th 
century. 
'Hiuen Tsang, (633),, a Chinese Buddhist Monk, philosopher and 
great traveller. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDillST SECTS 
63 
fruit is not produced by the act, but is engendered by 
the intervention of the impression made by the act 
in the "root of consciousness". 
"The fruit is not of the character of the act", 
says Hiuen Tsang, "for it is not directly engendered 
by the act". 
The Secret Teachings in no way contradict this 
view. The student has already been warned that the 
effect is never the product of a single cause, but 
always of several causes of unequal potency. In so 
far as the seeds are concerned, they are, from their 
beginning, compounds, including different elements. 
Moreover, the environment into which they are 
thrown is, itself, a mixture of dissimilar elements, so 
that the seed, before producing an effect, will of 
necessity undergo many contacts with other seeds, 
and thus, the "impressions" as Vasubandhu named 
them, being superimposed in different ways, it will be 
rare that one will take the exact form of another. 
Thus, as a result of these contacts, of these super~ 
impositions, seeds and impressions will become more 
or less different from their original nature. 
It follows that the vasanas : memories, seeds, 
tendencies, habits, and so on never recreate the tex-
ture of the past-physical or psychic activities-after 
an absolutely identical pattern. The pattern which 
will be the future being influenced by the "memories" 

64. 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEINGS 
will show resemblances, more or less marked, to the 
pattern of the past, but the copy will never be exactly 
the same. 
This excludes the possibility of any definite pro-
phecy. Some people have thought that if one could 
know all the causes existing at the present moment~ 
one could foresee their effect and thus behold the 
picture of the future. 
This idea is rejected in the 
Oral Teachings. 
Based on the law of universal impermanence. 
while at the same time upholding the determinist 
doctrine of the concatenation of causes and effects~ 
these caution the student against the idea that the 
absolute determinism is within his reach ; the sphere 
of probabilities is alone accessible to him. 
Even supposing that they are all known to him 
at a given moment and that he could calculate, at 
that moment, the effects which are naturally produced 
by these causes, at the moment which follows that 
one, these causes will have already undergone modi-
fications .as a result of their contact with other causes 
and forces. 
Not only will they never be identical 
with what they were before, but, in reality, other 
causes of a different kind will have followed them. 
It follows from this that the effects which mav be 
J 
expected from these last will differ from those which 
one might have foreseen in the preceding moment. 

ALEXANDRA DAVID NEEL 
Wearing her monastic robes in Tibet 


IN TffiETAN BUDDffiST SECTS 
65 
At the same time, a similar activity takes place 
in the senses and in the "mind" of the observer which. 
they too, are renewed from moment to moment.7 
Which moment, among this double current of 
fugitive phenomena, could have shown a stable 
picture of causes suitable to serve as a basis for the 
exact determination of the elements which make up 
the face of the future? 
The Tibetans translate alaya vijnana by kun ji 
namparshespa. Is this translation exact?-The dis-
cussion of such a question is outside the plan of the 
present book, but what interests us is the meaning 
which the Tibetans give to this term in their Secret 
Teachings. 
The idea of a "receptacle" cannot be applied to 
Kun ji. ]i (spelt gzi) means base, foundation. Family 
property is called ji. The ji of an individual is the 
dwelling-place which, before becoming his, has been 
that of the family to which he belongs. In the 
figurative sense, ji can be the basis on which a 
doctrine is founded. ]i is applied also to the founda-
·tion of a building, to no matter what on which 
something is based. 
1 See Chapter II. 

66 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
Kun means simply "all". 
As to namparshespa, it consists of two words : 
nampar which means "perfectly", and shespa which 
means "to know"-"to be acquainted with". 
In short, kunji namparshespa, means "acquain-
tance-knowledge basis of everything". 
At this point some explanation is necessary : 
First of all we should understand that the know-
.,< 
ledge, the consciousness in question, is not at all the 
superior knowledge called Shesrab.8 
The knowledge which is put before us as being 
the basis. of everything is that which· distinguishes, 
which separates, allots names, forms, qualities : in 
short it is that which carries out the arrangements of 
the world. The world is its work. 
That knowledge is a deception ; it depends on 
our senses, each of them providing its contribution to 
the common fund. 
Thus one distinguishes : 
Knowledge acquired by the eye . . . form 
and colour. 
Knowledge acquired by the ear . . . sounds. 
8 Shes=knowledge; rab=superior. 
A similar difference exists 
between the Sanskrit words vijniina and prajna, the first being a 
discriminatory knowledge applied to things of the world, while the 
second is transcendent wisdom. 

IN TIBET AN BUDDIDST SECTS 
67 
Knowledge acquired by the tongue 
. tastes. 
Knowledge by the nose . . . odours. 
Knowledge acquired by the whole epidermis, 
that results from the sensations produced by 
touch in contacts. 
And as the sixth, and by no means the least 
important, the knowledge acquired by the mind, 
that is to say by mental contacts: ideas which 
one has heard expressed, and so on. 
Two other kinds of knowledge are also men-
tioned; their meaning is widely different from 
Sanskrit words ·listed in the list of the vijnanas drawn 
up by the savants of Indian Buddhism. One of them 
is shown as the sum of the six forms of knowledge 
listed above, it is the knowledge or understanding 
which is possessed by the darkened mind (nion 
mongpa tchen gy yid kyi namparshespa).9 In fact, it 
is false knowledge: it is the error which dominates 
that mind which is incorrectly informed by the senses 
which pass on to it their impressions. These impres-
sions are always falsified by their inability to grasp 
reality. 
The understanding knowledge of the "darkened 
mind" is the ally of the "understanding knowledge 
'Spelling: nyong mongs pas tchan. gyi kyi rnam par shespa. 
translating the Sanskrit adana vijnana. 

68 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
which grasps" (len pai namparshespa). The false 
notions which are held by the darkened shadowed 
mind are grasped, assembled and become motives 
inciting the action. A mental activity based on wrong 
knowledge builds up, on its data, an image of the 
world which has no relation to reality. 
It is this world which we watch like a play which 
unfolds outside of ourselves while, in fact, there is 
nothing there but a canvas bearing many coloured 
patterns, which we have woven and printed in our-
selves according to the indications of our erroneous 
knowledge. 
Thus, the Kun ji namparshespa made up of 
the contributions of all the namparshespa is in no 
way a mythical receptacle, but our own consciousness, 
the basis of the phenomenal world, the whole of our 
. 
urn verse. 
The "river" with the current both continuous 
and discontinuous made up of "seeds" is nothing 
else than our mind in which the namparshespa, under-
standing-knowledge, ideas, and so on which they 
arouse appear and disappear in series of separate 
moments, but arising constantly; 
At this point the Master who is passing on to a 
pupil the Secret Teachings, puts a question to him: 
What do you mean by "your mind" when you speak 
of it, when you think of it? 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
69 
To express that which we call 
"mind~' the 
Tibetans have available three words which are not 
fully- interchangeable. They are: sems, Yid and lo 
(blo). 
Lo includes all the moods of the mind, agitated 
or calm, attentive, searching, lisdess, indifferent, 
impressionable or insensitive to exterior impressions, 
inclined towards discrimination, towards classification 
or unaware of differences, the imaginative mind, or 
the mind solely ocr.upied by the facts within reach, 
the understanding or the dull mind, the agitated 
passionate or unimpressionable mind, the mind which 
works over ideas, collects them, reasons, the humbled, 
depressed or alert mind, etc., all the forms in which 
the mind shows itself. 
Yid means more especially the mind considered 
as pure intellect. 
Sems has usually a wide application as the 
"thinking principle" which distinguishes animated 
beings from things considered to be ine:tt. Sems, as 
it is understood exoterically, has a meaning which 
comes close to Namshes i.e., the "consciousness" 
which transmigrates (the jiva of the Indians). Sems 
tchen (having sense or mind) is an expression which, 
in the literary language, means all animated beings, 
including man, but in popular speech only animals 

70 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEUNGS 
are thus called and to employ it of a man would be 
insulting. 
The student of the Secret Teachings is, in most 
cases, taught the various meanings of the three words 
indicating the three aspects of the mind, so he under-
stands the questions put to him when the Master, 
using the generic term sems asks him : What do you 
mean by "your mind" when you speak of it, when 
you think of it? 
In order to enable the pupil to perceive the 
diversity and the momentary nature of that which 
we call "mind" the Master insists on the different 
moods of it, some of which have been listed above. 
Just as the idea of an "ego" existing apart from the 
elements which constitute it, has been disproved, so 
that of a mind existing apart from these moods, these 
forms of activity which manifest it, is equally denied. 
Is it not this "mind" to which moods and forms 
of activity are attributed, while -not identifying it 
with them, that most men take for their real and 
lasting "ego"?-
y et according to the statements which the Bud-
dhist Scriptures attribute to the Buddha: 
"It would be better to consider the body as 
an "ego" than to consider the mind as such, for 
the body seems to last for a year, two years or 
a hundred years, but that which is called mind, 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
71 
thought or knowledge, appears and disappears in 
a perpetual state of change. 
Just as a monkey gambollihg in the forest 
grasps a branch, then lets it go to seize another, 
so that which is called mind, thought or know-
ledge, appears and disappears in a perpetual 
change, day and night." 10 
The student studying the Secret Teachings has 
not only alreq.dy familiarized himself with these 
theories, but he has tested their exactitude. 
During his meditations, while watching his mind 
with close attention, he has attained Lhag Thong 
and "seeing more" than most men, he has contem-
plated the continual arising and disappearance of 
ideas, of volitions, of memories, and so on, which pass 
like a procession of short-lived bubbles floating down 
a river. He has realised for himself that "mind" is 
only a word indicating a series of mental phenomena. 
Despite everything, the deeply-rooted habit of 
thinking on the basis of an ''ego" may tend to cause 
him to narrow the extent of the mind. Thus, while 
holding it to be a current of transitory moments he 
may, at the same time, accept either consciously or 
unconsciously, the theory of the santanas, isolated 
10 Samyutta Nikliya. 

72 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
currents of consciousness and of mental operations, 
following individually their courses. 
Now according to the Secret Teachings, what 
must be understood, seen, felt, is that there does not 
exist any current which is my mind, and therefore it 
follows that there is not a rplurality of currents which 
are the minds of other individuals, but only a single 
current which is Kunji namparshespa, the sum of all 
mental activity at work without any cognizable 
beginning. It is in this totality that what we call our 
mind is immersed, our mind which we try so hard 
to separate and define. Furthermore, this effort is 
useless. Whether we are aware of it or not, the 
thoughts, the desires, the needs which we feel for life, 
our thirst for it-nothing of all this is completely ours, 
for all of it is collective, it is the flowing river of 
incalculable moments of consciousness having its 
source in the impenetrable depths of eternity. 
Here is found again, in another form, the con-
ception of the Alaya vijnana, a mixture of "seeds". 
themselves the fruit of acts, determining new acts by 
the effect of "memories" as the Indians say, or, as 
expressed by the Tibetans, of "tendencies". 
Nevertheless it is not enough to listen to the 
teaching of such things or to read an explanation of 
them in philosophic works. They must be seen, 
seen by oneself as a result of perspicacious insight, 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
73 
the penetrating vision lhag thong which causes one 
to see more than we have seen up to the present. 
Lhag thong, the transcendent insight which sees 
beyond appearances and penetrates below the surface 
is able, like any other faculty, to be developed and 
cultivated. It is for us to do this, and so to prepare 
ourselves for the most fascinating of explorations. 

CHAPTER V 
The most striking of the Tibetan Buddhist 
doctrines that which is specially noteworthy in the 
Secret Teachings concern the ((going beyond". This 
doctrine is based on the Prajfia Paramita to which 
the great work of Nagarjuna is consecrated. 
The Tibetans, like the Chinese, have given to 
the term Prajfia Paramita a very different meaning 
from that which is attributed to it by the Indian 
authors, and which was adopted from them by most 
Western Orientalists. 
According to the latter, Prajfia Paramita means 
excellent wisdom, the best, the highest wisdom 
whereas, for the Chinese, it is question of a wisdom 
which is "gone beyond", according to the Prajfia 
Paramita mantram which is recited in all countries 
professing Mahayana Buddhism: 
"0 Wisdom which has gone beyond, gone 
beyond the beyond, to Thee homage" .1 
However, while this mantram shows us a wisdom 
"which has gone beyond"-gone to "the other shore" 
as Chinese say-Tibetans translate Prajfia Paramita 
1 gate, 
gate, 
paramgate, 
parasamgate 
Bodhi, 
Swahal 
(Pro-
nounced as with a French e and not as gate (a door) in English. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
75 
by: "sherab kyi pharol tu chinpa"2 that is to say; 
"going beyond wisdom". 
The genitive particle kyi leaves no doubt as to 
the meaning intended by the translator. To express 
that Wisdom accomplishes the act of going, he 
ought to have written kyis. But, more than any 
grammatical consideration, the fact that a whole 
doctrine is based on the precept of "going beyond'~ 
shows us the spirit in which the Tibetans understand 
the Prajiia Paramita. 
It has seemed to me necessary to give my readers. 
these explanations, because those among them who 
are familiar with Buddhist literature may be surprised 
at the manner in which the "excellent virtues" which 
they have met in the course of their reading are 
considered here. 
The number of these was originally six; laterr 
four other "virtues" were added to the list, but these 
latter only play a secondary part.3 
In this list, each "virtue" is treated in the same 
way as the wisdom-knowledge (shesrab), that is to say 
that its name is followed by the words "to go beyond". 
So, while in the works of those authors who take the 
translation of paramitli as "excellent" we find: 
excellent charity, excellent morality, etc .... the 
2 Tibetan spelling: pharol tu phyinpa. 
3 See following table. 

76 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEUNGS 
Tibetans tell us : "to go beyond charity, to go beyond 
wisdom-knowledge". 
The "Excellent Virtues" or, for the Tibetans, those beyond which 
one must go are: 
Gift 
Morality 
Patience 
Energy, effort 
.. , 
San-skrit 
Dana 
•.• 
Si1a 
... Khanti 
Vuya 
Meditation, concentration of 
mind 
Dhyiina 
Transcendent Wisdom 
Prajiia 
Tibetan 
djinpa (sbynpa) 
tsul tim (tsul grims) 
seupa (bsod pa) 
tsundus (brtson hgrus) 
samten (bsam gtan) 
shesrab (shes rab) 
With the addition of the four "Virtues" added later: 
Method, skilfulness of means Upaya 
thabs 
Aspirations, good wishes' 
'Strength, vigour 
Knowledge, learning 
Pranidhana 
Baladhana 
Jnana 
meunlam (smonlam) 
tob (stobs) 
yeshes 
Is it a good thing to possess these virtues and to 
practise them? Obviously yes, but none of them 
taken by itself nor all of them together are able to 
produce liberation (tharpa). The righteous man, the 
saint, . as much as the wicked man and the criminal 
remain prisoners in the round (samsara)5 of birth and 
4 Very wrongly translated as "prayer" by certain Western authors. 
In the same sense that it is understood in the West, "prayer" has 
no place in Buddhism. 
6 The Sanskrit word samsiira is, in Tibetan, korwa (skorwa) ; its 
meaning, the "round", being identical. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
77 
death, of assemblages and dissolutions, which makes 
up the illusory world of phenomena although, in the 
round, the fate of the first·named may differ from 
that of the second. 
According to the popular religious beliefs, the 
practice of these virtues leads to happy rebirths in 
the world of men or in the worlds of the Gods, while 
evil acts lead to unhappy rebirths in those spheres 
where suffering is reigning. The masses of Tibetans 
hardly look beyond these two kinds of future, never~ 
theless the idea that salvation, deliverance from. 
samsiira, the state of illumination of a Buddha are 
very different things from the practice of virtue and 
the carrying out of religious rites, is not wholly 
foreign to them. That is a question, the good people 
of the Land of the Snows think, quite beyond their 
intelligence, and they do not stop to examine it. 
At a higher degree, that of the teaching called 
nang (esoteric), it is explained that to be "excellent'"p 
the virtues and their practice must have ·become 
integrated in our character. They must be uncon· 
scions, have developed into reflex actions. Thus the 
act of helping a suffering being ought to occur as· 
spontaneously, as instinctively as the act of pulling 
back one hand quickly if it touches anything red-hot. 
If our charity, our patience, our effort, etc. in 
fact, no matter which of the excellent virtues, only 

78 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACF.UNGS 
manifest itself after a mental process has shown us 
the usefulness of it, or the necessity of forcing our-
selves to it through obedience to certain moral princi-
ples which we have been taught to respect, then the 
actions which we accomplish may be beneficial for 
those who are their object. We, however, shall only 
benefit from them as an educational exercise which 
is likely to turn us into robots, moved by agencies 
exterior to ourselves. The deeper part of our being 
would not have been modified, and such transforma-
tion is the only thing that counts. 
Buddhist salvation, Liberation, consists in a 
fundamental change in our perceptions, in our ideas, 
in our feelings ; it is an awakening resulting from 
transcendent and profound insight (lhags thong) 
which causes us to "see more" and to discover, beyond 
the world of virtues and vices, of Good and Evil,. a 
sphere where these pairs of opposites do not exist. It 
is a question, after having practised the "excellent 
virtues", of going beyond them because the transcen-
dent insight has shown them to be puerile, senseless, 
unfounded and ineffective. 
The doctrine of "Going Beyond" in conjunction 
with those of the "Direct Path" and of "Sudden 
Liberation" form the veritable core of the teachings 
Df the Higher Degree which are called secret teach-
ings, and those who have been initiated into them or 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
79 
who have understood their exactitude are advised 
not to spread them lightly as they are dangerous for 
the mass of men whose intelligence is too limited to 
grasp their real meanings. 
Ought we to consider the collection of doctrines 
and theories which together make up the secret 
teaching as being essentially and uniquely Tibetan? 
-That would be somewhat risky. Ideas hardly ever 
spring up from a single centre. In particular periods 
we see similar ideas arise among men separated by 
great distances and without there having been any 
material contact between them. However, as far as 
Tibet is concerned, we cannot neglect the possibility 
of direct or indirect relations between the Tibetan 
thinkers and living philosophers (or those who had 
lived) on their frontiers : Chinese or Indian. 
The famous Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna 
has eloquently proclaimed the Middle Way (Madhya-
mika) which leans neither towards affirmation nor 
towards negation because these only exist relatively 
to each other, and so, in consequence, neither one 
nor the other has any independent reality of its own. 
One has to go beyond the idea of "yes" and "no", of 
"being" as that of "non-being", says Nagarjuna. 
"W" d 
" 
" 
b 
d" 
11 
. 
1s om must g0 
eyon 
a concept10ns, or, as 
it is translated by the Tibetans, we must go beyond 

80 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHITNGS 
Wisdom (i.e., Wisdom as we conceive it) which comes. 
in the end, to the same thing. 
Long before Nagarjuna the Buddha had already 
laid down the principles of a similar spiritual and 
intellectual discipline. 
Speaking to one of his disci-
ples, he said to this effect : 
"Men are accustomed to state "is" or "is not" 
but for him who perceives wisely and according 
to the truth how all things are brought about in 
the world, for such an one there is no "is not". 
And for him who perceives wisely and in truth 
how the things m the world perish, for him 
there is no "is" .6 
"Everything is, is one of the extremes, 
nothing is, is the other. I teach, between the 
two, the truth of the Interdependent Origina-
tions."7 
That is to say that everything which exists 
depends, for its existence, on the existence of other 
things which produce it or which support it, and that 
the existence of that which exists ceases when the 
causes or the conditions which support it themselves 
cease. Thus, all existence is relative. One cannot 
•or more exactly, in Tibetan, there is no "existence" (yod) 
there is no "non existence" (med)-Asti and nasti in Sanskrit-both 
are denied. 
7 Samyutta Nikaya. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
81 
say that it is, because it is not autogenous, nor, on the 
other hand, can one consider it as pure nothingness. 
"To go beyond" is, in fact, to cease to cling to 
the opinions, the connections which belong to the 
world of illusion, and to understand that they have 
only a relative value depending on things which 
themselves have only a relative existence but which 
we should be wrong to consider as absolutely non-
existent. 
The Masters who, in Tibet, claim to be the 
possessors of the Secret Teachings8 and who are recog-
nised as such, never pretend that the doctrines they 
set forth to small groups of selected disciples, have 
been wholly worked out in Tibet itself. On the con-
trary, they state that these doctrines and the disci-
plines attached thereto date back to the distant past, 
well before the oldest period mentioned in Tibetan 
hi!story. If they sometimes attribute the origin of 
the transmission of the Secret Teachings to mythical 
personages such as Dordji Tchang, they admit with-
out difficulty that this is a picturesque way of ex-
pressing the fact that the beginnings of these teachings 
are unattainable by our researches, and that the spirit 
of these teachings has always, either in one world or 
m another, inspired an elite of thinkers who were 
• Sang wai damnag (gsang bai gdam snag). 

82 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
particularly perspicacious, and who "saw beyond" 
(lhags thong) that which appeared to the majority of 
beings. 
As far as we are concerned, leaving aside all 
groundless assumptions we must recognize that the 
inner history of the religious and philosophic evolu-
tion of the Tibetans is not well known to us, in fact 
we may say that it is unknown. The documents which 
we possess are of relatively recent date, and hardly tell 
us anything beside the founding and propagation of 
Buddhism in the country by missionaries belonging to 
different Mahayanist or Tantric schools. Yet other 
influences may have been at work in Tibet, either 
before the coming of Buddhism, or at the period during 
which took place the building-up of this composite 
body of philosophic and mystical theories and of 
popular religion which people of the West call 
Lamaism. 
The Bons9 overcome by the Lamaist clergy and 
who now copy the latter in many ways as fat as the 
white Bons are concerned, or who are only, with 
rare e:cceptions, simple sorcerers as far as the black 
Bons are in question, have probably included in the 
past some enlightened adepts of Taoist teachings. We 
still occasionally meet in Tibet some examples of 
• Pronounced Peune. More correctly, the Bon pos, followers of 
the Bon religion who are likened by the Chinese to the Taoists. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
83 
these thinkers among the anchorites, although these 
would not claim to be Taoists. 
Examining the theories belonging to the Secret 
Teachings the question arises whether certain among 
them, such as that of non-action coupled in these 
teachings with the doctrines of "going beyond", of 
the direct path and of sudden illumination, have not 
entered as a result of contact with Chinese Taoists. 
This is evidently only a guess and we ought not to 
.concentrate our attention only on these latter. 
Tibetan Masters of mysticism often mention 
teachings of nothern origin which have been mys-
teriously transmitted. These enigmatic sayings seem, 
to be based rather on legend than on historical fact. 
Moreover we ought not to take the word "northern" 
in the geographical sense. In Tibet, as in India, 
"'north" has mystical meaning. 
On the other hand, some Indians including the 
learned Mr. Tilak believe in the nordic origin of 
the .Aryas10 whose cradle was, according to them, 
situated in the arctic regions. This would explain, 
by the persistent effect of atavistic memories, the 
10 It should be remembered iirya means honourable, vener-
able, noble. The ancestors of the white race now called the Aryan 
Race called themselves "nobles" in scorn to the people of other races,. 
just 1a& the Germans called themselves Noble race (Heren volk). 

84 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
fascination which is exercised by the north on some 
of their mystics. 
This explanation cannot apply to Tibet where 
this same fascination is also found and even to a 
higher degree. 
In the Tibetan legends numerous 
allusions are made to a northern country where the 
transcendental doctrines originated. 
Certain nald-
jorpas11 pretend to go there occasionally. Enlightened 
Tibetans believe that this is a matter of phychic 
experiences, occurring in the course of special medi-
tations, and not of actual voyages. 
On the historical or semi-historical level, the 
Tantric doctrines are, in the opinion of certain learned 
men, considered to have been imported into Bengal 
by travelling merchants coming from tqe North. In 
such a case what North can be in question?-From 
Tibet or from ~ashmir, lying to the north of India, 
or from regions farther away and stretching beyond 
Tibet ?-We lack valid and precise information on 
this point. Moreover, it belongs to the domain of 
historical research and, as such, is outside the scope 
of t'l?.e present book, so I cannot discuss it at greater 
length. 
Let us return then to the doctrines propounded 
11 Literally "he who possesses peace, serenity". This is the narnt 
of Tibetan Yogins. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
85 
to students admitted to initiation in the Secret 
Teachings. 
Is the doctrine of "going beyond", which has been 
roughly sketched above, definitive? The Masters of 
the Secret Teachings say that it leads a long way, but 
if you ask them categorically: "Does it lead to the 
Goal?" they will only smile and remain silent. 
The word Goal, as also the idea of a Goal, i.e., a 
final, absolute objective, is not used in the Secret 
Teachings. Both are abandoned in going beyond the 
limit of the "Inner" teachings (nang). 
The Masters of the Secret Teachings will willingly 
remind their pupils of the ancient Buddhist parable 
of the raft. 
The traveller who finds his road blocked by a 
river will use a raft to reach the opposite shore, but, 
this shore once reached, he will not carry the raft on 
his shoulders while continuing his journey. He will 
abandon it as something which has become useless. 
This raft represents the different kinds of methods, 
intellectual training or moral discipline, which are 
available as means to bring the seeker of liberation to 
the "other shore". On this shore, both have lost their 
value ; they bear no relation to the conditions existing 
on the "other shore" and, like the raft in the parable, 
they are only a useless burden. 

86 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
In any case, this "other shore" is itself only a 
figurative expression, it is nowhere and it is everywhere. 
The "other shore" is that which is "beyond" all 
our conceptions and this is why it is equivalent to 
shesrab pharol to chinpa, the going beyond everything 
of the highest kind: transcendent wisdom because it 
also is a conception of our mind and nothing more 
than a raft facilitating the crossing ; the best, the 
surest of rafts, but which the transcendent insight (lhag 
thong) shows as what it is in reality, that is to say, an 
instrument. 
Moreover, does the reaching of the other ~bank 
mean the attainment of a definite goal ?-This is what 
the majority of Buddhists believe. However the point 
of view in the Secret Teachings is different. 
The man who ,has crossed the river will, perhaps, 
rest a while on the shore which he has reached, but 
beyond that point extends a country to be traversed, 
so the man will arise and continue that journey. The 
crossing of the river, the landing on the "opposite 
bank" are but a stage. 
Stage towards what destination? Taoist mystics 
have left us an enigmatic declaration to which the 
Masters of the Secret Teaching fully subscribe when, 
in a slightly different form, they pose the problem to 
their pupils. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
87 
"The country which is nowhere is the real 
home."12 
On the other hand,. is there any traveller who 
makes a crossing? Is there a somebody who reaches 
the other shore? 
If this was the case, this traveller would carry 
with him the "hither shore" into the "beyond", just 
as the dust on the soles of one's shoes is carried from 
one place to another. The traveller would transform 
the "other bank" into "this bank" because here and 
there are in him, are him and that outside the mind 
which thinks "here" and "there" are no other "here" 
and "there". 
To go beyond virtue and vice, opinions and 
beliefs13 is to go beyond the mental constructions 
which are built up by the mind, unceasingly, and to 
recognize, by transcendent insight, that they are void 
of reality. 
It is also to recognize, by transcendent 
insight, that that which has been imagined as practis-
ing virtue, surrendering to vice, as holding opinions 
and elaborating theories, as travelling towards a goal 
and reaching the goal, is nothing but an inconsistent 
phantom, devoid of reality. 
12 This sentence is ascribed to the Chinese Master Lii tzii. 
13 To one of his disciples who asked him: "If I am questioned 
about the opinions held by my Master, what should I say?", the 
Buddha replied: "You shall say: the Venerable One holds no 
opinions, he is free from all opinions." 

CHAPTER VI 
The Secret Oral Teachings associate with the 
doctrine of "going beyond" those of non-activity, of 
the direct path, and of sudden illumination. More 
exactly, they consider these last as being included in 
the "going beyond" as particular aspects o£ it. 
Passing "beyond" is equivalent to liberation and 
the three above-mentioned theories directly concern it. 
But first of all what is liberation as it is viewed 
in the Secret Teachings? 
We know that Buddhist salvation consists in 
deliverance from the round of successive deaths and 
births in a perpetual voyage comprising numerous 
painful incidents, in the course of which we are united 
to that which we detest and separated from that 
which we love. At least such is an exoteric descrip-
tion of salvation, current among Buddhists. 
This deliverance has been named Nirvana, a 
word well-known to all those who are in the least 
familiar with Buddhist literature. 
The literal meaning of Nirvana is extinction and 
because of this signification the most erroneous ideas 
have been spread concerning the nature of Buddhist 
salvation. 
This is not the place to examine these 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
89 
false interpretations. 
Two words will suffice. 
The 
answer to those that imagine that Buddhist salvation 
consists in the annihilation of the "ego", at the death 
of the "person", is that, as Buddhism denies the 
existence of an "ego" or a soul, whatever be the name 
given to it, there cannot be any question of the 
annihilation of that which is held to be non-existent. 
In reality there is annihilation but it is that of 
false views, of ignorance, and more exactly of the 
belief in the existence of an "ego" which is indepen-
dent, homogeneous and permanent; a belief which 
deforms our understanding of the world in deforming 
our mental vision. 
The Tibetans have not translated the word 
Nirvana. Not because they were not capable of 
doing so, but probably because the idea of salvation 
appeared to them somewhat differently from that 
which obtained in other Buddhist schools of philo-
sophy. 
Their equivalent for Nirvana is the phrase ugone 
beyond !suffering''~ This has not the solemnity of 
the word Nirvana ; it is currently used to say that a 
high religious dignitary is dead, without necessarily 
implying that the dead man had attained perfect 
spiritual illumination and had become a Buddha. 
To express this last idea, not only as regards a 
1 Nia nieun les despa, spelt mya nyen las hdas pa. 

90 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
dead man but often too of a living individual, the 
Tibetans say simply "to have become Buddha", "he 
has become a Buddha", or ''he is a Buddha".2 
However, the term most commonly used alike in 
the spoken language as in literature is : liberation 
(thar.pa) or the expression: "to be liberated" (thar 
song). 
There is no idea of death•in this idea of libera-
tion. One frees oneself in one's present life and 
without leaving it.3 
On the other hand the Buddhists of the Southern 
Schools of the Theravadins are inclined to believe 
that the enlightened man dies, if not instantaneously 
at least after a short delay after having become an 
Arhan, i.e., after· having attained spiritual illumina-
tion. 
In the same way the Theravadins (Hinayanists) 
differentiate between the state to which an Arhan has 
attained when enlightened and the state of Buddha-
hood, and also between Nirvana reached in this life, 
as was the case of the Buddha, and a parinirvana 
attained after death. 
These distinctions are known to the Masters of 
: Sangs-gyaipa (sangs rgyas pa) often shortened to sangs gya in 
current language. 
3 The Secret Teachings insist on the instantaxreous character of 
liberation and the possibility of attaining it in the present life as 
accomplished by the Buddha. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
91 
the Secret Teachings, but they brush them aside, 
considering them among the "mental compositions" 
whose author is our mind, and "beyond" which one 
must go. 
* * 
The Masters of the Secret Teachings state that 
the theories concerning non-activity (tos med)4 have 
been transmitted from master to disciple, in their 
lines, from time immemorial. 
In support of their assertions we should note that 
a doctrine of non-action known by the name of wu-
wei has been equally honoured in China from very 
ancient times. However the manner in which is 
understood the non-action is not the same in the 
Tibetan Teachings as that which was current among 
the ancient Taoists or the Chinese mystics who 
preceded them. 
Liberation is achieved by the practice of non, 
activity, say the Masters of the Secret Teachings. 
What is, according to them, non-activity ?-Let 
us first of all notice that it has nothing in common 
with the quietism of certain Christian or oriental 
mystics. Ought one to believe that. it consists in 
inertia and that the disciples of the Masters who 
" Tibetan spelling: spros med. 

92 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
honour it are exhorted to abstain from doing any-
thing whatever ?-Certainly not. 
In the first place, it is impossible for a living 
being to do nothing. To exist is, in itself, a kind of 
activity. The doctrine of non-action does not in any 
way aim at those actions which are habitual in life: 
eating, sleeping, walking, speaking, reading, studying, 
etc. In contradistinction to the Taoist mystics who, 
in general, consider that the prfl.ctice of non-activity 
requires complete isolation 
i~ a hermitage, the 
Masters of the Secret Teaching~, although prone to 
appreciate "the joys of solitude", do not consider 
them in any way indispensable. As for the practice 
of non-activity itself, they judge it absolutely necessary 
for the production of the state of deliverance (tharpa). 
In the preceding chapter it was said that neither 
the practice of any particular virtue nor that of 
numerou·s virtues together can bring liberation. This 
fact is constantly recalled to the pupils by the Masters 
who explain the traditional Secret Oral Teaching to 
them. They never tire of repeating the classic simile 
of the two chains. Whether one is bound by an iron 
chain or by a golden chain means, in both cases, to 
be bound. The activity used in the practice of virtue 
is the chain of. gold while that utilized in evil deeds 
is the iron chain. Both imprison the doer. 
The Dhammapada which forms part of the 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
93 
canonical literature of the Southern School of Bud-
dhism, and which can be considered as representing 
the original Buddhist doctrine, also stresses the two 
chains and the necessity of breaking them. 
"He who has shaken off the two chains, that 
of good and that of evil, he is a Brahman."5 
The word Brahmana is taken, in this text, in the 
old Indian meaning of ''he who has acquired the 
knowledge of the Brahman", that is to say of the 
Absolute Being, the Supreme Truth. This is the 
spiritually enlightened man who has "gone beyond'' 
the phantasmagoria of samslita. 
What then is this activity from which one ought 
to abstain ?-It is the disordered activity of the mind 
which, unceasingly, devotes itself to the work of a 
builder erecting ideas, creating an imaginary world 
in which it shuts itself like a chrysalis in its cocoon. 
It is this same work of a builder which was 
meant by the author of the Yoga Siitras when he 
wrote : 
"Yoga is the suppression of the movements 
of the mind" .6 
In the same way Tseng Khapa7, the founder of 
• Dhammapada, 412. 
8 Yoga citta vritti nirodha. 
7 Tsong Khapa was born about 1356 in Amdo, a Tibetan district 
now included in the Chinese frontier district of Chinghai. A large 

94 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHITNGS 
the Sect of the Gelugs pas (commonly known ,as the 
~'yellow Caps") who probably was initiated in the 
Secret Teachings, postulated the same necessity for 
the suppression of this "restlessness of the thoughts 
and the seeds to which it is due". 
A similar opinion was expressed by Chandra-
kirti.8 According to him "the essence of Nirvana 
consists simply in the extinction of the constructive 
activity of our imagination". 
No external agent forges the chains, either of 
gold or of iron, no one employs them to bind us to 
the world of illusion. It is the ideas which we hold 
and not our material activity, in itself, which con-
structs the chains and binds us with them. 
Why is this ·mental activity, calculated on false 
data, an obstacle to liberation ?-Simply because it is 
this activity, builder of mental constructions,9 of 
castles in the air, which, incessantly, builds afresh 
monastery has been built in the place of his birth. The author of 
the present book lived several years there with her adopted son the 
Lama Yongden. 
8 ~handrakirti (about the end of the sixth century or the begin-
ning of the seventh.) Sometimes thought to be the eighth century, 
but this appears to be an error. His Tibetan name is Dawa Tagspa 
(Zlawa grags pa). When he went to Tibet he was a professor in the 
monastic university of Vikramasila in the country of Magadha, India. 
• At this point the statement which constitutes the first article 
of the Chain of Interdependent Originations should be noted 
"On 
ignorance depend the mental constructions (samskaras)". 

IN TIBETAN BUDDffiST SECTS 
95 
the edifice of the world of illusion m which we are 
prisoners, and that, outside of our mind which 
creates it, this world does not exist. 
The Master of the Secret Teachings concludes 
here: 
That which is necessary is to enter into the 
"Way of seeing" (thong lag). 
This way is that in 
which the facts are examined and analysed with con-
stant attention, and where no room is left for the 
wandering of the imagination. 
On this way, lhag thong, the transcendent in-
sight is constantly employed, and it continually per-
fects itself with exercise. 
Such is the conception of non-activity in the 
Secret Teachings. There is thus no question of 
developing material or spiritual inertia to which one 
would force oneself, this coercion would require an 
effort, and so would be a form of activity. It suffices 
to allow the current of existence to flow freely without 
attempting to prevent or guide it, watching it like an 
interested spectator, may be amused, but always 
detached although feeling one with the spectacle, 
immersed in the current and flowing with it. 
"Path of Seeing" (Thong Lam) is another name 
for the "Direct Path". 
The Tibetans describe this 
picturesquely, as a steep path climbing the precipi-
tous side of a mountain so as to reach the summit 
quickly, while a wide and well-built road rises by 

96 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACF.UNGS 
easy gradients circling the mountain. The first is a 
break-neck path fit for mountaineers who are sure· 
fpoted; the other suits leisurely strollers who, in 
truth, do not dream of dizzy heights and hardly aim 
at such exploit~. 
The long road is still that on which the pilgrims 
linger to polish up the golden chain of virtues. The 
majority of these imagine that in this way they 
progress, without difficulties and without risks, towards 
a future which they generally fancy as a happy re-
birth in this world, in pleasant conditions or in a 
heavenly realm. 10 
Even those who have formed a more correct 
view, although a vague one, of what may be libera-
tion, Nirvana, do not easily give up the belief that 
one can, gradually and safely, move towards it by 
the long road of holines~. 
They may be heard to 
admit the excellence of the direct road, but they say 
that it is dangerous because the guard-rails of social, 
moral and religious laws are missing from its edge, 
and the traveller who makes a false step risks a fall 
in to an abyss. 
It may, indeed, be foolish to preach to an indi-
vidual of ordinary mind that there is neither Good 
nor Evil, that his acts have no importance, and that. 
1° Compare Chapter V, page 77. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDillST SECTS 
97 
moreover, he is not the author of them because he 
is moved by causes whose miscellaneous origins are 
lost in the inscrutable night of eternity. 
The man with a common mind-with an "infan-
tile" mind as the Tibetans politely say--cannot 
understand the co-existence of the two worlds : that 
of the Absolute and the Void and that of relativity 
in which he, the pilgrim, makes his life's journey. 
In contradiction with current opmwn, the 
Masters of the Secret Teachings do not hesitate to 
declare to those of their disciples who are judged 
capable of understanding this revelation : "The Gra-
dual Way, the persevering cultivation of the virtues,. 
of holiness, do not lead to liberation". The greatest 
saint, even if he has sacrificed a thousand times all 
that he held most dear, even his life itself, for love 
of others, for that of a God. or for a noble ideal,. 
remains a prisoner of samsara if he has not under-
stood that all that is a childish game, empty of 
reality, a useless phantasmagoria of shadows which 
his own mind projects on the infinite screen of the 
Void. 
On the direct road, this understanding is attained 
without any apparent preparation. The climber has 
not hesitated to lean over the abyss on which the· 
path borders, he has not hesitated sometimes t<> 
descend into them so as to inspect the depths, he has 

98 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEINGS 
known how to climb up out of them, and then, 
suddenly, one day as a result of something apparently 
without any importance: the colour of a flower, the 
form of the branch of a tree, a cloud, a bird' s song, 
the yapping of a jackal, the howling of a distant wolf 
or even a simple pebble against which he struck his 
foot in passing, and there arises a vision in his mind, 
lhag thong, transcendent insight is born. 
No grandiloquent description of the nature of 
this insight is· to be expected. No scene of fairyland 
is promised for the contemplation of the disciple 
following the Direct Path, the Secret Teachings are 
expressed in sober language suited to the subjects in 
question. Illumination is the discovery of the reality 
existing beneath appearances, and he who is enligh-
tened ·will be aware of the place which he, in fact, 
occupies in this reality. 
That suffices ; he will cease to be the dupe of a 
mirage; ceasing to create it, he will have broken the 
chains and will be liberated-thar song. 
Like other religions, the Buddhism of the Southern 
School (Hinayana) tends to offer to its adepts a dark 
picture of the world. If the Christians consider this 
world a "vale of tears", the faithful of the Hinayana 
are told to meditate on the repulsive aspect of the 
body considered as a bag containing a stomach, intes-
tines, etc. . . . filled with foul substances : bile, urine, 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
99 
excrements, etc. . . . the result sought being that of 
producing disgust and so combat all attachment to 
the physical form and to sensuality. 
The position of the Secret Teachings is wholly 
different. There is no attempt to provoke disgust on 
the part of the pupil. Dislike is only a form of 
attachment upside down, and both have the same 
effect: that of blinding the person who feels them 
to that to which he has given importance in allowing 
it to occupy his mind. 
No special feeling towards anything is laid down 
in the Secret Teachings. 
The Master expects the 
pupil who has examined the questions to which his 
attention has been drawn, to find there reasons for 
a serene indifference. If he cannot refuse to play a 
role in the comedy or drama of the world, at least 
he understands that it is all a game. If it has fallen 
to him to personify a king, a great man, a famous 
scientist, he will not be proud of himself; if he must 
play the part of a poor wretch, an ignorant man, he 
is not ashamed of himself. He knows that these 
differences only exist on the stage and that, once the 
play is over, the actors will be stripped of the used 
costumes in which they have been seen. 
The Secret Teachings lead the pupil farther. 
They teach him to look, with the same serene in-
difference, at the incessant working of his mind and 

100 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
the physical acttVlty displayed by the body. He 
ought to succeed in understanding, in noting that 
nothing of all that is from him, is him. He, physi-
cally and mentally, is the multitude of others. 
This "multitude of others" includes the material 
elements-the ground, one might say-which he owes 
to his heredity, to his atavism, then those which he 
has ingested, which he has inhaled from before his 
birth, by the help of which his body was formed, and 
which, assimilated by him, have become with the 
complex forces inherent in them, constituent parts of 
his being. 
On the mental plane, this "multitude of others'~ 
includes many beings who are his contemporaries: 
people he consorts with, with whom he chats, whose 
actions he watches. Thus a continual inhibition is 
at work while the individual absorbs a, part of the 
various energies given off by those with whom he is 
in contact, and these incongruous energies, installing 
themselves in that which he considers his "I", form 
there a swarming throng. 
This actually includes a considerable number of 
beings belonging to what we call the Past. 
To a Westerner, Plato, Zeno, Jesus, Saint Paut 
Calvin, Diderot, Jean Jacques Rousseau, Christopher 
Columbus, Marco Polo, Napoleon, and many others 
may constitute a diversified crowd, turbulent and 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
101 
quarrelsome, of which each member, thirsting for 
pre-eminence, tries to impose the repetition of his 
own physical and mental movements and, with that 
object, pulls in different directions the strings which 
move the poor "I", too blind to make out these 
phantoms and powerless to put them in their place. 
I have quoted some names taken by chance as 
being those of personalities with which a Westerner 
might have been in contact in the course of his 
reading and during his education. These names are 
only examples. The guests, whom X shelters in his 
particular guest-house, are not at all the same as those 
who live withY. 
The influences which act on an Indian or a 
Chinese, evidently emanate from people of their 
respective races or those who have been concerned in 
the history of their countries. 
* 
* 
* 
When the student becomes aware of this crowd 
in himself, he should avoid imagining, as some do, 
that it represents memories of his preceding lives. 
There is no lack of those who state and are convinced 
that such and such a personage, who lived in the past, 
is reincarnated in them. 11 
Stories depicting reincarna-
11 Such a belief is not peculiar to Asiatics. It is also to be found 
among certain Westerners. An amusing point to note on this subject 

102 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
tions are innumerable in Asia where they keep alive 
the childish thirst for the marvellous among the 
masses. 
According to the Secret Teachings, the "crowd 
of others" is made up of quite different things than 
"memories". It is formed by living beings whose 
activity follows its course and will continue it indefi-
nitely while taking various shapes for there is no 
death. 
It is not the "memory" of Plato or of J~sus which 
exists in Mr. Peter or in Mr. Smith. Th~re are Plato 
and Jesus themselves, ever-living and active thanks to 
the energies which they have formerly set in motion. 
Ancj the men who bore these names were themselves 
only the manifestation of multiple energies. In Plato 
teaching in Greece, in Jesus moving about in Galilee, 
just as in Mr. Peter or in Mr. Smith, were a crowd 
of living presences whose ancestry is lost in the un-
fathomable depths of eternity. 
Does that mean that the various personalities 
who, together, form an Ego remain inert or, in other 
is that the person "reincarnated" generally boasts of having been, 
in his preceding lives, an important personality, or even several such 
~n succession. 
No one seems to remember having been an obscure 
€:obbler ·or a humble farm labourer. 
At least one does not hear 
of such. 

IN TffiETAN BUDD:EnST SECTS 
103 
words, does it mean that this Ego is in no way active? 
-In no way, is the answer in the Secret Teachings. 
The individual Peter or Smith is a centre of energies 
which, at each of his gestures, each of his words, each 
of his thoughts, shoots out into the world and there 
produces effects. 
It is not only famous persons as 
Plato, Jesus, or the Buddha, who are found in the 
assemblies which constitute the individuals, our con-
temporaries; it is also the obscure cobblers, the 
humble farm-workers who no one seems inclined to 
claim as having been "himself" during his former 
lives. 
Everyone, big and little, strong and weak, works 
continually-and in general unconsciously-at the 
formation of new groups whose members, through 
lack of perspicacity, are not aware of their hetero-
geneity and, who insensible to the discordance of 
their voices, or without dwelling on it, shout in 
chorus "I'', I am Me ! 
Such are in general, the theories concerning the 
multiplicity and the succession of lives considered as 
individual, which are set forth in the Secret 
Teachings. 
It is well to add that the forces assembled in the 
shape of Peter or that of Smith are not equal in power. 
There are some which take a dominant position and 

104 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACF.UNGS 
relegate their companions in the background, or 
even suppress them.J2 
It is to these predominating forces that the 
Tibetan Masters of the reserved teachings appeal to 
explain in an elevated manner which is strictly in 
agreement with the doctrine of the non-existence of 
the homogeneous and permanent ego, the pheno-
menon of the tulkus13 which is very much in evidence 
in their country. 
We know that the tulkus are those individuals 
whom foreigners very incorrectly call "Living Bud-
dhas". In fact the tulku is considered as being the 
reincarnation of a former individual, this latter 
having himself been the reincarnation of another pre-
vious individual, and so on, forming a series of 
reincarnations which goes back, in the past, to a 
personality more or less eminent who may have lived 
several centuries before. 
It is clear that this conception implies the belief 
in an "ego" which is permanent and which trans-
migrates like a man changing house, which is the 
Hindu point of view. Buddhism, however, categori-
cally denies the existence of the ego. The generality 
12 On this point see ~n the appendices of my book "Buddhism, 
its doctrines and methods" a Tibetan parable concerning the person". 
13 Spelling sprul sku. On the subject of tulkus see my book: 
"Mystics and Magicians of Tibet", page 109. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
105 
of Buddhists automatically repeat the classic formula 
of this denial, like the faithful of all religions reciting 
their respective creeds without understanding the 
meaning of the words they recite, but, practically, the 
majority of Buddhists see in these successive lives the 
travels of a wandering entity. 
I have just stated that those initiated in the 
Secret Teachings see this question otherwise. 
Among the forces combined into the form of an 
individual one of them, or several of them together, 
may aim at a goal which cannot be attained in the 
short period of time of one human life. 
A strong 
determination to create an instrument able to con-
tinue the efforts which will be interrupted by death 
can, it is said, succeed in giving rise to the birth of 
an individual who will become this instrument, or 
can possess itself of an already existing individual and 
guide his activity in a suitable direction to lead to 
the desired result. 
Such is the theory. The name tulku agrees per-
fectly. 
Tulku literally means an "illusory body" 
created by magic.14 There is thus no permanent ego 
which transmigrates. 
14 The Tibetans distinguish between tulkus and tulpas. The tulkus 
are men and women, apparently living normal lives like our own. 
Tulpas are more or less ephemeral creations which may take different 
forms: man, animal, tree, rock, etc., at the ·will of the magician who, 

106 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
What is it that in the Secret Teachings is said 
about the fourth of the supernormal powers, that 
which allows the knowledge of preceding lives? 
This is sometimes expressed picturesquely as knowing 
one's preceding dwellings, a way of putting it which 
is very likely to give a wrong understanding of the 
subject. 
The reader has already seen from what has been 
said above, that the initiate in the Secret Teachings 
considers his preceding lives as being manifold. Not 
only manifold in succession which extends in time, 
but manifold in various directions, in coexistent 
episodes, in separate rays emanating from numerous 
clusters .of forces-clusters which we call individuals. 
It follows that if Plato, Jesus and others continue 
their lives in numbers of Peters and Smiths, each of 
these Peters and Smiths is in no way authorized to 
believe himself Plato, or Jesus, or any other reincar-
nated. Only a fraction of these personalities re-live 
in him. It has there taken the form of tendencies, 
create~ t)?.em, and behave like the being whose form they happen to 
have. These tulpas coexist with their creator and can be seen simul-
taneously with him. In some cases they may survive him, or, during 
his life, free themselves from his domination and attain a certain 
independence. The tulku, on the contrary, is the incarnation of a 
lasting energy directed by an individual with the object of continuing 
a given kind of activity after his death. The tulllu .does not coexist 
with his ancestor. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDF.UST SECTS 
107 
of sentiments transmitted by means of reading, or 
speeches having called up the thoughts, the words or 
the deeds of these eminent individuals. But, once 
more, let me repeat that the hearing of the words 
and the sight of the actions of common performers~ 
the cobbler, the servant, etc., can have brought to 
Peter or Smith even during the life of this cobbler 
or servant, elements which have taken root, which 
are incarnated in him, and have determined certain 
of the mental or physical activities of Peter or Smith. 
That is to say, have lived in them. 
This fragmentation of causes and energies is to 
be remembered when one tries to investigate one's 
"ancient dwellings". 
To recall them is to review the various persons 
living in us, to examine them, questioning them 
insistently, showing up their habitual lies, removing 
the mask from those who try to assume a false 
identity and, above all, in not trying to deceive one-
self concerning the quality and the moral value, the 
intellectual and social worth of the guests whom one 
harbours or, more accurately, who liave been us 1n 
the past and continue to be us in the present. 

CHAPTER VII 
"All the magnificence of kings and of their 
ministers, appear to the eyes of a Buddha, as so 
much spitde and dust. 
"To his eyes gold, silver and all treasures 
look merely like pebbles." 
-(Sutra in 42 articles)! 
"As images seen in a dream, thus should one 
see all things." 
-(Vajracchedika sfi.tra of the Prajiia paramita)2 
Two points of view, two mental attitudes. The 
Sun·a in 42 articles reflects the state of mind of him 
who has understood the vanity and even the distaste-
ful character of anything which the masses consider 
desirable. It is the attitude of the man who, as an 
1 The Siitra in 42 articles was carried from India to China about 
the year 65 of the Christian era. There are translations of it in 
Chinese, Tibetan, Manchu and Mongql. It is thought to be the first 
Buddhist work which has been translated into Chinese. 
2 Vajracchedika, in Tibetan: Dordji tchOd pa (rde rje gchod pa) 
which means "the Cutting Diamond". This word "diamond" is under-
stood in the Sacred Literature as meaning that which is most 
'excellent". 
The Siitra is thought to lead those who study it to 
Knowledge which cuts, breaks the bonds due to error, especially the 
belid; in the ego, and to produce spiritual illumination. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
109 
effect of semi-clairvoyance, turns away from the 
world with scorn and disgust. 
The other attitude is that of the calm thinker 
whose judgment has penetrated deeper into the 
nature of the manifestations by which the world is: 
made perceptible to us. 
He does not turn away. 
He feels neither scorn nor disgust. 
"Splendour of 
kings, riches" are not seen by him as spitde and 
pebbles . . . . He sees them void. 
The meaning of the term void which we have 
already employed and to which we shall recur in. 
what follows, has been the subject of numerous com-· 
mentaries and eager controversies among Buddhist 
philosophers. Westerners who have understood it 
are rare. Although understood differently by the 
Theravadins (Hinayanists) and by the Doctors of the 
Mahayana, neither the ones nor the others have ever 
thought of making the void of which they speak an 
equivalent of nothingness. 
Nothingness is one of those words which one 
uses without trying to form a clear idea of what it 
can mean. Absolute Nothing is inconceivable. He 
who says "Nothing" incorporates himself in this 
vacuity simply by the fact that he himself must exist 
in order to have the idea of it. 
We have already seen in the preceding chapters· 
that void means empty in its own nature, devoid of 

110 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
a ''self" distinct and independent from the elements 
which compose it, which render it perceptible, active, 
efficient. 
It has been explained that that which is "com-
pound", which is constituted by the combination 
of elements as a house is made up of stones, wood, 
etc., is only a collection, a group and in no way a real 
4'ego". Thus the individual is empty, everything is 
empty, because one can find nothing in it except the 
parts which constitute it. 
It is especially in this way that the Theras of the 
Southern School (Theravada) explain the meaning of 
the word "void" as used by them. 
Among the Mahayanists, "void" has the meaning 
,Qf "relative". All that which exists does so in relation 
to something else, is based on something else and 
.only exists because of this relationship. Because of 
this relationship which is the indispensable basis of 
their existence,. individuals, as well as all things, are 
void of self essence. They are products due to the 
conjunction and co-existence of causes: they are 
neith~r autogenous nor autonomous, and consequently 
they are only names denoting somethings which is 
void of intrinsic reality. 
The two explanations tend to show the same 
fact: 
they are brought together in the Secret 
Teachings. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
Ill 
When the student has understood the meanmg 
of them he is directed to examine another meaning 
of the Void, that which, in the works of the 
Mahayanist philosophers, gives the Void as the origin 
of all things. 
In this sense the Tibetans metaphorically call the 
Void ka dag, an abbreviation of ka nes dag pa which 
means pure from its origin, or ji (gzhi) ka dag: 
fundamental purity. In its proper sense the Void is 
-called tong pa gnid ( stong pa fiid). 
The adjective "pure" is not understood here In 
the moral sense 'which we sometimes give it: It 
means "unmixed", excluding all other elements. 
Void is understood as a state in which the ele-
ments do not produce any combination, give rise to 
no phenomenon, a state in which only forces, latent 
.and non-manifest, exist. Being the sphere of complete 
absence of manifestation, the Void is inconceivable. 
It should be noted that in the Secret Teachings 
the expression "Origin of things" is not applied to a 
beginning of the Universe, like that which is depicted 
in various ways by the different religions and philo-
sophic doctrines in their metaphysical treatises. 
According to the Secret Teachings the origin of 
things is not situated in any place or moment of past 
-time ; it is produced now, at each instant, in our 
minds. At every moment the subjective image which 

112 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
is the world, arises in our mind only to sink back 
and dissolve in it the moment after, like the "waves 
which arise from the sea and fall back into it" .3 
This root originally free from any admixture, 
otigin of the illusory world in which we live, is a 
fleeting contact with some unknowable instant of 
Reality, some indefinable force which the vasanas 
obscure at once, superimposing on it the screen on 
which the images which we see, are painted.4 
* 
* 
* 
Eighteen kinds of Void5 are ehumerated in Bud-
dhist Philosophy, illustrating what has just been said~ 
that the Absolute, the Reality, are void of all our 
conceptions. 
* 
* 
* 
3 A frequent comparison in the works of Indian philosophies. 
"See Chapter II, page 21. 
1 Interior Void. External Void. Internal and external Void. Void 
of Void. Great ·void. Real Void. Compound Void. Non-compound 
Void. Unlimited Void. Void without beginning, nor end. Void which 
rejects nothing. Intrinsic Void. Void of all elements. Void of any 
characfer ·of its own. 
Void of perceptions, of representations. 
Void 
of proprieties. Void of its own essence. Void without any properties. 
These last three kinds are also qualified as : 
Void of existence, 
Void of non-existence. Void at the same time of being and non-being. 
Denial and affirmation of a thing co-existing with its opposite are 
usual in the Buddhist philosophical phraseology : it is a way of 
expressing the fact that the mind comes upon the unconceivable. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
113 
Thus we have indirectly returned to the ccr 
existence of two worlds which are indissolubly united: 
the world of Reality and the relative world whi~h has 
been mentioned above. A third world, the imaginary 
one, is added to these two in the Secret Teachings. 
It is true to say that this last is mentioned by 
Mahayanist authors, but they mostly consider it com-
pletely unreal while, in the Secret Teachings, it is 
admitted to have a certain degree of reality. 
What is the imaginary world?-It has been 
variously defined as the realm of pure phantasy, of 
subjective visions, of ideas which are baseless or whkh 
seem to arise without any cause. These are "flowers· 
in the sky" according to the picturesque and classical 
expression in Indian philosophy. 
The Secret Teachings object to this definition on 
the grounds that nothing can occur without a cause 
and that disorderly imaginings have bases which can 
easily be discovered in the relative world. 
If one imagines a green dog with an elephant's 
trunk, the component parts of this fantastic animal 
have been supplied by the memory of objects which 
our sense have shown us. We have seen dogs, seen 
elephants with their trunks, and seen the colour 
green. 
It is the same wi.th pictures seen in dreams which 
are equally based on those which we are accustomed 

114 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
to see when awake. Again it is the same with ideas 
and feelings which arise in us during sleep for they 
too have their roots in our mentality, either in the 
conscious part of it, or in the subconscious. 
From these different facts the Secret Teachings 
conclude that the imaginanry world is not wholly 
unreal, that it is close to the relative world and inter-
mingled with it. 
* 
* 
* 
The Tibetan doubtobs6 are considered to be ex-
perts in the art of creating tulpas/ imaginary forms 
which are a sort of robots which they control as they 
wish, but which, sometimes, manage to acquire some 
kind of autonomous personality. 
It is also ·stated that during their periods of deep 
meditation the doubtobs surround themselves with 
an impassable occult protective zone which guarantees 
their complete isolation, this zone extending at times 
right round their hermitage, when they adopt the 
life of an anchorite. 
• Doubtob (grubthob) means he who has "succeeded", who has 
"accomplished" ; this implies. who has acquired supernormal powers. 
These are they who are called siddha in Sanskrit. 
7 The belief in tulpas is universal in Tibet and there are many 
stories about them, some of these stories being terribly tragic. 
For 
more details about tulpas see my books "Mystics and Magicians of 
Tibet", "Initiations lamaiques" and "La Vie surhumaine de Guesar 
de Ling" (the Tibetan lliad). 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
115 
Novices who are training themselves. according 
to the methods of the Secret Teachings, are some-
times advised to exercise themselves in creating 
mentally around themselves an environment com-
pletely different from that which is considered real. 
For example, seated in their room, they conjure up 
a forest. If the exercise is successful they will no 
longer be conscious of the objects around them which 
will have given place to trees, copses, and they will 
travel through the forest feeling all the sensations 
usual to those who move in the woods. 
The usefulness of such exercises is to lead the 
novice to understand the superficial nature of our 
sensations and perceptions, since they can be caused 
by things which we consider unreal. 
According to the Secret Teachings in denying 
them any reality, we may perhaps be wrong, for any 
mental creation possesses a kind of reality which IS 
peculiar to it since it can show itself effective. 
* 
* 
* 
The relative world is close to the imaginary 
world because, as has been said, error and illusion 
dominate it. That which appears to us as round 
may, in fact, be square, and so on. Most of humanity 
.are unconscious of the fact that they live and move 
in a world of phantasmagoria ; however, some have 

116 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
perceived this and have discovered in themselves the 
origin of this phantasmagoria. Is this to say that, 
from that moment, they have entirely freed them-
selves from it?-Not always. Perhaps one ought to 
say: not often. They remain in the position of those 
sleepers who, although conscious of the fact that 
they are dreaming, continue to dream and even 
follow with interest the adventures of their dreams.8 
But the scenes which they meet no longer affect them. 
Perceptions and sensations leave them unmoved, 
glide off them without arousing desire or repulsion.9 
In the words of the Buddhist texts, all the agitation 
of this world of relativity and illusion only produces 
in them this appreciation: "This is only that! " 10 
To say "This is only that!" does not mean that 
"that" does not exist. To state that the world in 
which we live has no existence whatever would be, on 
our part, an absurdity. Such a declaration would be 
equivalent of saying that we do not exist, for, such 
as we are7 we belong to the world ·of relativity, our 
existence is dependent on such a world and, outside 
of it, we do not exist. 
However in the same way as this world, we are 
8 This is quite a usual thing among most of those who have 
practised the Yoga exercises with this object. 
8 "As water slips off a lotus leaf or a grain of mustard from the 
point of a needle" (Dhammapada 401). 
10 Digha Nikaya. 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
117 
only "that". The vanity of man jibs at that statement 
which is, all the same, indisputable. Man is accus-
tomed to think himself important, he takes pleasure in 
this flattering idea, he has invented doctrines to give 
himself a central place in the universe, even going so 
far as to declare that the whole universe with its 
myriads of worlds, was constructed solely for him. 
His "Ego", he likes to think, holds the attention of 
super-human Powers ; Gods and Demons carefully 
watch his acts and thoughts, applauding some and 
punishing others. In himself man has built a sub-
office of the invisible tribunal of divine judges, and 
there he distributes praises and blame ; from the 
decrees he issues, there follow the vainglorious satis-
faction caused by deeds which are called "virtuous" 
and the tragic dramas of remorse springing from acts 
considered wrong or sinful. 
When Nietzsche gave out his dramatic proclama-
tion concerning that which is beyond Good or Evil, 
his vehemence sprang from the belie£ which he still 
held in the existence of Good and Evil in the com-
mon acceptation of the words, and also from his 
persistent faith in the importance of man and of 
his acts. An adept of the Secret Teachings would 
have smiled on hearing him, for all grandiloquence 
is banished from these teachings. In them the pupil 
is coldly told : 
"Learn that thou art only void and 

118 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
that thy deeds are in no way thine, but the simple 
work of energies forming ephemeral combinations by 
the effect of manifold causes among which a piercing 
and trained sight (lhag thong) discovers the most 
direct, while the innumerable others remain undis-
coverable in the depths of time and space, in the 
depths of "memories" (vasana) without any knowable 
beginning. 
Thus thou hast no reason to be either 
proud or humiliated. 
Realise thine own insigni-
ficance." 
The fact of having realised an accurate idea of 
the unimportant place which one occupies even in 
the relative world, does not necessarily lead to ,re-
maining inert, overwhelmed by the proofs of one's 
littleness. Action is in no way excluded. 
The student who has succeeded in understanding 
that his life is a dream which he himself supplies 
with agreeable or terrifying scenes, can ensure that 
the dream does not become a nightmare. He can 
strive to furnish this relative world, his own creation~ 
with things likely to lead to his own wellbeing, his 
happ~ness. Illusory objects, pictures like those offered 
by mirages, are nevertheless, efficient, that is to say, 
real for the dreamer, made of the same substance as 
they are and sharing with them the same degree of 
illusory existence. 
On the other hand, the well-informed dreamer 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
119 
may cease taking pleasure in dreaming. He may stop 
imitating those dreamers who, enjoying the phantas-
magoria which they watch and in which they play a 
part, persist in wishing to remain asleep. In truth, 
why do the dreamers fear awakening, why do they 
imagine in advance other dreams of hells and heavens 
which await them after death? 
It is because they 
fear that with the disappearance of the "images seen 
in dreams", the illusory "Ego" which is an integral 
part of them will disappear. They have not yet per-
ceived that the real face of this chimerical "Ego" is 
the face of Death. 
As long as the idea of this 
impermanent Ego lasts, this simple mass of elements 
which various causes have brought together and 
which other causes will separate, death also subsists. 
The Dhammapada alludes to the disappearance of 
this phantom from the field of our mental activity 
when it refers to whom "death does not see", that 
is, he for whom death does not exist. 
The awakening is liberation, salvation. 
The 
Secret Teachings propose no other object than this 
to their pupils. 
To wake up ... The Buddhas have done nothing 
else than this. and it is this awakening which has made 
them become Buddhas. 
* 
* 

120 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
Some people may ask: how will the awakened 
one, in his new state of "Awakened One", act towards 
others? 
The reply to this question is: 
Do others really 
exist ?-Are not others like the other objects which 
furnish our environment, just projections of our 
thought, and considering that our senses deceive us 
in everything, should we accept their evidence when 
they set before us the form of another wholly distinct 
from ourselves? 
In any case it is impossible for us, who are not 
awakened, to form an idea of the condition in which 
an "Awakened One" finds himself. It is similar to 
the impossibility for a sleeper, absorbed in his dream, 
to be aware of what exists outside the dream. 
From a practical point of ·view, we find induce-
ments to action such as that contained in the 
V ajracchedika Sutra: 
''It is when one no longer believes in the 'I', 
in the 'person', when one has rejected all beliefs, 
that the time has come to distribute gifts." 
The Masters of the Secret Teachings give this 
text and others like it to their pupils as subjects of 
meditation. Their enigmatic character weakens and 
disappears little by little in the course of prolonged 
meditations and they throw a clear light on the path 

IN TIBETAN BUDDHIST SECTS 
121 
of the pilgrim making his way through the relative 
world, marching towards the farthest conceptions of 
his mind: a world of Reality, a world of the Void. 
The question of Nirvana naturally arises here, 
for Nirvana is, according to general opinion among 
Buddhists, the opposite of the world of imperma-
nence : of the samsara. 
This opinion is examined and disputed in the 
Oral Secret Teachings. It is said there, that it is 
tinged by the idea of the "I" and of the "other", by 
ideas of separate places occupying distinct areas in 
space, all such con<:;eptions being rejected in these 
teachings. 
Nirvana and samsara, we are told, are not two 
different things, but one and the same thing seen 
from two different points of view by onlookers whose 
degree of sharpness of mental vision differs widely. 
The ignorant man, whose "mental eye is covered 
with a thick layer of dust" 11 sees the painful round 
of deaths and successive births with all that they 
imply of trouble and suffering. The Sage, whose 
"mental eye has been freed from all dust" which 
could interfere with its penetrating vision, he, by 
means of lhag thong (transcendent insight) can con-
template nirvana. 
------
11 Mahavagga. See Chapter L 

122 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS 
The awakening from the dream in which we are 
involved and which we continue to live even while 
being more or less clearly conscious that we dream~ 
will this awakening lead us to another world? Will 
it not rather consist in the perception of the under-
lying reality in the world in which we find ourselves? 
Ought we not therefore to understand that Nirvana 
and samslira, as reality and relativity, are fancies 
created by our mind, attributing them to the un-
knowable? 
It is stated in the great work of Nagarjuna, the 
Prajfia Paramita, in writing about the Void, this 
synonym of Reality : 
"Form is the Void and the Void is the form. 
The Void is nothing else than form and form is 
nothing else than the Void. 
Outside the Void 
there is no form, and outside the form there is 
no Void." 
The same declaration is repeated about the other 
elements composing the individual, perceptions, sensa-
tions, mental activity, consciousness. It is, again, 
repeated concerning all the points of Buddhist Doc-
trine, about the Buddha himself, about everything. 
Everything which we call "ourselves" and the furni-
shings of things and phenomena which make up our 
environment, whether physical or psychical, the 

IN TIBETAN BUDDIDST SECTS 
123. 
"world", all that is the Void and the Void is all that .. 
Outside of that there is no Void, and outside of the 
Void nothing of all that exists. 
Thus the world of relativity is not a limited. 
sphere separated by a rigid frontier from the real 
world. Now here does there exist a line of demarka-· 
tion, for everywhere there is interpenetration. 
The world of relativity is the Void-Reality and 
the V aid-Reality is the relative world. Outside of 
this latter there is no Void-Reality, and outside the 
Void-Reality there is no relative world. 
Will the student, at this point, think that he has 
attained to Truth? Will he stop there?-His Master 
will strongly dissuade him. If he stops, he will only 
have struck an obstacle which will immobilize him .. 
To believe that one knows is the greatest of the· 
barriers which prevent knowledge. To imagine that 
one possesses absolute certainty begets a fatal mental 
stagnation. 
The attitude which these Teachings advocate. is 
one of a strong will to know all that it is possible to 
know, never to halt on the road to investigation 
which extends infinitely far before the feet of the· 
explorer. 
The pupil may be somewhat bewildered at having 
seen ideas considered as most solidly based, first 
shaken and then overthrown around him, so the 

124 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIDNGS 
Master will suggest that to see in everything nothing 
but illusion may also be an illusion which must be 
put aside in passing and, he will willingly end his 
lessons with these words: "I have never intended to 
teach you something, but only to incite you to think, 
to doubt, to seek." 
* 
* 
* 
The subject of the Oral Teachings which are 
-called secret and given out by Masters belonging to 
different Schools of Philosophy in Tibet is far from 
being fully covered here. It includes numerous origi-
nal interpretations of the theories laid down by the 
Doctors of the Hinayana and of the Mahayana. My 
"account" is limited to pointing out the main lines 
·of these Teachings and the spirit which infuses them. 
To what extent I have succeeded in giving a clear 
enough idea is something which I cannot judge ; only 
my readers can say. 
In any case it seems to me fit and proper to finish 
with the declaration which is habitual with oriental 
authors when explaining a doctrine : 
If my readers find unintelligibility and 
mistakes in my .account, the fault is mine who 
have not been able to express, as they ought to 
have been, the Teachings which were communi-
cated to me. 

APPENDIX 
According to an ancient tradition, King Srong bstan 
Gampo (VIIIth century), the most famous of the kings of 
Tibet, explained to a group of selected listeners the deep 
meaning of the doctrine of the Void. 
He said: 
"Although the Buddha stated categorically that he had 
set out the whole of His Teachings without hiding anything 
or holding back any part thereof so as to form an esoteric 
section, the various degrees of intelligence among his hearers~ 
and, even more, the different degrees of understanding of 
those who, after Him, continued to spread His Doctrine~ 
have necessarily brought about divisions among those who 
profess to be His disciples. None of them has thought of 
rejecting the ,fundamental principles of the Master's Teach-
ing: the deviations have taken place as to the greater or 
lesser importance to be given to such and such of them,. 
or to the way in which these fundamental principles should 
be understood. Thus it happened that particular develop-
ments and a deeper way of understanding the fundamental 
data of the original doctrine have occasioned a series of 
teaP1ings considered as beyond the reach of less-developed 
intelligences, and which the Masters, who thought them-
selves in possession of the key to them, considered should 
only be taught to those disciples fit to understand them.t 
Srong bstan Gampo appears in history as a clever and 
daring chief. King of Lhasa, he showed himself powerful 
1 See what has been already said on this point. 

126 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACEITNGS 
enough to overawe the Chinese Emperor Tai Tsun and force 
him, despite the repugnance which the latter felt at allying 
himself with a "Barparian", to send him, as wife, one of 
his daughters, the Princess Wen Tchen.2 
However, in the memory of the Tibetans, he who is 
honoured is not the mighty sovereign, but a Srong bstan 
·Gampo who was super-human and endowed with a mytho-
logical biography. 
According to this biography, Srong bstan Gampo was 
much more than a great initiate. He possessed, innately, 
the deep understanding of the highest Knowledge owing to 
his being an avatar of the sublime and compassionate 
Chenrezigs,3 patron of Tibet, who had incarnated so as to 
teach and guide his chosen children : the good people of 
the Land of Snows. 
The sermons attributed to Srong bstan Gampo extend 
over various stages of understanding of the Buddhist Doc-
trine, and reach their highest point in that one which 
-concerns the theory of the Void. 
Void, we have .already said, does not mean "nothing-
ness''. On the other hand, this term does not belong to a 
-cosmogenic system beginning with a declaration analogous 
to "In the beginning was the Void, .4 
Nevertheless, some people have thought to find an 
explanation of the origin of the Universe in the classic state-
8 Chenrezigs is the Tibetan name of Avalokiteshvara. 
2 The marriage took place in 641. 
• It is well-known that the Buddhist Doctrine excludes any kind 
Q£ cosmological system, any description of a beginning, in the absolute 
sense, of the Universe. 

IN TIBET AN BUDDHIST SECTS 
127 
ment ~~]i ka dag . . . Tsal len dup''5 which means "In the 
originally pure base, an energy arose by itself". 
The Secret Teachings expounded in the sayings attri-
buted to Srong bstan Campo contradict this opinion. 
According to them, the original Void (ji ka dag) is the 
inconceivable form of the Mind existing before an auto-
genous energy (tsal len dup) caused the samskaras (mentaJ 
.composition) to arise in it, creators of the images which 
constiute our world. It is in this void of the mind, com-
parable to the special void, that are born, act and disappear 
all the phenomena perceived by our senses, phenomena 
which we wrongly imagine to be scenes unfolding outside 
·ourselves, whereas they only exist in us. 
During the king's sermons the eighteen sorts of void 
listed in philosophic works are explained in relation with 
the Void of the original mind. On the whole we are told: 
"The mind is comparable with space ; like space it has 
neither interior nor exterior ; in its depths one finds nothing 
but the Void. 
"Ideas of continuity or discontinuity cannot be applied 
to the mind ; it escapes them, just as in the case of space one 
-cannot conceive it either as limited or as infinite. 
''It is impossible to discover a place where the mind is 
born, a place where it dwells afterwards, a place where it 
.ceases to exist. Like space, the mind is void in the three 
times: past, present and future. 
''In space we see clouds arise and vanish, without being 
able to find a dwelling for them from where they emerge 
5 Spelling Gzi ka dag-rtsal len grub. 
This declaration is 
especially honoured by the Sect of the "Great Accomplishment" 
(Dzogs chen pa). 

128 
THE SECRET ORAL TEACIDNGS 
and to where they can go back to. In space we see the sun 
shine, the moon, the stars, the planets, b:ut what is space 
itself? 
"The; essence of space, its very nature, space in itself, 
are beyond all words, all imagination. It is the same with 
the original mind, void of any essence or any qualities of 
its own: impossible to grasp." 
The "beyond" is also explained in relation with the 
Void. "To go beyond Knowledge" means to immerse the 
mind once more in its original virgin world which, like space. 
can contain all because it is void. 
As a conclusion to these dissertations we can say, that 
the worthlessness of the doctrines and methods, which claim 
to elevate us above our world of relativity, is clearly 
denounced. 
Our world is limited, but its limits are not 
perceptible to us and, on our scale, it is practically unlimited. 
The more compactly we furnish it with the help of 
theories, opinions, imaginations, the more all these, acting 
as bonds, tie us down and keep us prisoners. 
Th·e "going beyond", the "non-activity" are the means 
for us to attain mental freedom. In truth we have nothing 
to do, it is a question of ''undoing:', of clearing the ground 
of our mind, of making it, as much as possible, clean, void. 
The Void is, here, for us always a synonym of liberation. 

CITY LIGHTS PUBLICATIONS 
Artaud, Antonin ANTHOLOGY $3.00 
Bly, Robert THE TEETH-MOTHER NAKED AT LAST (PP No. 26) $1.00 
Bowen, Michael JOURNEY TO NEPAL: He Who Is the Greater Is the Servant 
of the Other $2.50 
Bowles, Paul A HUNDRED CAMELS IN THE COURTYARD $1.25 
Bukowski, Charles ERECTIONS, EJACULATIONS, EXHIBITIONS AND GENERAL 
TALES OF ORDINARY MADNESS $3.95 
Burns, Robert MERRY MUSES $.75 
Burroughs, William & Ginsberg, Allen THE YAGE LETTERS $1.50 
Cassady, Neal THE Fl RST THIRD and Other Writings $3.00 
CITY LIGHTS JOURNAL (No.2) $2.50 
CITY LIGHTS JOURNAL (No.3) $2.50 
Corso, Gregory GASOLINE (PP No.8) $1.00 
Corso, Gregory THE VESTAL LADY ON BRATTLE $2.00 
Cossery, Albert MEN GOD FORGOT $1.50 
Daumal, Rene MOUNT ANALOGUE $2.00 
David-Neel, Alexandra SECRET ORAL TEACHINGS IN TIBETAN 
BUDDHIST SECTS $2.00 
diPrima, Diane REVOLUTIONARY LETTERS ETC. (PP No. 27) $2.00 
Dowden, George BI.BLIOGRAPHY OF ALLEN GINSBERG Clothbound $17.50 
Ehrlich, Dr. Paul EGO-CATASTROPHE $.50 
Fenollosa, Ernest THE CHINESE WRITTEN CHARACTER AS A 
MEOIUM FOR POETRY $1.25 
Ferlinghetti THE ILLUSTRATED WILFRED FUNK $1.50 
Ferlinghetti PICTURES OF THE GONE WORLD (PP No.1) $1.00 
Genet, Jean MAY DAY SPEECH $1.00 
Ginsberg, Allen AIRPLANE DREAMS $1.75 
Ginsberg, Allen KADDISH SCRIPT $2.00 
Ginsberg, Allen HOWL AND OTHER POEMS (PP No.4) $1.00 
Ginsberg, Allen INDIAN JOURNALS Clothbound $6.50; Paperback $3.00 
Ginsberg, Allen KADDISH AND OTHER POEMS (PP No. 14) $1.50 
Ginsberg, Allen PLANET NEWS (P.P No. 23) $2.00 
(Clothbound & signed $15.00) 
Ginsberg, Allen REALITY SANDWICHES (PP No. 18) $1.50 
Hemingway, Ernest COLLECTED POEMS $.50 
Journal for the Protection of All Beings No.2 
ON THE BARRICADES $1.50 
Journal for the Protection of All Beings No. 3 
GREEN FLAG: People's Park Poetry $1.50 
Joyce, James POMES PENYEACH $.50 

