  
Secrets of Mental Math
by  Arthur T. Benjamin (Biography)
The following materials are provided to enhance your learning experience. Click the links below
for free information including a professor-authored course summary, recommended web links,
and a condensed bibliography.
Course Summary - Professor's written description of the course.
Professor Recommended Links
Condensed Bibliography - Prepared by the professor for this course.
Course Summary 
Most of the mathematics that we learn in school is taught to us on paper with the expectation that
we will solve problems on paper. But there is joy and lifelong value in being able to do
mathematics in your head. In school, learning how to do math in your head quickly and accurately
can be empowering. In this course, you will learn to solve many problems using multiple
strategies that reinforce number sense, which can be helpful in all mathematics courses.
Success at doing mental calculation and estimation can also lead to improvement on several
standardized tests.
We encounter numbers on a daily basis outside of school, including many situations in which it
is just not practical to pull out a calculator, from buying groceries to reading the newspaper to
negotiating a car payment. And as we get older, research has shown that it is important to find
activities that keep our minds active and sharp. Not only does mental math sharpen the mind,
but it can also be a lot of fun.
Our first four lectures will focus on the nuts and bolts of mental math: addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. Often, we will see that there is more than one way to solve a
problem, and we will motivate many of the problems with real-world applications.
Once we have mastery of the basics of mental math, we will branch out in interesting directions.
Lecture 5 offers techniques for easily finding approximate answers when we don't need
complete accuracy. Lecture 6 is devoted to pencil-and-paper mathematics but done in ways that
are seldom taught in school; we'll see that we can simply write down the answer to a
multiplication, division, or square root problem without any intermediate results. This lecture also
shows some interesting ways to verify an answer's correctness. In Lecture 7, we go beyond the
basics to explore advanced multiplication techniques that allow many large multiplication
problems to be dramatically simplified.
In Lecture 8, we explore long division, short division, and Vedic division, a fascinating technique
that can be used to generate answers faster than any method you may have seen before.
Lecture 9 will teach you how to improve your memory for numbers using a phonetic code.
Applying this code allows us to perform even larger mental calculations, but it can also be used
for memorizing dates, phone numbers, and your favorite mathematical constants. Speaking of
dates, one of my favorite feats of mental calculation is being able to determine the day of the
week of any date in history. This is actually a very useful skill to possess. It's not every day that
someone asks you for the square root of a number, but you probably encounter dates every day
of your life, and it is quite convenient to be able to figure out days of the week. You will learn how
to do this in Lecture 10.
In Lecture 11, we venture into the world of advanced multiplication; here, we'll see how to square
3- and 4-digit numbers, find approximate cubes of 2-digit numbers, and multiply 2- and 3-digit
numbers together. In our final lecture, you will learn how to do enormous calculations, such as
multiplying two 5-digit numbers, and discuss the techniques used by other world record lightning
calculators. Even if you do not aspire to be a grandmaster mathemagician, you will still benefit
tremendously by acquiring the skills taught in this course.

Return To Top
 Professor Recommend Links
 http://www.artofproblemsolving.com
 http://www.maa.org
 http://www.phoneticmnemonic.com
Return To Top   
Condensed Bibliography 
These selected titles from the reading list are now available on Amazon.com. Click on a title for
more information and/or to order the title. 
Everyday Math for Everyday Life: A Handbook for When it Just Doesn't Add Up .
Ryan, Mark
If you are so rusty with your math skills that you want to start from scratch, this would
be a good book to use. The book focuses on hand calculation and mental estimation
skills, and real life applications of math, like measurements, checkbook tips, and unit
conversions.
Guesstimation: Finding the World's Problems on the Back of a Cocktail Napkin.
Weinstein, Lawrence and John Adam
Written by two physicists, using nothing more than basic arithmetic, this book
provides interesting strategies for coming up with reasonable estimates (within a
factor of 10) of problems that initially sound impossible to comprehend. Filled with
plenty of interesting examples, such as how many golf balls would be needed to circle
the equator, or how many acres of farmland would it take to fuel your car with ethanol.
Secrets of Mental Math: The Mathemagician's Guide to Lightning Calculation and
Amazing Math Tricks. Benjamin, Arthur and Michael Shermer
[Published in the United Kingdom with the title Think Like a Maths Genius.] This is
essentially the book upon which this entire course is based. The book contains
nearly all the topics of this course (except for Vedic division) as well as other
amazing feats of mind.
Short-Cut Math. Kelly, Gerald W
A solid, overall reference, with good ideas for mental (and paper) mathematics,
focusing on addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, estimation, and fractions.
Since it's published by Dover, it's very inexpensive.
Your Memory: How it Works and How to Improve It. Higbee, Kenneth L
Written by a professor of psychology, you will learn the techniques for memorizing
names, faces, lists, numbers, and foreign vocabulary. The book includes many
references to the medical and psychological literature to gain a deeper appreciation
for how mnemonics work.

In some cases the only available book from Amazon is a newer edition than the one used by the
professor. The edition used by the professor may be available on the used market. 
Return To Top

