Course Lecture Titles
12 Lectures 
30 minutes / lecture
1. Math in Your Head! (info)
2. Mental Addition and
Subtraction (info)
3. Go Forth and Multiply (info)
4. Divide and Conquer (info)
5. The Art of Guesstimation ( info)
6. Mental Math and Paper (info)
7. Intermediate Multiplication
(info)
8. The Speed of Vedic Division
(info)
9. Memorizing Numbers (info)
10. Calendar Calculating (info)
11. Advanced Multiplication (info)
12. Masters of Mental Math (info)
Available Exclusively on DVD: (info)
12 lectures, 30 minutes/lecture
   DVD
$199.95
$39.95
Be the first to w rite a review
Quick: What's 25 × 45?
How about 742 × 300?
Or 4821 ÷ 9? Most of us, when faced with math problems like
these, immediately reach for a calculator or a pen.
But imagine if you could perform these and other seemingly
difficult—but surprisingly easy—calculations right in your head.
Seems like an impossible feat? It's not.
One key to improving and expanding your math potential—whether
you're a corporate executive or a high-school student—lies in the
powerful ability to perform mental math calculations. Solving basic
math problems in your head is a gateway to success in
understanding and mastering higher mathematical fields such as
algebra, statistics, and calculus. It's a skill that offers other lifelong
benefits, including
giving you a competitive edge in school or at work;
keeping your mind active and sharp at any age;
improving your performance on standardized tests; and
learning to solve problems by using a variety of methods.
Mental mathematics also is valuable when you're shopping for groceries or
figuring out how much to tip at a restaurant. And perhaps the best part? Learning
how to do mental math can be fun—especially when you're learning in the
company of Professor Arthur T. Benjamin of Harvey Mudd College, one of the most
engaging and entertaining members of The Great Courses faculty. The Secrets of
Mental Math, his exciting new 12-lecture course, guides you through all the
essential skills, tips, and tricks for improving and enhancing your ability to solve a
range of mathematical problems right in your head.
Mental Math—Made Simple
Mental math, as Professor Benjamin demonstrates, is not as daunting as it may
seem. In fact, it's an ability you already have—you just may not know it. Performing
calculations in your head is all just a process of breaking down a large problem
into simpler and simpler problems until it's finally reduced to a single answer.
Assuming no detailed knowledge of mathematics other than what you learned in
elementary school, Professor Benjamin has designed The Secrets of Mental
Math to be accessible to anyone looking to tap into or strengthen his or her mental
calculating skills.
In the first part of the course, you focus on specific strategies for performing the
basic nuts-and-bolts operations of mental mathematics.
Adding any two numbers up to three digits
Subtracting any two numbers up to three digits
Multiplying any two numbers up to two digits
Dividing any number by a number up to two digits
Dr. Benjamin fills each lecture with a wealth of practice problems to follow along
with and get you engaged in the joys of mentally solving math problems.
Once you've gotten these four fundamental operations down, you then branch out
into some interesting directions that continue to hone your mental math skills.
Among the exciting skills you'll develop are
Secrets of Mental Math
Taught By Professor Arthur T. Benjamin, Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University,
Harvey Mudd College
Course No. 1406
70% off for a limited time about our sales
Keyword or Course #
Your email address
New & Featured
Special Sale - 70% Off
New Releases
Best Sellers
Special Set Offers
Recommendations
Courses by Topic
Science & Mathematics
History
Fine Arts & Music
Religion & Theology
Philosophy & Intellectual History
Literature & English Language
Business & Economics
Better Living
Professional
High School
View All Courses
Find a Course
LEARN MORE ABOUT
The Great Courses
What are The Great Courses?
About Our Sales
Lifetime Guarantee
Recommendations
"I've never made a secret
of the fact that I
consider the products
from [The Great
Courses] to be the best
value in college-level
education today."
—H. MCFARLAND, MIDWEST BOOK
REVIEW
More Testimonials
Newsletter Sign-Up
Be notified of special promotions
and new releases (privacy policy)
1-800-832-2412
Help & Customer Service
About Us
Keyword or Course #
Shopping Cart
Recently Viewed
My Account

how to find approximate answers using the art of "guesstimation";
how to quickly find squares and square roots;
how to improve your memory for numbers (including phone and credit card
numbers) by using a simple phonetic code;
how to approach enormous calculations with increased confidence and
accuracy;
how to mentally determine the day of the week of any date in history; and
how to do rapid pencil-and-paper mathematics in ways seldom taught in
school.
And his accompanying course guidebook is filled with additional problems you
can use to practice your newfound skills.
Discover Valuable Mathematical Tips and Techniques
Throughout The Secrets of Mental Math, Professor Benjamin leads you through
some fun—and memorable—techniques for tackling specific mathematical
calculations. Here's an example of one strategy he calls "Create a Zero, Kill the
Zero," helpful for determining the divisibility of any odd number that doesn't end in
5.
Is 1232 a multiple of 7?
Start by adding or subtracting a multiple of 7 to create a 0 at the end (1232 + 28
= 1260).
Kill the 0 from the new number (1260 becomes 126).
Add or subtract a multiple of 7 to create another zero at the end (126 + 14 =
140), then kill the 0 at the end.
Determine whether the new number is a multiple of the original divisor (yes,
it's 14).
Thus, 1232 is a multiple of 7.
An Encouraging, Rewarding Look at Numbers
But you'll get more than just fun strategies to help make mental math easier.
Learning with Professor Benjamin is like having a supportive coach right by your
side—someone to encourage you, challenge you, and instill mathematical
confidence in you. It's this same teaching method that has won him a host of
prestigious awards from the Mathematical Association of America, including the
Deborah and Franklin Tepper Haimo Award for Distinguished College or University
Teaching of Mathematics.
So prepare yourself for an unforgettable adventure in mental mathematics.
Enjoyable, eye-opening, and immensely rewarding, The Secrets of Mental Math
makes basic math quicker and easier than ever before. And it's a powerful way to
take your first, more confident steps into the intriguing—and undeniably fun—world
of numbers.
About Your Professor
Dr. Arthur T. Benjamin is Professor of Mathematics at Harvey Mudd College. He
earned a B.S. from Carnegie Mellon University and a Ph.D. in Mathematical
Sciences from Johns Hopkins University.
Professor Benjamin's teaching has been honored repeatedly by the Mathematical
Association of America (MAA). In 2000, he received the MAA Deborah and Franklin
Tepper Haimo National Award for Distinguished College or University Teaching of
Mathematics. In addition, the MAA named Professor Benjamin the 2006–2008
George Pólya Lecturer.
Available Exclusively on DVD
Because of the highly visual nature of the subject matter, this course is available
exclusively on DVD. It features hundreds of visual elements, including step-by-step
walkthroughs of mental math problems, as well as graphics and illustrations.
Back to top
Save up to $355 when you buy Secrets of Mental Math with Joy of Mathematics

Contact Us | Privacy Policy | Site Map | Gift Certificates | Affiliate Program | Careers
© This site and content copyright 2011. The Teaching Company, LLC. Site contents are also protected by
other copyrights and trademarks. All rights reserved.

